 This book examines the current debate on nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament . Sverre Lodgaard examines how to implement the disarmament provisions . The book is published by Routledge Global Security Studies .
 Analysis centres on the relationship between disarmament and non-proliferation in an increasingly multi-centric world involving China and India as well as the US, the European powers and Russia .
 It concludes with a description and discussion of three different worlds without nuclear weapons . It discusses the implications of nuclear-disarmament policies .
 This book will be of great interest to students of arms control, strategic studies, war and conflict studies, and IR/security studies in general .
 Sverre Lodgaard is a Senior Research Fellow at the Norwegian Institute of International Affairs, Oslo . Lodgaard: "I'm not surprised by the way the world is changing"
 They were heavily criticised both by their own establishments and by others, and the world was taken by surprise . The world was shocked by the events in which they took place, and they were taken aback .
 The call was followed up by Barack Obama and leaders of other countries . Obama and other leaders of the U.S. followed up .
 In many parts of the world, states are waiting to see what comes of it . In many states, states have been waiting for years to see if it will be possible .
 Elimination of nuclear weapons has been proposed before the Baruch plan of 1946, the McCloy-Zorin proposal of 1961, the ReaganGorbachev attempt in Reykjavik in 1986, Rajiv Gandhi’s plan and plea before the UN General Assembly in 1988
 Other countries have not been negative, but they are cautiously waiting to assess the realism of it . Mostly, other countries are not negative, they say .
 They see the call as part of a double agenda, the real purpose of which is to sustain and enhance Western unilateral advantage, they say . They say .
 The synergies of disarmament and non-proliferation may stop smaller and weaker states from acquiring a nuclear capability . New U.S. conventional weapons that can instantly destroy targets all around the globe are more likely to be used than nuclear systems .
 In a world without nuclear arms, the U.S. may therefore be even more superior, for nobody can match its conventional strength . Nobody can match the conventional strength of the United States, writes Andrew Hammond .
 At low levels of offensive nuclear forces, improved U.S. ballistic missile defences may, furthermore, create fears of first-strike capabilities . The U.K. may, however, be worried about first strike capabilities .
 If the shield becomes increasingly effective, others may be threatened from a position of near impunity . The shield may be increasingly effective .
 Nuclear disarmament is not a hallmark of progressive politics, but a change to maintain the dominance of the U.S. and the West, writes Aaron Miller .
 The United States unipolar moment was precisely that a moment yielding to a multicentric world . The U.S. unipolar era was the moment when it yielded to a multipolar world, the author says .
 Emerging powers wedded to state sovereignty, territorial integrity and non-interference in internal affairs are changing the parameters of global geopolitics . States in Asia, Africa and Latin-America cooperate more with each other to reduce dependence on Western powers .
 The systemic changes redefine fundamentally important questions of cooperation and conflict in international affairs . The changes will redefine fundamental questions about cooperation, conflict and international affairs, the authors say .
 Nuclear disarmament presupposes a cooperative approach to international security . The U.S. nuclear disarmament requires cooperation from international security forces, experts say .
 Big power cooperation is of the essence; regional cooperation is likewise likewise . The U.S. has a long history of cooperation in the Middle East region .
 The Cold War left important legacies that continue to influence nuclear weapon policies . Cold War legacy continues to influence the development of nuclear weapons .
 President Clinton focused on the benefits of globalisation as much as on how to avert threats . But when the period of opportunity of the early 1990s was over, the politics of fear picked up again .
 To the extent that specific threats no longer sufficed to justify the maintenance of strong nuclear postures, they were arguably needed to defend against the unknown . The U.S. has not been able to rely on specific threats to justify a strong nuclear posture .
 In the mindset of the Cold War, uncertainties about the future had to be met by the strongest of weapons . The U.S. had to meet with the strongest possible weapons to deal with the future .
 9/11 put the terrorist threat up front; Saddam was turned into a threat beyond proportion . Iran became a strong driver of threat-based policies, says George W. Bush Jr.
 Failure to take “effective measures relating to cessation of the nuclear arms race at an early date’ does not necessarily amount to non-compliance by any particular state. Legally speaking, failure to take . ‘effective measures’ is not necessarily ‘non-compliance�
 Progress depends on seriousness of all negotiating parties and is arguably beyond the powers of any single participant . Progress depends upon the seriousness of any one negotiating party, it says .
 Converging expectations were created and a review mechanism was set up to facilitate abolition . A review mechanism has been established to facilitate the abolition of the system .
 “cessation of the arms race at an early date’"" left a sense of urgency . Although no timeline was given, no timeline for the end of arms race was given .
 Attempts have been made to clarify the meaning of the commitments . Attempts to make the commitments more explicit, binding and tangible .
 Many parties to the Treaty have been disappointed with the results of the Treaty . However, in the view of a great many parties, the results have been disappointing . The Treaty was signed by the British government in 1953 .
 In addition to the five NWS recognised by the NPT, only four states have acquired nuclear weapons . Only four states in the world have nuclear weapons, including Iran .
 Throughout the nuclear age, more than 20 states did “something” in the direction of a nuclear weapon capability at some point or other, but dropped the ambition or were stopped in their tracks . The U.S. has not had a nuclear bomb capability .
 Russia became sole heir of Soviet nuclear weapons . South Africa abandoned its weapons and joined the NPT . NPT membership increased considerably . Conference of Disarmament agreed on a mandate for negotiation of a fissile material cut-off treaty .
 The United States and Russian nuclear arsenals have been significantly reduced . The U.S. and Russia have significantly reduced their arsenals in recent years .
 Review Conference came at the end of a period of good news, facilitating the decision to extend the Treaty indefinitely . The Review Conference therefore came at an end of an extended period of progress .
 At this point in time, non-proliferation seemed to be a winning proposition . The U.S. has a long history of nuclear proliferation .
 Iran is a state of growing proliferation concern . India, Pakistan and North Korea went on to test nuclear weapons . Iran has a history of nuclear testing .
 Proliferation concerns grew, disarmament negotiations came to a halt, big power relations deteriorated, and more functions were assigned to nuclear weapons in national military doctrines . More functions of nuclear weapons are assigned to national military doctrine .
 The grand bargain from 1968 that led to the NPT came apart until a new U.S. government with high disarmament ambitions opened a new window of opportunity to revive it .
 The chapter reviews the explanatory power of realist assumptions and idealist perspectives . It concludes with a list of 16 propositions shedding light on what it may take to turn would-be proliferators back to non-nuclear status .
 In legal terms, the link between disarmament and non-proliferation is well established . The link between the two is also well established in the U.S.
 More than anything else, the NPT review process has centred on the relationship between them . The academic literature has excellent analyses of the subject . The NPT Review process has been centred around relationship between the two .
 The discussion is not conducted in the legal framework, but focuses on the political and military dimensions of the disarmament-non-proliferation relationship . Therefore, the discussion in Chapter 9 is not . conducted in legal framework .
 Special attention is paid to the distinction between disarmament and disarmament as a state of affairs . The concept of rank disequilibrium appears to have strong explanatory power in cases like Iran and India .
 The NPT is a regulatory mechanism for non-proliferation, disarmament and peaceful uses all the way to zero . Looking ahead, the NPT looks ahead, looking at the future .
 New rules governing the final approaches to a NWFW will be needed . However, it says nothing about the precise meaning of zero and it is no more than a skeleton agreement .
 All the way, due respect must be paid to the path dependency of nuclear disarmament, says David Cameron .
 Some force constellations are more dangerous than others, and much is known about the conditions of military stability . However, some force constellations are more dangerous than others .
 The book is comprehensive in its coverage of disarmament and nonproliferation issues . The book stays within the confines of the state paradigm .
 Peaceful uses of nuclear energy the third pillar of the NPT are referred to intermittently in some of the chapters, but not discussed at any length . Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy is referred to in some chapters of the book .
 The notes and cross references are made in order to enable the readers to use single chapters without having to read the entire book . The notes are made to make reference points to single chapters .
 Theoretical assumptions, historical experiences, future challenges”, Oscarsborg, Oslo, June 2009. “Future challenges’s future challenges.”. Theoretically .
 Chapter 10 is a much expanded version of an article with the same title in Daedalus, Fall 2009 . Chapter 10 of this article is expanded to include a much larger version .
 John Hamre, Li Bin and William Potter hosted John and Li Bin to discuss their views on the world's most important issues .
 I am grateful to Ambassador Kaare Aas for his cooperation and encouragement in the early phases of the work. I am also grateful for his support for the project. Ambassador Aas, in particular, has been a key figure in the project .
 Norwegian Institute of International Affairs director says he's grateful to institute for ten years . He says the institute gave him optimal working conditions when he stepped down from the directorship .
 I have benefited from comments by colleagues in many parts of the world at conference tables and informally, in reference to conference papers and in freewheeling discussions . I have also benefited from . comments by . colleagues at conferences and in . reference papers .
 I would like to thank Steven Miller, Oystein Noreng, Benoit Pelopidas, Leon Sigal, Nikolai Sokov and Aruni Wijewardane for their inputs .
 Jan Risvik assisted me, competently and efficiently, language-wise and otherwise . Like so many times before, he assisted me in the language and manner of speaking .
 Lala Kylycheva assisted in the preparation of the notes and references and in meeting other editorial requirements . The author of this article has been contacted by Lala .
 Arms regulation offers hope for a better-organised world where arms regulation is deemed to be in the common interest . It raises the opportunity costs of hostilities and wars .
 State sovereignty remains a defining characteristic of the international system . International organisations are usually asked to facilitate cooperation between sovereign states . However, state sovereignty remains an important part of the system .
 The security sector, in particular, is not bound by growing volumes of international interaction, but follows its own logic . Security sector, however, does not need to be bound by international interaction but follows own logic, the author says .
 At the beginning of the twentieth century, trade between European states was booming, but this did not prevent the First World War . Trade between Europe and the world was booming .
 China is Japan's largest market and Japan's third largest, but they remain wary of each other as far as national security is concerned . China is now Japan’s largest market, but it is also wary of the relationship .
 Growing interdependence has not led to political integration and the formation of security communities, says President Obama . Growing inter-interference has not resulted in political integration, says Obama administration .
 The European Union, where economic cooperation did develop into political integration and cooperation on security and defence issues, is an exception in this respect . The EU is a rare exception, with economic cooperation developing into security cooperation .
 The framework conditions for nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation are further complicated by the ongoing shifts of power in the international system from the west to the east and south, says Dr. Peter Bergen .
 For the hegemon, the ‘second country’ the state that is next to it in the international power hierarchy has been the main problem . For the past few years, this has been a major problem for the Russian-led world power .
 Others watch such rivalries carefully, with satisfied states rallying around the hegemon and dissatisfied ones tending to side with the challenger . Others watch these rivalries closely .
 Even if the challenger aims at no more than equal status, what the hegemon sees is a trajectory that threatens to cross and overtake its own . Even if it aims for equal status in the world, what is seen as a threat to overtake the world's most powerful .
 In the 1970s, the Soviet Union said it aimed for no more than parity with the US, but the U.S. had its eyes on capabilities that were rising faster than its own, leading to another round of intensified arms racing .
 China proceeds cautiously, stressing the peaceful nature of its development . Americans debate their hedging 10 Power shifts and nuclear weapons strategies . Some argue cooperation is possible and others that confrontation is unavoidable .
 The state of the U.S. economy discourages new, expensive foreign policy adventures . American public opinion wants the administration to extricate itself from the wars in the Middle East .
 Obama emphasises international cooperation on the basis of international law . Obama emphasised international cooperation in the wake of the crisis in Syria .
 To set nuclear disarmament in motion, Obama has to come to terms with Russia . Obama has been criticized for wanting to set a precedent for nuclear arms control .
 If not, the grand ambition of a nuclear-weapon-free world will fail before it gets started . "If not, it will be a disaster for the U.S. if not," says David Cameron . The world's first nuclear-weapons-free nuclear weapons ban will fail
 The successor agreement to START I is no big deal, but without cancellation of the missile defence plans for Poland and the Czech Republic, it may not have been possible . Poland and Czech Republic may have been able to protect themselves from the threat of missile defence .
 Agreement on deeper cuts requires more comprehensive accommodation of national interests . Agreement must be more comprehensive, government officials say .
 Obama recognises that disarmament depends on cooperative big power relations . His vision of an NWFW is the number-one priority in his maiden speech at the United Nations .
 The rationale for nuclear disarmament and the economic and political incentives for improved international cooperation reinforce each other in the conduct of U.S. foreign affairs . For the time being, the rationale for disarmament continues to be the case .
 The U.S. emphasis on military superiority and the reactions and priorities of other powerful actors in an increasingly multi-centric world make the continuation open to question . However, the United States emphasis on . military superiority makes the continuation of the US military presence open to . question .
 The security environment may become more cooperative and so facilitate disarmament, or it may deteriorate into the traditional security dilemma that fuelled the arms race of the Cold War . An increase in the power of one state weakens the position of others and drive them to increase their own military capabilities .
 The negation of the Bush administration’s priorities does not mean that unilateralism is out for ever . The negating of Bush administration's priorities doesn’t mean unilateralism will be out of ever .
 Unilateralism is a structural phenomenon that derives from the superior position of the United States in world affairs . It would be no surprise if the pendulum were to swing back in an effort to reconfirm United States superiority and keep challengers at bay .
 The Bush administration left Russia, China and others with a deep distrust of the U.S. It would be premature for them to assume that Obama’s policies are the beginning of a new, benign longterm trend .
 Elimination of nuclear weapons may take decades, but those who prefer a more assertive foreign policy backed by sophisticated nuclear forces may get the upper hand again before disarmament has gone very far . Elimination may take years, but it may be easier for those who want more assertiveness to
 Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty predicated on international cooperation across a broad range of issues concerning peaceful as well as military utilisations of nuclear energy .
 To function effectively, it requires more concord between the big powers than is common in the international system . The UN system needs to be able to work effectively, says U.N. Secretary of State Clinton .
 The Treaty also labours under conflicts of interest between states in the northwest and the south . The Treaty was also laboured under conflict of interest .
 The latter object to supplier-state restrictions on international nuclear commerce . The NWS criticise the NWS for their failure to disarm .
 UNSC Resolution 1887 from the Security Council summit of September 2009 reconfirmed the validity of its main elements . Under mounting pressure from both sets of conflicts, the Treaty was in jeopardy when UNSC resolution 1887 reconfirms its validity in September 2009 .
 The West was the first truly global military power in the history of humankind . The unipolar moment in world politics was the unrivalled hegemonial position of the United States .
 It came into being in the 1990s; reached its apex in the spring of 2003 following the invasion of Iraq; and dissipated quicker than anybody expected .
 In part, the moment was squandered by the destructive policies of the U.S. itself . Part of that was due to economic and political developments that had been in the making for several years . In part it yielded to economic, political developments in the coming years .
 The foreign policy of the Bush administration has been amply described by analysts in and out of the U.S. The Bush administration's foreign policy has been described by many analysts .
 "Unilateralism was part of the part of it, but not among its defining characferisficsics" Unilateralism is not among the defining features of the U.S. government's foreign policy .
 Unilateralism grew in the 1990s, after the Cold War, and was inherited by the neoconservatives . The neoconservatives took it to new heights in the neoconservative era .
 The neocons added exceptionalism to it, the idea that exceptional rules should apply to the exceptionally strong, sometimes in reference to the Roman empire and Roman law .
 After 9/11 the Bush administration leaped ahead to take it in new directions . In the history of the U.S. exceptionalism is not new either, but after 9-11, it's not new .
 Notable among them were the policies of preventive action and regime change, by force if need be . Notable was the use of force if necessary to change the regime .
 Another distinguishing feature was the administration’s unwillingness to talk with its most ardent opponents . The administration's unwillingness to speak with its opponents was also a distinguishing feature .
 The United States withdrew from some international agreements and refrained from joining others . In practice, unilateralism meant that the U.S. withdrew from international agreements .
 International rules, norms and standards were treated selectively in order to not restrict U.S. freedom of action . International rules and standards are treated selectively to avoid restrictions on freedom .
 Once it decided to leave an agreement, it did so so the way the treaty prescribed . However, once it left, the treaty did so in accordance with the treaty .
 The treaty said that a party might leave on 6 months’ notice, the U.S. did so . The United States did so, according to the treaty . The U.N. has left the United States on a 6-month notice .
 Unilateralism limited the scope of applicable international law, but did not challenge its foundations . The U.N. Security Council did not agree on the basis of the law, it said .
 Insofar as U.S. policies promoted these values, there would be no need to legitimise them in reference to the UN Charter, international law and multilateral organisations . The United States should not legitimise its policies, says David Perry .
 The policies would legitimise themselves by their contribution to basic values . The policies should be legitimised by their contributions to the values of basic values, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 The rule of law was discarded in favour of unilateralism and exceptionalism, writes David Cameron . Rule of law has been discarded by the West, he says .
 Hegemonial rule is based on two standards, one for the hegemon and one for subjects . While the rule of law is . based on a single standard for all parties, it is not for the subjects . The rule of the law is based .
 The United States was the global rule-maker, but did not always have to play by the rules . The U.S. is now the world's most powerful player in the Middle East .
 When Bush declared victory in Iraq, exceptionalism was in high standing in Washington . It was in place of exceptionalism in Washington.
 Unilateralism is almost certain to stay in some form or other, but exceptionalism has been on the retreat . However, while unilateralism is still likely to stay, exceptionalism is on the decline .
 The U.S. is likely to reign supreme in high-tech capabilities for a long time to come . Exceptionalism’s longest shelf life will therefore be in military affairs, where the United States reign supreme .
 Since the beginning of the Cold War, the U.S. has toppled many governments of other countries . But the prominence given to it by the Bush administration has gone .
 Bush administration stands out as being more extreme in its declaratory policies than other administrations . Some say Bush administration is more honest than many others . Bush administration stood out as more extreme than others .
 Under the heading Global Strike, the Bush administration planned for quick destruction of all targets of significance wherever and whenever it was deemed necessary . The Bush administration wanted to destroy all targets wherever they were deemed necessary.
 Plans were offensive and pre-emptive in nature and based on advanced conventional, space and information warfare capabilities . The plans were based on conventional and space warfare capabilities, say officials .
 The network of foreign military bases tells a lot about the world’s first global military power, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Additional to these numbers were the forces in Iraq and Afghanistan and non-declared facilities in Kuwait, the Philippines, Israel and other places . The U.S. military says it has more than 1,000 troops in the region .
 The sword had become impressively potent, but the shield remained imperfect . The sword was impressively powerful, but it was still imperfect .
 Chinese weapons rendered United States assets in outer space vulnerable . Asian states exploiting U.S. and Western vulnerabilities by going for ballistic missiles that might do great harm .
 More than anything else else, however, the experiences in Iraq and Afghanislan shed doubt on the realism of the ambition of the ambitions .
 While the military instruments were sharper than ever before, their political utility left much to be desired . While the political tools were sharp, they left little to be used for political purposes .
 In Clausewilzian terms, the U.S. military machine failed to provide an effective continuation of politics by other means . The United States military machine is failing to provide a replacement for the political system .
 Globalisation reduces the applicability of military force by raising the stakes in peacelulul futures and the opportunity costs of war . That lesson came on top of a long-term undercurrent globalisation that reduces military force .
 The U.S. military budget shows no sign of abating, big budget and current-account deficits notwithstanding . Nevertheless, the United States military budget remains a big problem .
 The United States remains determined not to allow any other state or combination of states to challenge its military superiority . The U.S. remains determined to not allow any . other . state or combinations of states . to challenge . its military . superiority .
 President Obama’s FY 2010 budget represents a further 2. per cent increase in real terms . In spite of the financial crisis, the budget has been increased in spite of financial crisis . The White House budget is set to be increased by 2.5 per cent .
 Military superiority is written in stone, and political leaders know that proposals for budget cuts may be devastating for their careers . Political leaders know budget cuts could be devastating to their careers.
 Behind the high-tech conventional weapons there has often been a nuclear shadow . Behind the conventional weapons often have often been the nuclear shadow of the country .
 Bush administration widened the option of nuclear weapons use to include contingencies where the adversary has no WMDs, only conventional forces . The Bush administration expanded the option to use nuclear weapons in the event of WMD threats .
 The restrictions that previous administrations professed to abide by always sharply criticised by NNWS for being too weak were eliminated . The restrictions were always criticised by previous administrations as too weak . Previous administrations have been criticised for their weak restrictions .
 This was the way the United States established its hegemonial position after the Second World War, spearheading the UN and the Bretton Woods institutions and launching the Marshall Plan . The U.S. led the UN, the Marshall plan and the creation of the Marshall Fund .
 This century, the U.S. has acted in blatant disregard of these ground rules . The United States has paid a heavy price for it. This century has been the worst .
 In most regions of the world, U.S. reputation has fallen dramatically . The United States reputation has also fallen dramatically in recent years .
 The US-India nuclear agreement made headway in India, where the US and India nuclear agreement was made .
 President Obama inherited a long tradition of threat-based foreign and security policies . President Obama inherits a long history of foreign policy with a long legacy .
 The Cold War fixation on threats remains vibrant, much invigorated by 9/11 . Except for a period in the 1990s, when the Clinton administration had its eyes on the opportunities of globalisation, the Cold War remains vibrant .
 It is as if foreign policy has to be based on threats in recent years radical Islam, terrorism, Iran and to some extent North Korea . Statistics show that the world has become less violent .
 For a couple of decades, the expansion of the global economy has been the dominant theme of international affairs . Only interrupted by the Asia crisis at the end of the 1990s and the global financial crisis a decade later .
 The United States has focused not only on what it sees as violent threats, but also become sceptical of immigration and of globalisation practices that suppress wages . Nevertheless, contrary to much of the rest of the world, the U.S. has focused on violent threats .
 In the state that spearheaded globalisation, there are now protectionist tendencies at work . In the UK, there is now a protectionist tendency at work.
 President Obama tries to reconstruct the image of the U.S. by reaching out to others across major dividing lines in international affairs . Obama also calls for nuclear disarmament .
 This way, he may be able to convince others to pursue agendas similar to his own . He may also convince others that he has a similar agenda .
 The shift is reminiscent of Hegelian dialectics, which says in all socio-political processes there are contradictory elements, and it is the tensions between them that create the dynamics of development .
 The question is to what extent he will be able to follow up on his ambitions . The question will be whether he can follow up his ambitions with a successful career .
 Limitations on immigration, which restrain the innovative capabilities that have come with foreign scientific talents working and settling in the US, have a distinctly negative impact on the U.S. economy . Limitations of immigration have a positive impact on innovation and the economy, authors say .
 When they go home, as is now increasingly the case, the creative capabilities will shrink . The creative capabilities of the children will shrink when they return home, he says .
 Poorer economic prospects in the U.S. combine with better working conditions in many countries of origin to bring more highly educated people back home .
 The U.S. has benefited greatly from owning the international means of payment . Britain benefited from the pound in the days of the British Empire, much the way Britain did . The United States has benefited much more from owning international payment .
 If need be, huge deficits can be temporarily managed by printing more money . The U.S. did this during the financial crisis of 2008/2009 .
 History shows that the international currency comes and goes with power shifts in international affairs . History shows . History . shows that . history shows that power shifts . go away .
 When the British Empire went down, the pound was replaced with a certain delay by the dollar . The dollar was replaced by the British dollar when the British empire went down .
 The United States is ceding power to others in an increasingly multi-centric world . A handful of power centres will have a say in the development of a new system that would be beneficial for many .
 To own the international currency is to own a very important means of economic and political influence . The struggle over this issue is going to be intense, so the struggle over it will be intense .
 The United States unipolar moment was exactly that just a moment in modern history . The U.S. unipolar era was a moment of American history, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The U.S. remains unrivalled in military terms, but is on a steep rise economically and politically . It is followed by a rapid transition to a world where other powers are on a sharp rise .
 In the evolving multi-centric system, the United States will be one of many centres . In that sense more of a ‘nonnal” country, although still a particularly important one, is still important .
 The ‘second country’ is the problem, the challenge or, eventually, the enemy . The “Second country” is the . problem, or the challenge, the . enemy .
 In the days of the British Empire, London had its eyes fixed on the ‘second country’ that was next to it in the power hierarchy . That is, on the one that might be able to undermine its hegemonial status . London was focused on the "second
 India is intent on maintaining an independent foreign policy in all directions . However, while being involved in a subdued arms competition with China, India is not interested in arms competition .
 In Japan, the Hatoyama government launched a comprehensive review of the U.S. alliance for the first time in decades . The review is aimed at reducing the United States footprint in Japan and to improve relations with China .
 The Union is based on international rules, norms and standards, and in that sense programmatically obliged to sustain international rules of the road in its external affairs . The Union has been criticized for its lack of transparency in recent years .
 The Bush administration’s attempts to circumvent international law demonstrated that the costs of doing so can be very high . Bush administration's attempts to bypass international law proved that the cost of trying to do so was high .
 Bush administration tried to split EU members into “new” and “old” Europe . Bush administration also tried to separate EU members from ‘new’ and ‘old’ Europe .
 Relations with Russia have been at their lowest since the end of the Cold War . Russia welcomed U.S. military bases right up to Russia’s borders, bringing relations with Russia to their lowest .
 Russia suspended its participation in the CFE agreement and threatened to withdraw from the INF Treaty . Russia has also threatened to pull out of the INF treaty . Russia is the only member of the U.S. to participate in the agreement .
 Alarmed by NATO’s war over Kosovo, it upgraded the role of nuclear weapons in its military doctrine . The U.S. upgraded its nuclear weapons policy in response to Kosovo's war .
 NATO could go to war against Serbia without a mandate from the UN Security Council . It might do so again closer to Russia’s borders . NATO could do so without a UN mandate .
 The United States partnerships with East European states drove a wedge into the Union’s efforts to develop a common security and defence policy . The U.S. partnership with East Eastern states drove the wedge .
 The ‘second country’ was hampered in its integration endeavours and constrained in its ability to act in international affairs . The second country was hampered by its integration efforts and constrained by international affairs, the author says .
 The shift may be slow and arduous, but this is the political law of gravity . The shift will be slow, arduous but it will be the political will of the future .
 New members in the east are small compared with the founding states and other member countries further west . The EU integration process is all-encompassing, and the new members are small . The new members of the east will be small compared to the founding countries and other EU members .
 There may be U.S. bases in Poland, Romania, Bulgaria and other East European countries for a long time to come, but the most contentious plans are gone . There may still be a long-term presence in East European nations .
 The more cooperative relations between the USA and Russia become, the easier it will be to unite new and old members behind common approaches to security and defence . Russia and the U.S. have a history of cooperation in the world's most successful nations .
 The moves are incremental and modest, but they point in the direction of enhanced integration . The moves point to enhanced integration in the U.S.
 Still, for a long time to come, EU will be unable to muster its economic strength for global geopolitical ends . EU will not be able to muster economic strength to achieve geopolitical ends, says David Frum .
 When the Cold War ended, European political leaders stressed that Russia had to be drawn into European cooperation and security . But US/NATO policies and Russian nationalism came in the way .
 East European anxieties and the domestic situation in Russia authoritarian rule, restrictions on civil and human rights, corruption and corruption continue to pose problems . East European anxiety over Russia continues to grow in Russia .
 In the long term, geographic proximity, mutual economic interests, absence of military threats and security challenges will knit them closer together . The long-term, however, will knit the two countries closer together in the long run .
 Russia is now likely to be a slow movement towards an all-European security architecture . However, what could have changed quickly in the beginning of the 1990s, during the latest period of opportunity for change .
 The Western world is a network of democracies, says CNN.com's John Sutter . He says the Western world has its own interests in the United States and Europe .
 Politically, the transatlantic community is tied together by tradition and common institutions . Politically and politically, it is tied to tradition and institutions .
 In the U.S. political regions of gravity have shifted from the northeast to the south and west . In the United States, the political region of gravity has shifted north and south .
 The U.S. no longer relates to international law the way Europeans do . Most important, the United States is not a European country . The United States has no way of dealing with international law like Europeans do.
 While most Europeans remain true to international agreements and multilateral cooperation, U.S. unilateralism persists .
 There will be more or less of it with the Obama administration, less but the shifts are likely to be variations of the same theme . The Obama administration is likely to continue to see the same themes .
 Different attitudes towards international mles, norms and standards are at the core of transatlantic controversies . Different attitudes to international norms are likely to be a source of much contention across the Atlantic .
 Most Europeans do not condone U.S. use of force in violation of international law . Most Europeans don't condone United States use of U.N. forces in violation .
 Use of force against Iran has been a recurrent issue in U.S. politics for years . Obama’s diplomatic overture did not rule this option out .
 The Europeans, on the other hand, have 18 Power shifts and nuclear weapons warned against it all the time . The Europeans have been warned against the idea of power shifts .
 East European governments may be inclined to follow where the U.S. leads, but there is no certainty about it . East European leaders may be tempted to follow the United States .
 On Iraq and other issues of war and peace, European public opinion has been more reserved about cooperation with the U.S. than European govermnents . That goes for Eastern Europe as well, as well .
 NATO has adapted to the transatlantic cleavages by changing from being a coherent alliance under United States leadership to becoming a two-pillar structure . Both sides of the Atlantic may use NATO infrastructure for their own purposes, and sometimes for a common purpose like stabilisation of Afghanistan .
 NATO is no longer a decision-making body it used to be decisions are made in Washington and in Europe . NATO is now a platform for transatlantic consultations. NATO is not a decision making body but a platform to consult with the U.S.
 The US urged the Europeans to unite after the Second World War to become a better partner . The US now has to treat the Union and its largest members both as partners and challengers .
 Europeans are norm-bound and supportive of the international nonproliferation regime . The Europeans are supportive of nonprosprosionist regime . Implications for armaments and disarmament are unclear .
 The EU attaches non-proliferation provisions to its trade agreements, which are negotiated and entered into at the Union level . The EU says it is not interested in nuclear proliferation .
 The EU can be counted on to strongly support the Treaty and the regime that it harbours in the future . In the NPT review process, common EU positions are comprehensive, EU says .
 The United States is less predictable over the long haul because of the likely fluctuations of unilateralism . The U.S. is likely to be less predictable in the long-term because of its unilateralism, experts say .
 Under President Obama there appears to be a comprehensive overlap between U.S. and European non-proliferation polices . That was not the case under President Bush and it may not be the same case under the next president .
 Differences can amount to complementarities, but will more often cause tensions . Differences often amount to complearities but will often cause tension .
 The United States is committed to superior military strength and increases its military expenditures in spite of its economic problems . The U.S. will continue to increase its military spending despite economic difficulties, President Obama says .
 Europeans have cut their military investments to the bone after the Cold War . They emphasise non-military solutions to problems out of necessity as well as conviction . This translates into a propensity to solve foreign-policy problems by military means .
 Confronted with acute challenges at the outskirts of the non-proliferation regime, this may lead to different responses on the two sides of the Atlantic . The U.S. and Europe face different challenges at outside of the Non-Proliferation .
 As for the NPT commitment to cessation of the nuclear arms race at an early date and disarmament, the U.S. call for abolition, the Europeans are split . The Europeans are divided on the issue .
 Non-nuclear Germany is pitted against pro-nuclear France . UK is outspoken in favour of multilateral nuclear disarmament while considering modernisation of its sea-based deterrent .
 Obama’s call for nuclear disarmament is strongly supported by most Europeans . Obama's call for disarmament strongly supports most Europeans, including the UK .
 Progress in disarmament affairs depends very much much on accommodation with Russia . Russia is a key part of the U.S. nuclear disarmament process .
 To reduce its reliance on nuclear weapons, threat perceptions must be alleviated, says South Korea . To reduce the use of nuclear weapons must be reduced, experts say .
 The United States accounts for 45 per cent of world military expenditures; Russia for 3 per cent . To wait for stronger conventional forces to reduce the role of nuclear weapons makes little sense, he says .
 For the West, that means policies that can ease tensions along Russia’s borders in Europe, the Caucasus and Central Asia . The West wants to ease tensions between Russia and the West .
 Obama pushed the “reset button” to improve relations with Russia, but caused anxiety in Eastern Europe . U.S. policy got closer to that of the big West European countries, but also caused anxiety among Eastern Europeans .
 The second one is likely to swing back and forth on the way to closer EU integration . The first one is expected to swing between the two parties .
 U.S. culture bodes for political shifts of greater consequence . United States culture is changing, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The World Without the West is economically, culturally and scientifically attractive, and politically and militarily powerful . Defining characteristics of the West are the West's defining characteristics . The West is politically and politically powerful, and culturally attractive .
 Given its dominant position in world affairs, anything else would have been a surprise . The U.S. has been a dominant player in the Middle East for decades .
 The pull is supplemented by political and military power, which instils respect and projects influence . Political, military power and political power can also be used to project influence, say experts .
 Globalisation, which makes everything flow more easily across borders, emanates from the West . Quite often, bandwagoning pays off . Globalisation is a form of globalisation that makes things flow more freely across borders .
 Western technologies facilitated it and the West is capitalising on it . Western technology facilitated it, and Western technology enabled it to be used in it .
 The extension of norms, institutions and habits is essentially an outward flow from the West, says CNN.com's John Sutter . The extension is essentially a flow of norms and habits, he says .
 Those who defy co-option and assimilation may be exposed to Western world's hard power . Western world has formidable soft power, and those who defy it may face its equally formidable hard power, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Small and medium-sized states either play with the West or they risk being discredited and isolated . Smaller states must play with West or risk being isolated and discredited, says CNN's John Defterios .
 The other holds a starker view, envisioning an inevitable conflict between the two countries . It is either systemic conflict or assimilation. The other view is that the two nations must be integrated .
 Discussions often boil down to the question of how much hedging is enough and how much is too much, i.e. risking becoming a self-fulfilling prophecy .
 This rudimentary description fits the past better than the present, however, and ignores other options that are opening up to the non-Western world . This is not the case, but it's a sign that the Western world is opening up .
 During 20 Power shifts and nuclear weapons the U.S. unipolar moment would have been a fair description . Today, it fails to capture the power shift that is going on in the international system .
 For emerging powers of Asia, Africa and Latin America, the power shift presents new international options . The power shift also presents new options for the emerging powers .
 They are no longer confined to integrating into the existing liberal order or challenging the West for international leadership . They no longer are confined to integration into the liberal order . They are now challenging West for leadership .
 By building relations with each other, they are making the West less relevant . The West is making it less relevant, writes David Frum .
 More and more, they take what they need from the West while routing around the US-led order . More than ever, more and more of the West is routing around them, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Empowered by the same technologies that the West has been using in its globalisation drive, they are giving preferential treatment to each other . The West is gradually establishing their own frames of reference in international affairs .
 To enact their own preferences they no longer have to confront the West, but can more often afford to ignore it . The West is no longer confront them, but instead they can choose not to confront it .
 Connectivity for the globe as a whole has increased in the last twenty years . But it is increasing at a much faster rate among countries outside the Western bloc .
 The World Without the West is becoming preferentially and densely interconnected . It is becoming more and more interconnected . The world without the west is becoming pre-emptively interconnected .
 This creates the foundation for the development of a new parallel international system . This creates a new set of mles, institutions and ways of doing things and currencies of power .
 Trade between the 20 largest and wealthiest countries in the world is growing significantly faster than world trade, and faster than standard economic models would predict . For instance, trade between the world's largest and richest countries is growing much faster than the world average .
 Economic growth in big countries like China, India and Brazil does not account for all of it . China's economic growth in recent years has been seen as the world's fastest growing economy .
 They are not cutting their ties to the West, but the relative importance of those ties is diminishing . The relative importance is diminishing, but it's not cutting them off from the West as well .
 Indigenous media networks make it increasingly difficult for the Western media to penetrate other political cultures . Indigenous media network makes it difficult to penetrate Western media in other cultures .
 World Without the West is shaping its own narratives of world affairs, reducing that source of power in Western hands . The World Without The West will shape the world's view of events around the world .
 SouthSouth is underwritten by intergovernmental institutions that coordinate and stimulate cooperation between its members . Preferential connectivity SouthSouth provides preferential connectivity between SouthSouth members of the SouthSouth .
 During the Bush presideney, the nonaligned movement also beeame more active again .
 In Asia in particular, states tend to behave the way the authors of the UN Charter said they should back in 1945 . Less so in India, South Korea and Japan; more so in China, Russia and Iran .
 Inviolable sovereignty the right to determine one’s own social, economic and political order rejects key tenets of liberal internationalism like global civil society, development aid tied to good governance, and international responsibility to protect people who are ill-treated .
 Sovereign states determine their own domestic order while dealing with each other on a market basis . Sovereign states decide domestic order and deal with other countries on a domestic basis .
 The material foundations are natural resource endowowments, manufacturing capacity and incremental innovation,e.e. learning by doing . The material foundation is the foundation for the development of the world's largest-ever-ever industry .
 International institutions have no legitimate business other than to serve and facilitate these ends . International institutions are no longer legitimate business but to serve these ends. International institutions should not have any legitimate business in the world .
 Interdependence is growing, gradually shifting from the West to the World Without the West, but without fostering political integration . Interdependency is growing in the West but not in the process of political integration, says Julian Zelizer .
 The strategy of the West is to turn emerging powers into responsible stakeholders in the institutions of the existing liberal order . The strategy is to make emerging powers responsible for the West's liberal order, writes Andrew Hammond . Hammond: The West wants to make the emerging powers more responsible .
 To make it work, the rules are adapted to the new distribution of power . The rules will need to be adapted to a new way of distributing power .
 The G8 is being replaced by the G20, but the leaders of the former will continue to meet a couple of times per year . The G20 is replacing the G8, but leaders of both the former and G8 will meet as an inner core .
 The new heavyweights have got greater roles and expanded voting rights in the Bretton Woods system, the WTO and other international organisations, but all the time on the assumption that the global political economy shall be structured around rules sponsored by the West .
 Head of the World Bank is American and the head of the IMF is European, by a tradition to be upheld . The World Bank and the IMF are both American and European .
 China and other emerging powers have been working within this system, accommodating to it and not trying to overturn it . For some time, China and the other emerging nations have been accommodating to this system . China has been working in this way for some time .
 The major beneficiaries were major oil exporters in the Middle East and the former Soviet Union . China, Japan and Germany were major industrial exporters such as China, Germany and Germany .
 In 2008 and 2009, the prices came down again, but at the level of $70 per barrel, the petroleum business remained lucrative . The petroleum business was lucrative at the time .
 Twothirds of current oil exports from the Persian Gulf are going to Asian customers . For the Gulf States and Russia, the most important growth markets lie in the East .
 India, China, Japan and other Asian energy importers have compelling strategic interests in deepening their ties to major oil and gas exporters . The other way is the other way, India and China want to deepen their ties with major oil exporters, analysts say .
 Before the financial crisis struck, the combined current account surpluses of Russia and the six members of the Gulf Cooperation Council exceeded that of China . China's current account surplus has led to increasing volumes of eastbound investment .
 China is investing wherever supplies can be obtained . To secure its energy and raw materials supplies, China has invested in China's energy and materials .
 The interests are strong and mutual, adding economic substance to the World Without the West . The interests of the West and the West are strong, mutual .
 Leverett: Sovereign wealth funds and similar kinds of stateowned investment channels provide a potential for coalitions of creditor nations to restrain the U.S. from acting contrary to their interests . Leverett notes that sovereign wealth funds .
 Central banks of major creditor countries have had their eyes on macroeconomic stabilisation . Most SWFs have focused on maximising the value of their assets . So far, the central banks have had eyes on stabilising the economy .
 Looking ahead, state-controlled entities may turn to strategic as well as economic considerations . State-run entities may be turning to strategic and economic considerations, say experts .
 Such actions can restrict the flow of financing for the United States currentaccount deficit, further diversify away from the dollar as a reserve asset, and broaden the currency regime for international oil trading to include other currencies .
 Iran is at the interface between the West and the rising powers of Asia . Iran is a key part of the Middle East and the West .
 Russia and Iran back China on the Taiwan issue; China and Iran support Russia in Chechnya . For Russia and China it is important that Iran does not fall back into the United States sphere of influence .
 India weighs in to strengthen Iran’s eastward orientation, tempered by its new relationship with the U.S. India has been in talks with Iran to strengthen its eastward direction .
 Iran may support the Nabucco pipeline to Europe, which does not pass Russian territory and which may not be fully fed without Iranian supplies . Iran may send more gas eastwards and leave more deliveries to Russia through South Stream and other pipelines .
 Iran has been as much oriented towards the East and Northeast as it has been towards the West . Western sanctions in response to its nuclear programme are likely to enhance Iran's eastward orientation .
 The Western part of its external affairs is where its problems and conflicts lie . The Eastern part meets growing opportunities, the Western part is where it lies .
 Under the circumstances, Asia is about to become a comfort zone for Iran, says Iran's ambassador .
 As for China, there are numerous question marks about its ability to manage the effects of globalisation . China's economy has been hit hard by globalisation in recent years . But it is still expected to be a major factor in China's economic success .
 Another vulnerability is access to energy to fuel its blistering economic growth . Power shifts and nuclear weapons 23: "Power shifts and nukes 23"
 The energy market is tense; the competition is tough; state intervention is all over the place; and the leadership has little experience in handling political risks in the Middle East, Africa and Latin America . The energy industry is tense, the competition and state intervention are tough .
 India faces risks of fragmentation and is hampered by poorly developed infrastructure . India's economy has been hit by a wave of poor infrastructure .
 India and China have an agreement about joint exploration of foreign energy sources to temper competition . More often than not they compete for commercial opportunities .
 Russia has proven less interested in opening its economy to market forces than in leveraging its energy wealth to consolidate domestic politics and restore Moscow’s international influence . Russia, with its comprehensive definition of ‘strategic sectors’, has proven to be less interested .
 This has limited its growth potential, as does its singular concentration on the energy sector . This has also limited the growth potential of the company, according to analysts .
 Energy exports account for 20 per cent of Russia’s economic growth . This sector accounts for about 1 per cent jobs, but energy exports are the biggest source of growth .
 Financial crisis may persuade Russia to diversify its economy and leave some strategic sectors for privatisation . However, the financial crisis, which struck Russia very hard, may persuade it to do so .
 Gradually, states outside the Western world are left with more choices than assimilating with the West or confronting it . Interdependence, but not integration, is the key to success in the West .
 China, India, Brazil and other economic powerhouses make the West less dominant and relevant . They can enhance that trend by enhancing the connectivity with each other, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Globalisation, and the power that unfolds in this rapidly expanding space, is based on factors that often change . Globalisation is a process that is constantly changing, says David Cameron . The BBC's new book, The World Series, airs tonight at 9pm on BBC One .
 Assets are shifting hands all the time, and the uncertainties are exacerbated by domestic dislocations and political instabilities . The uncertainty is exacerbated by political and economic instabilities in the country .
 Usually, authoritarian political systems like China, Russia and Iran are assumed to be more vulnerable to domestic ruptures than democratic ones such as India, South Korea and Japan . China's authoritarian system is assumed to have more vulnerabilities than that of democratic ones .
 Growing inter-ependence between emerging powers does not translate into political integration between them . Growing interdependence does not mean political integration, analysts say . Russia, Ukraine, Russia and Ukraine are among the most powerful countries in the world .
 China, India and Russia have opened their economies to the outside world . China from 1978, India from 1991, Russia from 1991 . Russia in fits and starts from its reconstitution in the early 1990s .
 Russia and China are trying hard to control their own domestic order . Russia from the liberal and chaotic years under Yeltsin and China from the totalitarianism of traditional communist rule they are trying .
 China and Japan are trading partners of sorts, but this does not convert into a high degree of political trust . China is trading partners with Japan, but it does not have a high level of trust in the country .
 If trade and investments between China and India develop into a common market hyperbole, maybe, but not excluded they may still be wary of each other when it comes to geopolitics and military .
 Globalisation is the essential driving force that limits the ability of any nation to control its own development and makes adaptation the key to success . Adaptation is the key for success in adaptation, says the authors .
 Realists are right in claiming that the politico-military sphere is different from the economic sphere . But realists are also right in saying that the sphere of politics and military is different .
 The Coal and Steel Union was established with a view to political unification and became the starting point of remarkable progress in that direction . There is no comparison with the European Union, which was established in 1950s .
 The principles of state sovereignty, territorial integrity and non-interference mesh with nation-building and nationalism . State sovereignty and territorial integrity are key principles of national sovereignty .
 China has had only 30 years of steady nation-building . Following ‘the century of shame’, the civil war, civil war and the cultural revolution, China has only had a steady period of stability .
 The Russians, about to regain their pride and part of the power position that was lost with the demise of the USSR, are in a nationalist mood as well . The Russians are in the nationalist mood, as well as the Russians .
 Government thrives and legitimises its policies in reference to Russian history and big power traditions . Provoked by the establishment of United States and NATO positions along its borders, the government thrives .
 In some of fhem, nafionalism arises out of frustration over Western narratives of history and interpretations of contemporary affairs . In some cases, it also arises from frustration over American and other Western narratives .
 Divergent narratives are nothing new, but now the information revolution exposes and disseminates them . The information revolution is now exposing and disseminating them .
 Nationalism adds to state sovereignty in restraining the impact of globalisation, says David Cameron . Nationalism is a way of restraining globalisation and protecting state sovereignty, he says .
 First, strong economic growth facilitates strong growth of military budgets . Second, strong growth in defense spending is a good thing for the U.S. military .
 In the case of China, significant hidden expenditures come on top of this . China has spent millions of dollars a year on infrastructure projects .
 There has been no distinct tendency for national military acquisitions to interact and feed on each other, except for the Indian-Pakistani relationship where Pakistan tries hard to keep pace with India .
 China by introducing different versions of the DF-31 ICBM Power shifts and nuclear weapons 25 and building four or five new SSBNs . India by aiming at a minimum deterrence triad; and Pakistan by building more nuclear warheads for delivery by landbased ballistic missiles .
 While the U.S. and Russia reduce their nuclear arsenals, the Asian NWS are doing the opposite . While the United States and Russia are reducing their nuclear arsenal, the Asia NWS is reducing its own .
 The security sector is a sphere of its own depicting a dangerous world . Interdependence raises the costs of war, but for lack of political integration the security sector can't be fully integrated .
 Asian powers attend to the risks of war all the time . Far from constituting a security community,*’’ Asian powers are at risk of war every time,*'
 They are rearming but, conscious of how much is at stake, they try to avoid the dangers posed by arms racing . They are aware of how little at stake they can do .
 Third, a nuclear-disarmament strategy that tries to generate support from likeminded states in order, subsequently, to build mounting pressure on recalcitrant ones in the east and south would be short-sighted . Third, an attempt to build support for likeminded countries in order to
 The power shift away from the West, and growing cooperation within the World Without the West translate into diminishing Western leverage and greater staying power for the emerging powers .
 China, India and other states are less and less susceptible to pressure and increasingly able to pursue their national interests . China and India and others states are . less and . less susceptible . to pressure, they say .
 The sooner the Asian NWS are included in dialogues on how to proceed, the better . The call for an NWFW started as a United States and Western initiative, and without United States leadership such a call would have gotten nowhere .
 If their priorities are not taken properly into account, it will be hard to sustain . If they don't feel ownership to the process, progress will be difficult to sustain.
 IBSA played a role in forging support for the USIndia nuclear cooperation agreement . For instance, IBSA helped forge support for a nuclear cooperation deal with the US .
 South-South political consultations are also likely to expand in the time ahead . Similar to the growth in economic cooperation, they are likely to grow in the future .
 India is not a fully legitimate partner in nuclear-weapon discussions . However, it is not fully legitimate partners in the nuclear-weapons discussions .
 Even if India is recognised as an NWS, China and India are generally too far apart to discuss nuclear-weapon issues with a view to common positions .
 The others are non-nuclear-weapon parties to the NPT and in the great majority of cases also members of nuclear-weapon-free zones, urging all NWS to disarm .
 India remains a member of NAM, and NAM can reinforce important tenets of Indian foreign policy . NAM will help India transition from a uni-centric to a multi-centric world, says Ravi Agrawal .
 The World Without the West knows to distinguish between the main Cold War antagonists and the emerging powers of Asia . It knows that the Cold War is not going away with the West .
 Growing economic cooperation between China and other states in Asia, Africa and Latin America makes the latter less eager to criticise China . China's growing body of economic cooperation with other states makes the criticism less likely .
 China's nuclear profile is a low one focused on core deterrence and prevention of nuclear coercion . For another, there is less of a reason, too, as long as China’s nuclear profile has a low profile .
 China and India abstain from nuclear posturing, keeping their weapons in a low state of preparedness . The two countries are known for their low-preparedness .
 Their power play is unfolding on arenas other than the nuclear one, first of all in the economic sphere . The attractions of their huge domestic markets and their savings and investment capital are powerful assets that can be used for political ends .
 China’s centralised political system makes it particularly well equipped to do so . China is particularly well-equipped to take advantage of its political system, experts say .
 In short, the salience of nuclear weapons in China’s foreign affairs is modest while in India, if looms larger as long as the fight for big power status on a par with other centres is going on .
 Hegel said that history is moving from the East to the West . The shift to Asia is the result of a shift in history from the West to Asia .
 It started in the East and is ending in the West, where the highest level of civilisation is taking shape . The West is the place where civilisation is beginning to take shape, with the highest levels of civilisation taking shape.
 When the Cold War ended, Francis Fukuyama said much the same, a. in reference to Hegel . When the cold war ended, he said much of the same . The Cold War is over, but the world is over .
 The West is the end of a long tradition of democracy, human rights and rule of law . It is also the end to a long history of human rights in the West .
 The West has come to the end of history while the rest of the world is still in it, having longer or shorter distances to go . The West comes to an end while the West has a long and long way to go, says David Cameron .
 One flaw has to do with the West’s own shortcomings a big subject that the financial crisis helped us to recognise . Another that the West fails to make proper account of history .
 As late as 1820, when the Qing dynasty had been on the decline for a while, China and India slill accounted for some 45 per cent of the world’s economic output .
 When the Chinese speak of rejuvenation, they mean restoring China’s power position to that which it used to enjoy in previous centuries . China's power position has never been restored to that of previous centuries.
 This can only be realised if China grows significantly faster than the others, and Chinese elites consider that to be fair . China's economic growth will only be achieved if it is seen as a fair .
 There is something natural about it that can only be understood against the background of long historical periods of superior performance and strength . There is only a natural natural state of dominance in the sport .
 The first prime minister upon independence, Jawaharlal Nehru, noted that fate had marked India out for big things, and that it was entirely natural for New Delhi to take a leadership role in world affairs . The first Prime Minister of India in India's history said fate marked India
 Nehru's notion of greatness is part of the nation's mental make-up . Similar to China’s notion of rejuvenation, it is similar to that of the U.S. China .
 Americans keep emphasising that the United States is “a great force for good” but it seems stronger than that of the Chinese . Indian exceptionalism is not of American proportions, writes Andrew Hammond .
 The strategy is openness China from the end of the 1970s, India from the beginning of the 1990s. China has been open to openness from the start of the 1980s to the start-of-the-2000s. India has been very open to the West since the 1980
 From the 1430s onwards onwards, the voyages were cut back and soon discontinued altogether .
 They were considered too costly as Mongols and other raiders threatened the frontiers . They were seen too costly to carry out raids on the frontier .
 Seafaring was judged to be an expensive distraction from more important tasks . Seafaring is judged to have been a distraction from other important tasks.
 China turned its back on trade and exploration and oriented itself inwards . China turned to the north in the 1980s to focus its focus on exploration .
 While Western powers were energised by the new discoveries, China stagnated . Western powers substituted observations, experiments and critical thought for dogmas, beliefs and rituals of the Middle Ages .
 The fact that by 1820 it still accounted for as much as 30 per cent of world output has to be explained in demographic terms .
 China can therefore be trusted to stay open to the outside world to the best if its ability, and so can India . India can also be trusted in China's ability to remain open to outside world, says ambassador to China .
 Development is India’s overriding priority, informing a foreign policy that prioritises accordingly, stressing the importance of peace and stability . Like China, development is India's overriding priority .
 China reserves itself in relation to U.S. balancing strategies against China . It therefore reserves itself to United States balancing strategies .
 When Russians emphasise that they can manage this and that on their own without attending to others, the Chinese disapprove of it and so do many Indians . Many Indians also disapprove of such a move .
 China is highly secretive on nuclear matters . It is a stark illustration of the difference between the security sector and other sectors . The country's security sector is the most secretive sector .
 Secrecy is an important part of its nuclear posture, and in this respect there is no sign of change . Secrecy remains a key part of the North Korean regime's nuclear posture .
 Analysis of ongoing power shifts revolve around the United States and China . For good reasons, analyses of China and the U.S. focus on power shifts .
 Despite mounting problems and declining influence in recent years, the United States still sees itself in a global leadership role . The U.S. sees itself as a global leader despite mounting problems .
 In the view of many Americans, the United States remains the essential nation and a force for good, destined to lead the world . In the U.S. in the world, many Americans still believe the country is essential and will always lead .
 No politician aspiring for high office would suggest that the U.S. should abdicate from leadership role . No politician would suggest abdicating from leadership .
 The means by which it is exercised vary from one administration to the next . The means of exercising the power vary from administration to administration .
 President Obama is upgrading the importance of alliances and multilateral cooperation in conformity with international law . President Obama says alliances and cooperation are important to the U.S. President Barack Obama's administration .
 China is conscious of the importance of harmonious external relations to sustain its formidable domestic modernisation project . China treasures partnerships in all directions, conscious of its importance of external relations .
 At the same time, it is keenly interested in its own power position in the world . The UK is keen to be seen as the most powerful country in the Middle East .
 Measuring comprehensive national power is a favourite sport among think tanks and university institutes specialising in foreign affairs . Measuring a nation's strength is a popular subject in think tanks, universities and think tanks .
 What is measured is China’s strength relative to other big powers, to the U.S., to the United States, in particular . China's strength is measured by how strong it is relative to others, to be measured .
 The objective of China’s rise is therefore to regain its lost international status . What should be regained is top rank in the international system conditioned by superior achievements and overall strength .
 ‘Peaceful developmenf’ substituted for ‘peaceful rise’ in 2004 . ‘rise’ has offensive connotations that may worry China’s neighbours and opposite numbers in world affairs .
 China wants to alleviate concerns that a rapidly growing China will upset the global status quo . The rise of new powers tends to cause turbulence, especially as ascending powers have been about to overtake established leaders .
 peaceful development is intended to reassure neighbours that China is seeking win-win outcomes in its foreign affairs . Peaceful development is meant to reassure China that it is seeking a 'win-win' outcome .
 David Kang shows that, so far, China has been successful in this respect . Kang: So far, it has been a well-documented analysis of China's foreign policy .
 The smaller countries of Southeast Asia cooperate more and more with China without cutting their ties with the US . They say it is not because they are afraid of China but because it is deemed to be in their best interest .
 Chinese commentators link the strategy of peaceful development to China’s domestic situation . The strategy is linked to the country's domestic situation, they say .
 The magnitude of its growth and nuclear weapons is matched by the magnitude of the problems it faces . The U.S. has its internal problems, including internal problems .
 Domestic upheavals are very much what the leadership should watch out for . If the past is a guide to the future, domestic upheavations should be watched out for.
 The ‘Great Leap Forward’ caused a major set-back in 1959-1963; the ‘Cultural Revolution’ meant another period of decline in 1966-1976 . In 1989-1993, starting with the Tiananmen Square massacre, the reform economy hit a blow
 Since 1993, it has emerged from international isolation that started in 1989 . It has achieved around 10 per cent annual economic growth .
 The East Asian financial crisis of 1997 hit hard at other countries in the region but not at China . China greatly enhanced its overall position in the area after the crisis, which hit hard .
 China's strategy acknowledges the need for a peaceful international environment in order to not jeopardise domestic developments . The strategy is based on the firm conviction that isolation was the major factor behind China’s periods of decline .
 These strategic assumptions found their way into declaratory policy in the late 1990s and early 2000s . The U.S. has been criticized for its lack of transparency in foreign policy .
 China aims to augment its wealth and influence, but in a way that reassures its neighbours about its peaceful and mutually beneficial intent . China also aims to reassure its neighbours of its peaceful intent, says Mr Liu .
 China is saying to its neighbours that in the age of globalisation, economic, social and political progress is something that nations must pursue together, for mutual benefit . In similar fashion, China is . saying to . its neighbours, economic . and social progress must be pursued together .
 Rejuvenation is a long-term process, and there is no better choice for China than to step carefully in relation to the one and only existing superpower . China is the only superpower in the world, according to the UN .
 China has, moreover, a strategic purpose and a will to pursue its national strategy . China has also a national purpose and will be pursuing national strategy, says China's ambassador to Washington . The U.S. has a long history of foreign policy in China .
 If comprehensive power is understood to be the product rather than the sum of hard and soft power the way Cline’s function assumes Pp^ X . Pp is perceived power, C critical mass, E economic capability, M military capability and W the will to pursue national strategy
 China is progressing from a low starting point. Power is seen not only as something states possess, but as something that is embedded in the structure of international affairs .
 Japan is reluctant to accept the rise of China and is a brake on regional cooperation . A natural preference is East Asian regionalisation, but Japan has a reluctance to accept China's rise .
 In China and India, nuclear-weapon programmes are rooted in great national ambitions . In China, India, the nuclear-weapons programmes are seen as rooted in national aspirations . In India and China, the programmes have been linked to national ambitions.
 For China, rejuvenation in reference to the power position it used to enjoy in previous centuries suggests that the aim is a dominant position in international affairs . China's rejuvenation is a reference to its previous power position .
 In India, there is a strand of exceptionalism in its pursuit of a leadership role in world affairs . Nuclear weapons are deemed necessary in order to attain that role, writes CNN.com's Peter Bergen .
 If the U.S. is seen to reduce its reliance on nuclear weapons as part of a strategy to maintain United States military superiority, nobody can match its conventional forces . Nobody can match the conventional forces while achievement of an NWFW is in the blue .
 Then, disarmament would run contrary to their historical claims for greatness, he says . Then, he adds, it would be wrong to disarmament . The U.S. should not disarmament, he writes .
 In order for China and India to contribute to a disarmament process in good faith, there has to be equity built into it, says CNN's John Defterios .
 High economic growth and vibrant nationalism fosters it, and it was enhanced by successful management of the latest financial crisis .
 Emerging powers China, India and Brazil were reassured of the appropriateness of their development strategies and foreign policies . The emerging powers were reassured by the reassurance .
 The main missing element is a strategic dialogue with the United States based on mutual deterrence . The U.S. needs to engage in dialogue with Russia and China, the Russian president says .
 India has revived its radical disarmament rhetoric, but will hardly be prepared for much disarmament action until a minimum deterrent force has been established and a seat at the negotiating table has been secured . Influenced by the United States disarmament initiatives, India has .
 India in particular, since it is playing for time. Both are sensitive to the contents and sequencing of the specific steps to be taken . India and the U.S. are both keen to know what will happen in the next few days .
 Asian giants are powers in their own right, increasingly averse to external attempts to interfere with their national interests . The Asian giants have been increasingly wary of external interference .
 For China it is an important element of its strategic posture, and a sign of weakness . For China, it is important to maintain its position as a strong leader .
 Confronted with improved U.S. ballistic missile defence systems and long-range conventional precision-guided munitions .
 In the face of such policies, it will not be an easy partner in disarmament deliberations in the years ahead .
 The structure of geopolitics is the US, China and the EU . It is commonly assumed that global geopolitics will revolve more and more around the U.S. and China .
 For China, the United States is number one in all main respects, being the only superpower . The EU is unlikely to emerge superior to China in comprehensive power because of its political integration . For the US, China and the EU are ‘second countries’
 In terms of economic growth, China is outdoing the United States and EU by a wide margin . China's economic growth outdoes both the U.S. and EU in terms of GDP growth .
 Politically, China’s ascent depends on the political mobilisation capabilities of the United States and on European integration . The rise of China's rise depends on political mobilisations of the U.S. and Europe integration .
 Obama may take a U-tum with Obama’s commitment to multilateralism, alliance politics and international law . The U.S. capability to rally international support behind its policies has declined considerably, but may take U.tum .
 In Europe, EU enlargement put a brake on integration and the financial crisis hit the Union hard, but integration remains an overriding political objective . The EU has been in the throes of a crisis, but it is still a political imperative for integration .
 The United States and China are the likely drivers of geopolitics in the time ahead, writes Andrew Hammond . The EU attracts the keen attention of both the U.S. and China .
 Geopolitics is about the impact of geography on politics, and the geography of the Arctic is changing rapidly as a function of global warming . The Arctic is becoming more and more vulnerable to global warming as a result .
 The EU is China’s largest market, and in ten years’ time China may eclipse the U.S. as the EU's largest trading partner . China is now the world's largest trade partner .
 The EU has no hard power aspirations in East Asia and does not share U.S. perceptions of the need to curb China’s military capabilities . The EU does not want to engage in hard power ambitions in Asia and has no ambitions of hard-power aspirations .
 Growing Chinese military investments do not present a threat to Europe . Taiwan is a peripheral issue for the Europeans, and Chinese activities in the South China Sea and the Malacca Strait are not of prime concern either .
 China’s emerging blue water navy brings it in line with other big powers . China and the Middle East have an interface between SLOCs and energy .
 China's shortcomings with regard to democratic practices and human rights are sources of irritation . China’s shortcomings with . regard to human rights and democratic practices are sources . irritation .
 The plight of ethnic minorities in Tibet, Sinkiang and other places are discouraging and censorship practices are comprehensive . Tibet is one of the world's most isolated places, Tibetans .
 Official statistics tell that there are some 100,000 public protests of various kinds per year . Official statistics say there are around 100,00 public protests a year .
 If China’s economic and political performance continues to improve, tensions will be alleviated . Europe adopts broader and more instrumental approaches to democracy and human rights as China becomes better known . China's political and economic performance will also improve, writes Andrew Hammond .
 They have no security concerns in relation to each other, and substantial economic and political interests in common, they say . They have substantial economic, political and economic interests in each other .
 They share a common interest in a multi-centric world order, and they both wish to enhance their role in global governance institutions . Both wish to strengthen role in governance institutions, they say .
 Most observers believe for a long time to come, the commonalities of interest between the EU and the U.S. outweigh the cooperative potential of European-Chinese relations as far as security issues .
 India is another huge country on a steeply rising curve, although not as steep as China’s . India is a huge country, but not the steepest curve in the world .
 India has a rugged and resilient democracy, and historical and linguistic ties to the West . India has history and historical ties with the West, but also ties with India's democracy .
 With the end of the Cold War and Russia’s opening to the United States and China, its common geostrategic interests with Russia dissipated and threatened to leave it isolated . Russia's interest in the U.S. and China has faded, leaving the country isolated .
 During Wen Jiabao’s successful visit to India in 2005, a strategic partnership was declared . A strategic partnership has been declared .
 China formally recognised Indian sovereignty over the Himalayan territory of Sikkim . India reaffirmed its position that Tibet is a part of China . China formally recognises India's sovereignty over Sikim .
 The two sides agreed on a road map for settlement of the border dispute, which had brought them to war in 1962 . The two countries also agreed on an agreement to settle the dispute .
 Along the border, a number of confidence-building measures have been instituted . Measures include a ceiling on troop deployments, agreement to clarify the line of control, advance notification of military movements and manoeuvres .
 Given historical complexities, China’s traditional support for Pakistan; and the potential rivalry between them; this turn of events was remarkable . Given the historical complexities and China's traditional support, this is remarkable .
 The border conflict is far from settled, and economic cooperation is hampered by material shortcomings such as weak Indian infrastructure and lack of knowledge about each other’s social and economic systems and ways of doing business . Still, the border conflict has not yet been settled, says Indian diplomat .
 China sees Russia, Japan and the U.S. as neighbours, but India is far away from them . India is a key ally of the West .
 The relations between India and China oscillate between indifference and rivalry . Power shifts and nuclear weapons 33 are vulnerable to tactics of divide and rule .
 The nuclear cooperation agreement between the U.S. and India has such a geopolitical aspect . The deal has such an important geopolitical aspect, CNN's Peter Bergen says .
 It opens a broad range of economic, political and military cooperation between the two countries . The two nations have been in touch for years .
 India can produce in the order of 50 nuclear weapons per year if it makes maximum use of its capacity . Within the framework of the agreement, the US-India agreement can produce 50 nuclear warheads per year .
 By the end of 2008, India was estimated to have in the order of 60 to 70 weapons . India was aiming at a minimum deterrent in the low hundreds of weapons .
 China from the United States and India in the form of U.S. missile defences and expanding Indian arsenal . India from Pakistani and Chinese expansion and modernisation .
 China is modernising and diversifying its forces, but it is unclear to what extent it intends to expand its capabilities . China is replacing old missiles with new, more survivable missiles .
 In the India-Pakistan relationship, threats and use of nuclear weapons cannot be excluded . In India and Pakistan relationship, the use of nukes can't be excluded, experts say .
 It takes politically astute leaderships in Beijing and Delhi and skilful diplomacy to clarify the functions of their nuclear weapons and avoid being entangled in competitive arms acquisitions . However, it takes political savvy leaderships to clarify functions of nuclear weapons .
 India has an unbroken tradition of non-alignment, India shuns alliances . India has a history of not aligning with the West .
 It is mindful of its independence and widely assumed to be the fulcrum of balance in Asia . The country is mindful that it is aware of its own independence .
 The Soviets did not use the term ‘geopolitics’, but the Russians do . The Soviets didn't use it as a term, but now the Russians .
 Geopolitical analyses tend to see the world through zero-sum lenses what one party gains another loses . The Russians have always been inclined to read international politics this way .
 Geopolitics is prominent in Russian analyses of international affairs . Today, geopolitics is a key part of Russia's analysis of world affairs .
 NATO bombing of Yugoslavia in 1999 triggered a sea change in Russia’s attitude towards the West . NATO bombed Yugoslavia without a UN mandate and therefore in violation of international law . NATO bombing without UN mandate in 1999 violated international law, according to Russia .
 Since NATO could do this, it might do more of the same closer to Russia’s borders . NATO might do the same with Russia, which has a strong anti-Russian presence in Russia .
 Russia upgraded role of nuclear weapons in response to NATO's weak conventional forces . Its conventional forces were weak and clearly inferior to NATO’s, so Russia upgraded its nuclear weapons . Russia upgraded the role in response .
 The Bush administration was successful in extending its sphere of influence to Russia’s borders in Eastern Europe and the Caucasus . While the Bush administration suffered severe set-backs in the Middle East .
 New physical facts were established on the ground in the form of U.S. military bases in Eastern Europe and assistance to Georgia . Efforts to enlarge NATO even further to include the Ukraine and Georgia thwarted .
 These developments could only come at the expense of relations with Russia and the arms control architecture . These developments would only come as the result of relations between the U.S. and Russia .
 Rising Russia tried to hit back as soon as it overcame economic difficulties and humiliations of the 1990s . In contrast with China, which tries to avoid open confrontation with the US .
 US-Russian relations were at a low point when George Bush left the White House . US-Russia relations were therefore at a high point when Bush left .
 Under Obama they quickly improved, much as a function of his ambitious nuclear disarmament plans . Under Barack Obama, they improved under the president .
 Without another agreement with Russia for further cuts, his high-profile call for NWFW would have come to nought .
 START I, which expired on 5 December 2009, was replaced by START I . Plans for a missile shield in Poland and the Czech Republic were shelved .
 The Shanghai Cooperation Organisation promotes common interests in fighting terrorism and keeping the U.S. out of Central Asia .
 The SCO may also be used to regulate their access to Central Asia’s energy resources, but so far there is more competition than cooperation in that respect .
 Russia and China support each other on Taiwan and Chechnya . They have a common geopolitical interest in keeping Iran out of the U.S. hands .
 To the extent that they feel encircled and contained by the US, they are likely to strengthen their ties in opposition .
 China does not want geopolitics to tilt in this direction . Russia has been a major arms supplier to China in recent years . Russia is ambivalent with regard to arms and oil supplies .
 Russia's relations with the EU suffer from its own economic policies as well as from its authoritarian political system . Russia’s relationship with the European Union suffers from own economic and political policies .
 Its economic openness is limited by a comprehensive governmental hold of strategic sectors . Human rights and rule of law deficiencies obviate against closer cooperation, says Amnesty .
 History, geographic proximity, growing Russian market and economic complementarity speak in favour of closer cooperation between the two countries . History, geography proximity, and growing market speak out favour closer cooperation .
 Similar to China and EU, Russia acts out of respect for the UN Charter and international law, says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Russia has been accused of violating the UN charter and acting out of international law .
 Russia's veto power in the Security Council is particularly important given its weakness on many other dimensions of power . For Russia, its veto power has been particularly important .
 Russia’s relations with Japan are constrained by the territorial dispute over the Kurile Islands, for which there are no signs of early resolution . Russia and Japan are locked in a territorial dispute on the islands .
 The coupling of Japanese technology and economic strength to Russian raw materials in Siberia, a matter of much speculation and intermittent hopes since the Cold War, has not materialised .
 The answer is energy, which is a formidable economic and geopolitical card . First of all, the answer is the answer to energy, says CNN's John Defterios .
 Most of Russia’s economy is in the European part of the country and oriented towards the West . Most of the Russian economy is located in Europe and is oriented to the west .
 The exercise of this option to become an integral part of the European economic space is up to Russia itself . The exercise is primarily a matter of economic and political reforms, writes Andrew Hammond .
 If China and the EU form a binary star system some day, Russia is in its gravitational field . Russia is somewhere in the gravitational field of the EU's gravitational field, Russia says .
 Putin took Russia from chaos and decay in the 1990s to stability and economic growth in this century . Putin is credited with turning Russia into a nation of stability and growth .
 The correlates of that transformation were authoritarian rule, a firm governmental grip on a comprehensive set of strategic sectors, and virulent nationalism . The correlates were authoritarian presidential rule, and a firm government grip on the nation .
 The next phase may see democratic reforms and economic liberalisation stimulating more diversified and robust economic growth and opening the doors both to Europe and the economic powerhouses of Asia . The next step may see more diversification and robust growth .
 The military doctrine of 2000 stated that the upgraded role of nuclear weapons was temporary, awaiting the reconstitution of sufficient conventional forces . The upgraded role was said to be temporary .
 In addition to being a counterweight against NATO, nuclear weapons are deemed important also in defending the vast and thinly populated expanses of Siberia bordering China .
 SIPRI estimates that Russia has approximately 2,000 operational warheads and about 5,400 altogether . There is considerable uncertainty about Russia’s inventory of sub-strategic or tactical nuclear weapons . Russia is believed to have about 2,400 warheads, reserves and weapons awaiting dismantlement
 In 2008, Russia's chief of staff affirmed Russia’s commitment to non-strategic weapons in reference to the situation in Europe . In 2008 Russia's top military official said Russia would not hesitate to use non-military weapons .
 A reduced role for nuclear weapons must await conventional force upgrades that are substantial enough to assure the Russian leadership that its borders can be defended by conventional means, one says . One will have to wait a long time .
 Threat perceptions may be downgraded in view of Obama’s rapprochement with Russia . The importance accorded to nuclear weapons likewise likewise is likewise . However, the importance of nuclear weapons is also downgraded .
 Sub-strategic weapons have to be included in the negotiations, says Peter Bergen . The START I replacement will be replaced by a new disarmament agreement .
 Few relationships display such a stark contrast between economic interdependence on the one hand, and political and military animosity on the other, as that between Japan and China . China is one of the world's most powerful countries .
 Historical grievances, territorial disputes in the South China Sea, political rivalry in Southeast Asia, strategic competition for vitally important natural resources and mutual security concerns . Chinese worries about the evolution of the US-Japan alliance put heavy strains on relations between them .
 The Taiwan issue exacerbates tensions, and so does Japan’s involvement in the U.S. missile defence programme . Japan is also involved in the United States missile defence program .
 Japan unveils new defence policy guidelines for first time naming China as a possible military threat . Japan unveiled new policy guidelines after incursion of a Chinese submarine off Okinawa in 2004 .
 China expressed deep concerns over the adjustments of Japan’s military strategy and over a joint US-Japan statement in 2005 declaring Taiwan to be a common security issue for the two of them . In response to the statement, China expressed concern over the changes of the Japanese military strategy .
 Chinese officials deemed the relationship to be at its lowest since the establishment of diplomatic relations in 1972 . Relations between China and the U.S. have been at an all-time low .
 When Bush left, the US-Japan alliance was stronger than ever before . Obama wants to enhance U.S. alliances both in Asia and in Europe .
 The guidelines for Japan-US defence cooperation includes consideration of situations in areas surrounding Japan, which the Chinese take to be a reference to Taiwan .
 China is concerned that the United States empowers it . Rather than using the alliance to constrain Japan, China is worried it empowers the U.S. Rather than constrain the alliance, China wants to use it to help Japan .
 U.S. defence commitments to Taiwan rely on logistical support based in Japan . If it comes to another Taiwan Strait contingency, Japan might be involved .
 The new Japanese government seems, moreover, to take a different view of U.S. extended deterrence, possibly favouring a doctrine of no-first-use . The new Japan government seems to be taking a different approach to the doctrine .
 No-first-use means that nuclear weapons would be used only to retaliate in kind . No first-use nuclear weapons are banned from being used in a nuclear strike .
 Hu Jintao’s visit to Japan in May 2008 may be compared with his visit to India in November 2006 . In this respect, Hu Jintsao's visit to . Japan in 2008 may . be . compared with . his visit . to India .
 He went out of his way to highlight the cooperative dimensions of the relationship and downplay the conflicts of interest . He also downplayed the conflicts .
 The U.S. missile defence deployments in Alaska and California may as well detract from the Chinese deterrent . The United States missile defence deployment may also detract from a Chinese deterrent, too .
 This amounts to a strong common interest in bringing North Korea back to nonnuclear status, but not always to agreement on the best strategy to make it happen . North Korea has a strong interest in re-normalizing relations with the U.S.
 China to maintain a credible deterrent; India to establish minimum deterrent . India to maintain credible deterrent, China to establish a minimum deterrent.
 Having a huge population, a vast territory, impressive economic growth, and a prestigious historical record and rapidly growing selfconfidence, China cannot be ignored . Having a large population, vast territory and impressive economic . growth, a prestigious . record and growing self confidence, China can't be ignored,
 The United States never resolved to base the relationship with China on mutual vulnerability and deterrence . The U.S. and China have been at odds for years over economic and political relations .
 Opponents of mutual deterrence argue that it would be irresponsible to leave the US, Japan and Taiwan vulnerable to China's nuclear weapons .
 China is bound to take precautionary measures in the form of more weapons in less vulnerable deployment modes . China is therefore bound by taking precautionary steps in the face of emerging U.S missile defence systems .
 It reserves its position on the fissile material cut-off issue because it is not sure that it has enough . materials in stock to meet future requirements . Also, it reserves position on cutting-off issues because it does not know enough .
 U.S. decision to accept mutual deterrence along with a strategic dialogue on how to manage it is therefore of the essence . To remove these rearmament incentives and build confidence in future cooperation, the United States needs to take action .
 The U.S. wants to reduce its reliance on nuclear weapons by assigning more functions to new conventional systems systems that others do not have . The United States wants to use conventional systems to reduce nuclear weapons .
 To avoid the first-use dilemma in the face of a declaratory policy never to be the first to use nuclear weapons, new investments to enhance their survivability is a logical answer .
 China is investing more in nuclear-equipped submarines . This is what China is doing,a. by investing more into nuclear-armed submarines .
 The challenge is not unique for China, but presents similar dilemmas for 38 Power shifts and nuclear weapons Russia and others . China's challenge is similar to that of Russia and other countries .
 In the view of ardent United States critiques, it confirms one of the most sinister interpretations of U.S. disarmament policy, which sees it as a variation of the conservative theme of change .
 China acquired nuclear weapons to deter others and avoid being coerced . China has adopted a policy of no-first-use from the beginning .
 In this respect, it is usually credited with a progressive disarmament policy . The U.S. is credited with the success of its disarmament policies .
 There are lingering concerns that others may be trying to get at China, and that nuclear weapons help to keep challengers at a distance . The century of shame in mind, there are lingering fears that others are trying to target China .
 There is an element of pride in the nuclear achievements also in this country. Second, even if nuclear weapons are marginal to China’s overall status in international affairs, there is a pride in nuclear achievements .
 India will continue its nuclear-weapon programme until a minimum deterrent force of some sort has been established . India's nuclear-weapons programme will continue until it is established, experts say .
 It may feel compelled to accede to the CTBT if the US, China and others ratify the Treaty and urge it to do the same, but this is far from certain . In the meantime, it may be compelled to . accede .
 It is not ready for a fissile material cut-off, but willing to participate in negotiations . The U.S. has not yet agreed to cut off production of nuclear material .
 It had a high profile on disarmament matters before aligning itself with the international arms control order after the 1998 tests .
 Other states may encourage India to build on the tradition from Jawaharlal Nehru and Rajiv Gandhi and get ready for disarmament talks as soon as possible .
 In the bipolar world of the Cold War, it was logical to start with measures that would bring the qualitative and quantitative dimensions of the arms race to a halt and then proceed to disarmament . The Cold War was bipolar and bipolar, writes David Cameron .
 A CTBT and an FMCT are important both for substantial and symbolic reasons, and have been uppermost on the priority list of states from the beginning of nuclear-arms-control endeavours 50 years ago .
 India and China suggest that further deep cuts in U.S. and Russian arsenals should come first . The interests of both countries should be considered first .
 Asian giants are able to put political weight behind their preferences . Increasingly, the Asian giants can put political power behind their political weight .
 Russia and the U.S. have conducted about 1,000 nuclear weapon tests each . India have conducted five nuclear tests, Russia has conducted five, while India has conducted about five .
 China hedging and hesitates to proceed to an early cut-off agreement . China is hedging, hesitating and hesitating to proceed .
 India is in the process of building up its arsenal and is therefore all the more unprepared . India is the most vulnerable in the world because of its lack of firepower .
 If arms-control agenda constrains them while leaving the usual suspects largely off the hook, initiatives will quickly go sour . But if the response is an arms control agenda that constranks them, it will go sour, experts say .
 North Korea capitalises on its oil and gas exports both politically and economically . It assigns important roles to nuclear weapons in its military doctrine .
 Russia's economic growth is slower, more uneven and more vulnerable than China's and India's . At best, it will take a long time to beef the conventional forces up to the point where nuclear weapons would no longer be needed for other purposes than core nuclear deterrence .
 It takes a much more benign security environment to get there . Alternatively, it takes a more benign environment to achieve it .
 The scars from the Cold War have not been healed, but to prepare Russia for deep and comprehensive cuts, they must be overcome . Russia must overcome its Cold War scars, says Russian President Vladimir Putin .
 The United States and its allies in Europe and Asia are conducting policies of extended deterrence . The U.S. and allies in Asia and the U.K. are conducting extended deterrence.
 The alliances are not at stake and neither is nuclear deterrence, but the question concerns what nuclear weapons are supposed to deter .
 The Hatoyama government that came to power in 2009 started a comprehensive review of the alliance with the United States inter aha with a view to redefine the role of nuclear arms .
 Most Europeans want to send the remaining U.S. nuclear weapons in Europe back to the United States . Few consider the first-use option to be important for the cohesion of the Alliance .
 During the Cold War, U.S. and European hardliners fed on each other to build support for new arms acquisitions . During the 1950s and '60s, the United States and Europe spent millions of dollars on arms .
 Hardliners on one side of the Atlantic colluded with likeminded people on the other to raise security concerns that arguably needed a military response . They could conveniently refer to them when arguing for new weapon programmes at home .
 The same kind of interplay has been at work in US-Japanese affairs to thwart Obama’s disarmament ambition . The U.S. and Japan are at odds to thwart the Obama administration's disarmament ambitions .
 European countries, Japan and the U.S. are poised to take a fresh look at the role of nuclear weapons . At this juncture, however, it may be that these countries will develop common interests in reducing the role that these weapons play in their bilateral relationship and internationally .
 During the Cold War, nuclear weapons were spread over large parts of the globe, at sea and on land . During the 1950s, nuclear arms were spread around the world .
 The first bomb sprang to life not in 1945, but in the brain of Leo Szilard, a decade earlier . The bomb bomb was the brainchild of the scientist, who had created the first bomb in 1945 .
 It is the bomb in the mind that stands at the heart of the nuclear proliferation problems, for the mental one is available to all . The mental bomb in mind is the key to nuclear proliferation, writes Peter Bergen .
 The physical one, in the possession of states, came about for fear of others . The physical state came about to be a state of fear, not fear .
 Szilard was appalled by the physical destruction of the bomb, but feared Hitler even more . Szilsard feared the destruction of Hitler's bomb bomb even more.
 All members and aspirants to the nuclear club have said that they wanted the bomb for fear of others . Later, all members of the club said they wanted to use the bomb because of the others .
 In other words, if the threat is not manifest it will always be latent, for the bomb in the mind does not know geographical borders and the future is unpredictable . If the threat was not manifest, it will be latent .
 Current rationals for retention and modernisation of nuclear arms are reminiscent of the MAUD report . Current rationales for retaining and modernising nuclear arms were similar to that of the report .
 The stated rationale for the British proposition to build a replacement for the Trident submarine system emphasises the need to defend against the unpredictable . For instance, the stated rationale is the need for the replacement of Trident submarines .
 The same rationale can be used by many other states, and it fits some states much better than it fits Britain . It fits some of the UK better than the UK, but it doesn't fit other states .
 During the Cold War, this rationale was coined “the fallacy of the last step” the mistaken belief that the latest military acquisition would provide a lasting advantage . The fundamental flaw of this rationale is coined ‘the fallacy’
 Further proliferation, horizontal and vertical, remains a matter of great concern, says U.S. State Department . Further proliferation remains a concern more so than during the Cold War .
 First, attempts at threat inflation and the corresponding politics of fear . First, the recurrent attempts at . threat inflation . The politics of . fear is the result of the government's failure to respond to the threat .
 When the period of opportunity of the early 1990s was over, this practice was resumed in reference to new threats, from non-state as well as state actors . This practice has been resumed since the 1990s, when it was resumed .
 The doctrine of nuclear deterrence outlived the global rivalry and confrontation between the U.S. and the Soviet Union . Second, the doctrine of . nuclear deterrence . outlived . the . global rivalry . between the United States and the . Soviet Union.
 Threats of using nuclear weapons, a recurrent practice during the Cold War, have also been issued later . Threats to use nuclear weapons were also issued later, including in the 1980s .
 Third, arms race left enormous stocks of weapons and fissile materials behind, many of them in excess of military needs and without adequate protection . Many of the weapons and materials left behind are not adequately protected . The arms race also left enormous stockpiles of fissiles and weapons behind
 Risks connected with lax controls fed into strong elements of push and pull for nuclear proliferation both in the state and non-state paradigm, and still do. Risks still exist, but still do, writes CNN's Peter Bergen .
 As the Cold War drew to an end, the superpower leaders offered a vision of a world without nuclear weapons . A vision that was revived 20 years later, it was revived in the 1980s .
 The first period of the nuclear age the first nuclear era was part of the Cold War . Threat inflation and the politics of fear were the first periods of the first era .
 The distinct characteristics of this world order translated into an equally distinct nuclear arms race driven by threat inflation and politics of fear . This world order was driven by a world order driven by threats of inflation and fear .
 For a couple of centuries, the lifetime of international orders had been limited to a few decades . For a few centuries, international orders were limited to just a handful of decades . But now, the life of international international orders has been reduced to only a few years .
 Innovators know that to get on to something new, it is important to go back to basics and start from scratch . Innovators known that to start something from scratch, they need to learn from the basics .
 Decision-makers considered each move to be a necessity, without trend-breaking alternatives . Like bad chess players, decision-makers consider each move a necessity .
 Scholars and observers met to discuss security and arms-control issues . The agenda was usually confined to small-scale, reformist variations of existing policies . Even modest refinements seemed unrealistic .
 Threat inflation and politics of fear were essential features of security politics on both sides of the East-West divide . Threat inflation, fear and threat inflation are essential features in security politics in both countries .
 Moscow-Washington ties survived Cold War and got a new lease on life in this century . Its origin and form differed, but it was deeply ingrained in Moscow and Washington .
 In the United States, the practice reemerged towards the end of the 1990s . It got a formidable boost when terrorism struck the U.S. on 11 September 2001 . The practice was boosted by the 9/11 terrorist attacks in the US .
 Threat inflation was used to promote arms programmes in the U.S. All through the Cold War, threat inflation used by American politicians and experts . The first nuclear era 45 The way it worked in America .
 A series of reports were in effect advocacies of enhanced arms build-up . Under the pretence of analysis, analysis was in effect .
 The report (NSC68... 1950) claimed that, should a major war occur that year, the Soviet Union could immediately overrun Western Europe, drive towards the oilrich areas of the Near and Middle East, and attack selected targets in Alaska, Canada and the United States with nuclear weapons
 Truman was sceptical at first, the Korean War helped persuade him to endorse the report . The Korean War led to a fourfold increase in the defence budget .
 Most administrations after Truman have determined defence requirements first, then allocated the rest to domestic needs . Most administrations since Truman have decided defence requirements before domestic needs were allocated to domestic .
 The weapons laboratories did not wait for the military to define the needs, but found out themselves what the art of the possible would be . The weapons labs found out what to do with the military's needs .
 Presidential candidate John Kennedy took it on board, appealing to fear for political advantage . John Kennedy appealed for fear to be used for political gain .
 The real initiators of the review were John Foster and Edward Teller, both of the Lawrence Livermore Laboratory, taking the view that intelligence officers should deliberately try to influence policy by emphasising the worst that the Soviet Union could do .
 Estimate the Soviets may well expect to achieve a degree of military superiority which would permit a dramatically more aggressive pursuit of their hegemonial objectives . Within the ten year period of the National 46.
 With the benefit of hindsight, the B-team’s allegations about Soviet weapon systems were all wrong . But that, in a sense, is beside the point . The B-Team's claims about Soviet weapons systems were wrong .
 The Committee on the Present Danger declared war on Jimmy Carter and his notions of nuclear sufficiency . The Committee was followed up by the Committee on The Present Danger .
 The Strategic Anns Limitation Talks agreement was not ratified and Jimmy Carter was not re-elected . Jimmy Carter did not win re-election in 1977 .
 During his presidency, the hegemon-challenger dilemma the challenger claimed parity . The hegeman fearing it would go for more ushered into another major wave of Cold War. During his .
 At times, East-West affairs were about little more than nuclear arms racing and bean counting . At times it was about nuclear arms race and bean count .
 For a while, Soviet spokesmen characterised the early 1980s as a pre-war period . The Soviet-era period was characterised as a 'pre-war' period .
 Stalin put the loss of human lives at 15 million after the Second World War . Stalin wanted to hide Soviet weakness after World War II .
 Real losses were much higher, and they came on top of millions of victims of the ‘Great Terror’ of the 1930s . Real losses are much higher and they come from the Great Depression .
 When the nuclear age began, the Soviet Union was, therefore, on its knees, much inferior to the U.S. When it began, it was on the verge of collapse . The Soviet Union is now on the brink of collapse.
 The feeling of inferiority haunted Soviet leaders all through the Cold War . Soviet leaders felt inferiority in the face of the Soviet Union .
 Soviet politics of fear emanated from this inferiority complex, and from the self-interests of the military sector . Military sector grew to almost one half of its gross national product . Eventually breaking back of Soviet economy .
 In another reading of the same period, the resource limitations left the U.S. leadership without any real possibility of matching the United States .
 The Cuban crisis in the 1960s and '90s saw political restraints in the United States . However, the political restraints of those years become clear when juxtaposed to what followed after the crisis .
 At the time of the Cuban crisis, Soviet Bear and Bison bombers were based deep inside the Soviet Union and would have to be forward deployed .
 That could reveal their intention and make them vulnerable to pre-emptive attack . That could make them more vulnerable to attack .
 Castro asked Khrushchev for a pre-emptive nuclear strike on the U.S. that day . That day, Castro asked for a strike . Castro was the first president of the Soviet Union to use a nuclear weapon .
 Soviet leaders were determined to deny the United States another dictate . Swallowing their humiliating retreat, the Soviet leaders refused to back down .
 Parity with the United States became economic priority number one a formidable ambition for a much smaller economy . The dictatorship had it in its powers to pursue it .
 For the United States leaders, the outcome confirmed the importance of strategic superiority . For the U.S. leaders, it was a victory for them .
 The result was an annual 10 per cent increase in U.S. military expenditures from 1980 to 1986 . The result of the increase was renewed fear in Moscow about United States superiority and nuclear war . Moscow feared the United States was superior to the Soviet Union .
 In 1998, the Commission to Assess the Ballistic Missile Threat to the United States, better known as the Rumsfeld Commission, focused on the dangers posed by rogue states developing ballistic missiles capable of reaching the U.S. The Commission argued that the United .
 Missile-defence deployments in Alaska and California were justified in reference to North Korea . Poland and the Czech Republic planned to deploy missiles in Poland and Czech Republic in Iran .
 In Russia, President Putin was riding high on a nationalistic trend, upgrading external threats and capitalising on his own strongman image . Russia's President Vladimir Putin has capitalised on his nationalistic image .
 During the first nuclear era, nuclear weapons were tailored to all sorts of delivery systems . Land-, airand sea-based missiles of various ranges, to landand carrier-based aircraft, and to artillery systems .
 Nuclear weapons substituted for conventional munitions to such an extent that by the 1960s and 1970s, important U.S. and Soviet force categories had little capacity for conventional warfare .
 Eisenhower sought unilateral advantage through quantitative superiority . In the United States, Eisenhower sought to achieve quantitative superiority through quantitative advantage . Eisenhower sought the U.S. in the 1950s .
 The Cuban crisis triggered a veritable Soviet catch-up effort, demonstrating in the course of the course 48 years . The legacies of nuclear history of 15 years the fallacy of the last step also in quantitative respects .
 When the Cold War ended, the world’s arsenals contained about 60,000 warheads . 98 per cent of the warheads were Soviet and American ones .
 The United States and the Soviet Union assigned to nuclear weapons during the Cold War . These numbers speak to the formidable importance of nuclear superiority and parity that produced them .
 To explain the ever-expanding size of the arsenals, nuclear war-fighting doctrines were added to the arsenal .
 To be able to destroy each other’s weapons in series of attacks and counterattacks, large diversified arsenals were arguably needed . Large diversified and well-protected arsenals are arguably needed to be needed .
 For deterrence to work there has to be a will to use the weapons if attacked . The best way to convince the adversary about that is to prepare for it . The only way to be seen to be ready is actually to be prepared .
 War-fighting doctrines were about the inhibitions against use goes down, writes Andrew Hammond . Hammond argues that war-fighting doctrine is helpful in making deterrence credible . Hammond: "Deterioration makes deterrence credible"
 He argued that the mere existence of nuclear weapons had a restraining effect irrespective of the sophistry of nuclear-war planning . He argues that the existence of the weapons had an effect on the nation .
 In the ‘real world’, deterrence theory boiled down to existential deterrence all through the Cold War . Yet the nuclear build-up continued and the nuclear doctrines became ever more sophisticated .
 Nuclear doctrines are no longer in the foreground of international affairs, but nearly one decade into the twenty-first century they stayed much the same . Nuclear doctrines no longer dominate international affairs .
 Deterrence, war-fighting and possible first-use of nuclear arms remained key organising concepts . The U.S. nuclear arms were also key concepts in the 1950s .
 After the tests in 1998, India also adopted such a policy, but later extended the role of nuclear weapons to include the deterrence of chemical and biological weapons .
 As was the case during the Cold War, nuclear policies were driven by fear of the other . Domestic interests in research, development and production of arms were key factors in nuclear policy .
 Others may think the same way without admitting to it, because they are unable to challenge it . Others may not admit to it without admitting it, but they may think it .
 China still had only 24 ICBMs capable of reaching the West Coast of the U.S. In the 1980s, China showed remarkable restraint, and The first nuclear era 49 by 2009 by 2009 it still had just 24 ICBM . During the second wave of US-Soviet arms
 The Chinese evidently consider that if a few bombs can be detonated over United States cities, that is enough to deter a U.S. nuclear attack, and they are most probably right . The Chinese are most likely right .
 For any U.S. administration, a few Fl-bombs on United States population centres mean unacceptable destruction . For any United States administration, any Fl-bombing means unacceptable destruction. For any . United States .
 India has not defined what its objective of minimum deterrence would mean . It seems bent on avoiding an arms race with China . It is too early to judge where it is heading, but it seems bent .
 40 years of Cold War arms racing produced 70,000 nuclear weapons and huge amounts of highly enriched uranium and plutonium .
 The collapse of the Soviet Union, which had based its nuclear management on physical control without any rigorous material accountancy, caused grave concerns about proliferation .
 Abdul Qadeer Khan network widened it into a concern tons azimuth' firms and individuals from more than 30 countries on four continents had contributed to the network . Nothing seemed to have come from the former Soviet Union .
 Article I of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons obliging suppliers not to assist others in the acquisition of nuclear weapons, became an issue of the highest order . Article I oblige suppliers to not assist others with the acquisition .
 By shooting two significant amounts of HEU at each other, the weapon developers were virtually certain that a nuclear explosion would follow . Testing was not considered necessary, for by shooting two . amounts of . HEU would be almost certain that an explosion would happen .
 The plutonium bomb that was used over Nagasaki had been tested at Alamogordo . The bomb was used in the bombing of Hiroshima .
 Most newcomers chose to test, while Israel and South Africa adopted policies of opacity and ambiguity . Most of the newcomers chose tests, while South Africa and Israel chose to remain opaque .
 When risk of nuclear proliferation began to transcend the state paradigm, the lesson from Hiroshima became particularly relevant . The lesson is particularly relevant when it comes to nuclear proliferation, the author says .
 The first and most effective line of defence is at the source, meaning reduction of weapons and weapons-grade materials, and effective control of the remaining inventories . Equally obvious, the most effective way of defence should be to reduce weapons and materials .
 The outcome may be a question of what a nuclear explosion will do to an urban area, i.e. another Hiroshima . The outcome of the nuclear explosion may be the outcome of what will happen to the city .
 Somehow, the superpower would probably strike in revenge, e.g. against states that are believed to host or support the group behind the terror .
 The political system of the U.S. may change very much for the worse, and so may that of others . So may others' political system change much more for the better .
 As the Cold War began to wind down, a spectacular attempt was made to rid the world of nuclear weapons . Reykjavik was the first city in Iceland to try to rid itself of nuclear arms . Iceland was the last city in the world to have a nuclear bomb .
 Mikhail Gorbachev and Ronald Reagan shared the objective of a nuclear-weapon-free world in 1986 . The pair had a go at it in Reykjavik, Iceland, in a bid to achieve a world nuke-weapons free .
 The prelude was the summit meeting in Geneva in November 1985, best known for a joint statement emphasising that a nuclear war cannot be won and must never be fought .
 The following year, Gorbachev sought direct dialogue with the United States at the highest level, aiming, first of all, at agreements in the field of arms control and disarmament, he says .
 He shied away from bottom-up summits issuing communiques that had been negotiated in advance . He said he didn't want to use communiques negotiated by top-up leaders .
 Geneva had been conducted in a top-down way, and Reykjavik was cast in the same mode . Geneva was conducted in the way of a top down-down approach to the world's most important city .
 Without it, there was no chance of getting around old habits blocking new departures towards cooperative security . Without it there would have been no chance to get around old ways blocking new arrivals .
 Some argued comprehensive disarmament would undermine the Western alliance and make the Europeans accommodate to the Soviets . Some argued that comprehensive disarmment would undermine Western alliance .
 The argument was anchored in the past, in the textbooks of the Cold War, the author says . It was not prepared to imagine what a world without East-West confrontation and nuclear weapons might be like .
 At Reykjavik, Reagan and Gorbachev confirmed to each other their objective of eliminating all nuclear weapons . The two leaders agreed to observe parity and equality at each step along the way .
 The Commission had emphasised that, in the nuclear age, security was something the parties had to seek together, to mutual advantage, ft ft ft was not something one party could achieve at the expense of the nuclear era . The first nuclear era 5 1 other .
 Reagan proposed that the side that wished to deploy strategic defences should be obligated to present a plan for sharing the benefits of them and for eliminating offensive ballistic missiles . Reagan proposed the plan in 1986 .
 If the missiles were eliminated before deployment of defences against them, then no capability for a first strike would exist .
 Gorbachev tried as best to curtail the SDI, partly because of commitments he had made at home . The programme was of genuine concern to him .
 Soviet scientists told him that the SDI could be neutralised for 10 per cent of what the missile shield would cost . Soviet scientists had told him they could neutralise for 10% of the cost .
 At Reykjavik, Gorbachev insisted that the SDI should be confined to laboratory research and testing for a period of ten years . That blocked the big deal . The SDI was banned from being used for testing for ten years and that blocked it .
 The Reykjavik summit prepared the ground for the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces agreement, which eliminated all United States and Soviet missiles in this category, and for the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty . The treaty reduced operational strategic nuclear weapons by 50 per cent .
 As an eyewitness to Reykjavik, I feel Gorbachev was no less responsible than Reagan for its failure . He held SDI hostage for the success of the meeting, he says .
 Reagan held good cards with impressive disarmament proposals . He could have played them far better if he had not been as stubborn on SDI as Reagan as Reagan .
 Gorbachev followed that bargaining strategy in later negotiations toward the end of the Reagan administration . It could have been postponed for further consideration if they had reached agreement on a deep reduction of nuclear weapons .
 This assessment seemed appropriate at the time it was written, and even more so today, knowing the technological difficulties that ballistic missile defence still encounter . This assessment seems appropriate today, especially today, as well as today .
 The superpowers seem to have taken the consent of the superpowers for granted . The legacies of nuclear history of the other NWS should be taken seriously .
 There are no references to the question in the United States and Soviet memoranda of conversation, nor is there any mention of it in Reagan's, Shultz's, Gorbachev’s and Dobrynin's accounts of the discussions .
 The other NWS were mere appendices to the bilateral dimension of this world order . The world order is now a very different world order, writes David Frum .
 Second, there was no mention of the NPT, despite the fact that elimination of nuclear weapons was an international legal obligation . Article VI of NPT made elimination of nukes an international obligation, despite Article VI .
 This confers credence to the view that, for the major powers, the NPT was somewhat marginal to their core security concerns . The NPT has been seen to be a relatively minor issue for major powers in the world .
 Or they had never paid much attention to Article VI and, therefore, failed to recognise it even as they tried to implement it . Or they didn't recognise it, or failed to recognise it even though they had tried to .
 The achievements at the Reykjavik summit were greater than those in any U.S.-Soviet meeting before . But the popular perception of the outcome in Iceland at the time was one of near disaster or near farce .
 There was something unreal about it all, partly because it had not dawned on those who received the news that the Cold War might soon be over . The Cold War was over, but it was not dawning on those receiving the news of the end .
 There had been some 25 communications back and forth in preparation of the summit . They were high-level secret ones setting the stage for a leader-driven negotiation .
 Leaders had been met with incredulity because they had been thinking big in unconventional ways . Also, they were met with disbelief because of the leaders' unconventional ways of thinking big, they said .
 While much progress was made in the field of disarmament, an NWFW was not to be . An NWFW would not be able to be created .
 Reykjavik revived the vision, shaking governmental bureaucracies entrenched in the nuclear paradigms of the Cold War and giving hope to people who had been at their mercy .
 He was joined by other former U.S. leaders at the 20th anniversary of Reykjavik .
 They were deployed in the name of national security . They enhanced the status and prestige of their possessors, says the author .
 Nuclear weapons were used to maintain superpower spheres of interest and mark political ambitions . By moving them forward, including them in military manoeuvres and keeping them in high states of readiness, nuclear weapons were .
 There was a nuclear shadow to many deployments, operations and conflicts . Produced in enormous numbers, widely distributed and well-integrated in the military machines .
 After the Cold War, some of these functions have continued unabated . Others have been weakened and discarded . Yet others have been given a new lease of life by adapting nuclear postures to new political and military circumstances .
 To better understand what it takes to change the role of nuclear weapons, a closer look at their current functions is in order . To understand what is needed to change nuclear weapons' current functions, visit CNN iReport.com .
 Karl Marx wrote that the most effective power is the structural one which functions without being used . The structural impact of the structural impact is the most important power, Marx wrote .
 Military strength is an important determinant of the international hierarchy of states, and nuclear weapons are the ultimate expression of strength . The U.S. military says it is determined by the strength of a nation .
 Nuclear weapons instill a sense of awe in the minds of opponents and foster caution and respect . Nuclear weapons are unique in their destructive capacity, instilling a sense in the mind of opponents .
 France also got the muscle to chart an independent foreign policy . The legacies of nuclear history policy are still visible in France .
 Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty was opened for signature in 1968 . Structural significance of nuclear weapons was enshrined in treaty form . Treaty was signed by the U.S. in 1968.
 The NPT is based on the distinction between “haves” and “have-nots” between five big powers and all others . The distinction persists in a somewhat diluted form another four de facto nuclear-weapon states have been added .
 The weapons in the hands of a privileged few, their status value becomes all the more conspicuous . Precisely because the weapons are in the . hands of the few, they become more conspicuous, the . weapons .
 Domestic and international prestige played a role in India’s declaration of nuclear-weapon status . Some 30 years later, domestic as well as international prestige, played a key role in the declaration .
 Elements of the Indian scientific community pushed for it to show that they mastered the technology . The Indian scientists say it was necessary to prove that they had mastered technology .
 India is well on its way to become a recognised NWS, adding self-confidence to strong sentiments of national sovereignty and independence . In the beginning, the international reactions to the 1998 tests were harsh and condemning .
 The end of the Cold War eliminated the political and ideological confrontation between East and West, but the nuclear doctrines remained much the same . Deterrence and war-fighting remained much of the same.
 The Clinton administration’s Nuclear Posture Review became an exercise in continuity, the first-use policy included . The U.S. and Soviet/Russian forces were much reduced, but the posture review was a continuity exercise .
 Russia changed its doctrine to make it more similar to that of the U.S. Russia has been criticized for its lack of transparency in the past .
 The stated rationale for acquisition of nuclear weapons has always been phrased in terms of national security . National security is a key part of the nation's national security policy .
 During the Cold War, all NWS adopted this logic, although operationally, they gave very different meanings to it . The Cold War was very different, but operationally it was very important .
 The United States and the Soviet Union built enormous forces to guarantee unacceptable destruction . China, France and the United Kingdom introduced notions of sufficiency and minimal deterrence . The U.S. and the . Soviet Union .
 For the United States, this goes back to the Soviet blockade of West Berlin in 1948 and what it might take to defend the city . For the U.S. this goes forward to the idea of defending West Berlin from the Soviets .
 Use or threats of use of nuclear weapons were deemed necessary to maintain access to the city and to defend it . In the face of superior Soviet conventional forces, use or threats to use nuclear weapons was deemed necessary .
 First-use became a crucial part of NATO strategy from the inception of the alliance . It led to the deployment of thousands of tactical nuclear weapons in Europe .
 Russia discarded the Soviet declaration of no-first-use of 1982 and adopted the Western first-use policy of 1982 . Russia adopted the West's policy of first use .
 The role of Pakistan’s nuclear weapons also came to centre on firstuse, deterring India from making deep intrusions into its territory . Later, the role of the nuclear weapons .
 A third function was that of nuclear war-fighting, contemplating nuclear exchanges between the USA and the USSR involving thousands of nuclear weapons back and forth, as if nuclear war could be similar to conventional war and be lost or won . Post-Cold-War doctrines 55 post-Cold War doctrines
 Even in the absence of any expectation of waging large-scale nuclear war, both powers went for demonstrated capabilities to win or deny victory to the other party .
 Cold War excesses were among the worst excesses of the Cold War . Plan could justify about 10,000 strategic nuclear weapons on each side during the height of the .
 The Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty eliminated land-based intermediate range missiles . The Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty reduced the strategic forces by one-third . The Presidential initiatives of 1991/1992 ordered comprehensive withdrawal of tactical nuclear weapons .
 The role of nuclear weapons in war is geared less to strategic big-power settings and more to regional contingencies . Today, nuclear weapons are geared less toward strategic big power settings . The role is more important to regional nations than strategic powers .
 The United States maintains extended deterrence postures with its allies in Europe and East Asia . The U.S. maintains extended postures in cooperation with allies in the region .
 The end of the Cold War changed the weapons configurations in these regions, but not the essence of the doctrines . The Cold War ended in favor of the U.S. in the Middle East .
 The United States keeps the option of being first to use nuclear weapons in response to an attack on its allies, be it an attack by conventional or by unconventional means . The U.S. keeps the . option of using nuclear weapons if it is attacked by its allies .
 President Obama’s disarmament initiatives triggered renewed debate about extended deterrence at official levels . Henry Kissinger warned the European allies not to repeat requests for assurances that the U.S. could not possibly mean .
 The U.S. has issued specific nuclear threats more than 20 times in the past 20 years . The United States has issued a nuclear threat or threat to use nuclear weapons .
 Before Barack Obama, nine out of ten presidents of the nuclear age have done so during crises and limited wars in Berlin, Cuba, East Asia, Indochina and the Middle East . Nine out of 10 presidents have done that during crises or limited wars .
 The one exception Ronald Reagan did not experience a crisis of the kind that made the other presidents invoke such threats . Ronald Reagan didn't experience such a crisis .
 To many Europeans, this seemed a logical thing to do when the conventional imbalance that justified NATO’s first-use policy disappeared and big-power cooperation got off to a new start .
 The U.S. attaches to possible first-use elsewhere in the world . That was naive, it ignored the importance that the United States attaches to potential first use elsewhere . That, however, was naive .
 The U.S. is increasingly bent on exploiting its superiority, says CNN's John Sutter . Also, the United States sees no need for compromise and accommodation of Russian interests or those of others .
 Threats of first-use have been made to maintain United States spheres of interest . U.S. has made threats of first use to maintain sphere of interest in China .
 Sometimes, they were invoked to protect United States forces far away from home from larger ground forces in their neighbourhoods . Sometimes, the U.S. forces were deployed far from home .
 Friends and allies who might not be able to stand their ground on their own needed support . Sometimes, friends and allies needed support. Sometimes, it's not always easy to stand your ground on your own . Sometimes it's hard to say goodbye to your friends or family .
 Some of the threats were bluffs, some were defied and some may have worked more or less as infended . Some of these threats may have been bluffed or deflected, but some were successful .
 Nuclear threats were made in connection with the first Gulf War . Shortly after the Iron Curtain came down, nuclear threats were levelled at Iraq .
 Two of these three actions were actually taken by the Iraqis during the last days of the war, which perhaps implies that they were not deterred from using chemical weapons either .
 The regime had to explain to its military commanders why it was pulling back from the brink . It looked a lot better to say that it was sparing the Iraqi people from nuclear holocaust than to admit that the leaders were worried about their own skins .
 Baker believes the calculated ambiguity about the U.S. response was part of the reason why Iraq did not use its chemical and biological weapons . Baker: The calculated ambiguity in the United States' response was the reason for Iraq not to use such weapons .
 To him and others, the utility of nuclear threats therefore appeared to be confirmed, he said . To him, he and others appeared to have confirmed .
 Whatever chance there might have been for the United States to adopt a policy of no-first-use after the dissolution of the Warsaw Pact and the Soviet Union, it effectively disappeared with this experience .
 The Bush administration issued threats against Iraq to deter Saddam Hussein from using chemical and biological weapons against U.S. and allied troops and Israel . The threats were meant to deter Iraq from using such weapons .
 Government statements made the nuclear option a live issue for public attention and debate . To make contingency plans is quite customary, but to say that all options are on the table falls well short of specific threats .
 Among the leading candidates for the 2009 presidential election, only Obama took partial exception to the use of nuclear weapons against Afghanistan and Pakistan, “involving civilians” but not Iran .
 The military brass seemed more sceptical of threats and use of nuclear weapons than their political leaders . The country's political leaders seemed sceptical about threats and nuclear weapons .
 The threats against Iraq and Iran were not made in defence of United States spheres of interest, but in an effort to expand U.S. influence in the Middle East . The threats were made in an attempt to expand American influence in Mideast, the author says .
 During the second term of Bush’s presidency, the policy of regime change lost much of its appeal and credibility because of the traumatic experiences in Iraq and Afghanistan . However, during the . second term, the . policy of . regime change has since lost its appeal due to the traumatic
 To qualify for inclusion on the list, a physical change in the disposition of armed forces had to occur for the specific purpose of influencing the behaviour of another actor in a particular situation, short of any intent to influence the behaviour .
 Ships are easier to move around than army units or land-based aircraft . Ships are more mobile than military units or army units, say experts .
 They can be nearby yet out of sight, and therefore be used more discreetly than land-based forces . Land-based troops can be used discreetly, and can be easily used in military operations .
 During the Cold War, nuclear weapons were deployed at sea and in other countries for strategic and tactical warfare . The U.S. deployed nuclear weapons at sea, and at other countries, for strategic purposes .
 Warships had nuclear weapons on board for surface-to-air missiles and anti-submarine warfare . Aircraft carriers had nuclear air-weapons as well . Warships were also equipped with nuclear weapons as well as anti-air weapons .
 Any deployment of such forces to the vicinity of hot spots, or involvement in incidents in other regions, could therefore be used to extend a nuclear signal of some sort .
 At the very least, the projection of nuclear weapons on to foreign shores, their use in military exercises and shifting levels of readiness were recurrent reminders of their comprehensive existence and integration into the force .
 Without extending specific threats of nuclear-weapon use, they left the impression that nuclear weapons were weapons of war, and that was indeed the intention . The intention was not to extend specific threats, but to make use of nuclear weapons .
 Other weapon systems had a designated role in the strategic war plans against the Soviet Union .
 Of course, the relative size and sophistication of military forces influence the propensity to use them, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Stronger postures widen their applicability and enhance the confidence of their owners that they can be brought to bear on others with positive results . Stronger postsures widen the applicability of their postures, say experts .
 The U.S. monopoly on nuclear weapons was an important asset in its foreign affairs for as long as it lasted . In particular, the United States had a monopoly in nuclear weapons . The United States' nuclear weapons were an asset in foreign affairs .
 Cuban missile crisis in October 1962 saw the Soviets learn they were inferior to the U.S. Still, for many years, they were clearly inferior .
 If the will is seen to be weak and wavering, their credibility will be undermined . The will is needed to be seen to have credibility in the world, it is said .
 This is what Post-Cold-War doctrines 59 more than 60 years of non-use in combat tends to do . The U.S. has not been involved in combat in the past 60 years .
 Since 1945, decisionmakers have shied away from using these weapons in war .
 There is a certain truth to the observation that the more time that passes without a nuclear weapon being used, the stronger the norm of non-use . The more time a nuclear bomb is not used in nuclear weapons, the more it passes without being used .
 Both governments and non-govemmental organisations have to care about their reputation . In a globalising world, both governments and organisations need to care for their reputation, he says .
 The U.S. abstained from nuclear-weapon use in Vietnam, and the Soviet Union shied away from using nuclear arms in Afghanistan .
 During the Cold War, the leading powers had a relatively easy job upholding the credibility of nuclear-weapon use . The Cold War was a relatively difficult time for the world's leading powers .
 Well-established threat-based policies were always helpful in this respect. Well-establishing threat-related policies are always helpful, says CNN.com .
 Stronger nuclear forces were recommended in response to threats . The threats were highlighted and exaggerated, according to the U.S. government .
 In this environment, the focus was all the time on the risks of nuclear war, not on the view that the threat might be receding because of a creeping norm of non-use . The focus should be on the fact that the nuclear threat is not receding, not the view
 Shows of force in the vicinity of hot spots around the world also helped to maintain the credibility of nuclear policies . The U.S. nuclear policy has been criticized for its lack of transparency .
 They raised the visibility of the nuclear assets and alerted the conflicting parties to the stakes involved . The operation was a success for the first time .
 Usually, these manifestations were many steps away from nuclear use, but they reminded others of the global reach of nuclear weapons . They had the potential to instil awe and respect in their minds, says CNN's John Sutter .
 They testifled to the relevance of nuclear weapons in the conduct of international politics . Nuclear weapons are a key part of international relations, say experts .
 Nuclear-weapon establishments could not but but be concerned about the utility of what they were producing . Nevertheless, the nuclear-weapons establishments were concerned about what they produced .
 The United States had a big military-industrial complex closely linked to the political system . The U.S. had a large military industrial complex, but it was not linked to its political system.
 To keep and, if possible, expand their share of government budgets, the nuclear weapon establishments went for new nuclear weapons that would be more usable . The nuclear weapon establishment went for more usable weapons .
 A range of weapons suitable for a variety of tasks were built, including low-yield weapons approaching the yield of the largest conventional bombs . The weapons range includes weapons capable of carrying out a range of tasks .
 Manipulation of effects blast, heat, radiation and fallout to tailor them to suit them to speciflc purposes was also tried . Manipulation was also possible .
 President Carter turned them down, against the recommendation of his closest advisors . Carter turned down the offer of a visit to the White House . The White House was in the midst of a crisis in the early 1980s .
 Threat-based policies picked up again towards the end of the decade . After a lull in the early and mid-1990s, when President Clinton focused on the opportunities of globalisation .
 The focus was on regional contingencies rather than global ones between the major powers . This time, the focus was . on regional . contingencies not global ones .
 The legacies of nuclear history gain a significant advantage in relation to other nuclear powers by investing heavily in nuclear forces had lost much of its currency . The idea that one could 60 years ago had lost its currency.
 The initiatives of 1991/1992 eliminated tactical nuclear weapons from surface ships and removed all nuclear deployments from foreign soil except airborne weapons in the low hundreds in Europe .
 The introduction of new types of nuclear weapons has also been severely restricted by the moratoria on nuclear-weapon tests and the signatures on the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty . More sophisticated simulation techniques enable the most advanced NWS to circumvent the limits imposed by a test ban .
 By the turn of the century, the means to counter the creeping norm of non-use had shrunk . The means of counter-using means had therefore shrunk .
 CNN.com will feature a series of provocative videos from the U.S. presidential candidate's inauguration . The White House is hosting a White House tour of Washington, D.C. and beyond .
 In so far U.S. policies promote these values, there would be no need to legitimise them in reference to international law, the United Nations Charter and multilateral organisations .
 On the international scene, the rule of law was downplayed in favour of unilateralism and exceptionalism . Rule of law has been downplayed on international scene . The rule of the law is being played down by the West, but it has been played down .
 U.S. withdrew from some international agreements and abstained from others . To maximise its freedom of action, the United States withdraws from some agreements .
 At the core of U.S. hegemonial rule was economic, cultural, technological and political strength . The use or threat of use of force to dissuade, deter, or if deterrence failed defeat those who sought to challenge it .
 The U.S. had had such a capability in the form of ICBMs and submarine-launched ballistic missiles on alert . Ever since the deployment of solid-fuelled intercontinental ballistic missiles in the 1960s .
 Global Strike focused on regional scenarios; incorporated conventional capabilities along with nuclear ones . It emphasised pre-emptive and preventive attacks rather than retaliatory strikes . Global Strike was different, however, because it focused on region scenarios .
 By forcing total vulnerability upon any potential adversary and creating near-invulnerability for the United States, the U.S. was primarily intended to stop countries from challenging the American hegemony . The United States was designed to stop any potential adversaries challenging its hegemony .
 The sword had become impressively potent, but the shield was marred by technological problems . It remains incomplete and remains incomplete to this day .
 The National Security Strategies of 2002 and 2006 said that the U.S. must deter and defend against the threat of weapons of mass destruction before they are unleashed . The U.N. strategy says that the United States must deter, defend and defend .
 "It will not do to wait until the targeted regimes have built their weapons and can retaliate with them," says President Obama . "We will not wait until they have built weapons," says Obama .
 President Bush called it a strategy of pre-emption, in accordance with the way this expression had been used in the past, but that use of the term blurs the important distinction between pre-empting and prevention . President Bush said it was a strategy that had been called pre-
 The new triad replaces the old triad of the Cold War ICBM, SLBM and heavy bombers . The new one had an offensive leg combining these delivery systems with conventional strike capabilities . A defensive leg including ballistic missile defences . A revitalised defence infrastructure including the nuclear weapon production complex
 Putting offensive weapons into a continuum invites new weapons to fill gaps . Putting all kinds of offensive weapons in a continuum invited new weapons into the mix . Putting weapons in the mix invites new ones to fill eventual gaps .
 The effect on the nuclear threshold seemed different depending on which aspect one chose to emphasise . The effect of the threshold was different depending upon which aspect was emphasised .
 Nuclear weapons can be used in situations where the adversary has conventional arms only, the U.S. says . Nuclear weapons could be used to deter chemical and biological weapons, it says .
 By integrating all means of offensive warfare nuclear and conventional into one and the same continuum with no special doctrinal restrictions on any of its elements, use of nuclear weapons became easier to contemplate and more likely to happen .
 More enemies and greater target complexity called for a wider array of military options against regional adversaries . The U.S. military says it has more enemies and more targets to choose from .
 There would be greater flexibility in the numbers of nuclear weapons that might be used . Strategic weapons would be available for tactical purposes as well as strategic purposes .
 In part, this could be seen as compensation for the withdrawal of sub-strategic weapons that the presidential initiatives of 1991/1992 set in motion . Part of this was because it strengthened the utility of nuclear weapons in regional conflicts . Partly, this was due to the withdrawal from sub
 Nuclear planning was reoriented in order to enhance U.S. force-projection capabilities . Nuclear planning plans were reoriented to enhance the United States' capabilities .
 More than anything else, the NPR departed from past nuclear policy by downplaying and repudiating international arms-control instruments . The NPR's nuclear policy is a departure from past policy .
 The removal of restraints on the U.S. exercise of power should have come as no surprise . Therefore, the removal of such restraints should have been no surprise.
 Bush team criticised Clintonites for not having done more to exploit U.S. superiority after the Cold War . Clintonites criticised for not exploiting United States superiority .
 In 1978, the U.S. would not use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear-weapon state parties to the NPT . The Carter administration stated that the United States wouldn't use such weapons against NWS states .
 U.S. policy evolved to become substantially at odds with UNSC Resolution 984 . Clearly, United States policy evolved into that of the United Nations .
 It may be argued that a UNSC Resolution has the force of international law and therefore trumps national strategy documents . It may also argue that the UNSC resolution trumps the national strategy document .
 Flowever, there is little doubt that, in reality, it was the other way around . The Bush administration showed little respect for the UN and disregard for much of what the Clinton administration did . Flowever .
 For a while, the moratorium on nuclear tests and the end to discrete political use of nuclear force enhanced the norm of non-use . For a time, nuclear tests were banned in North Korea .
 Flowever, doctrinal changes starting in the 1990s and taken to the extremes in this century stemmed that development . Flowever: doctrinal . changes starting to . the 90s and taking to extremes, this century, stemmed that . development. Flowever .
 The United States widened the spectrum of possible nuclear use, thereby correcting the diminishing utility of nuclear arms . The U.S. widened the . spectrum of . possible . use of nuclear weapons .
 The Russian and French doctrines also assigned new roles to nuclear weapons . The British and Indian doctrines did the same, only to a smaller extent .
 This administration will not use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against NPT members in good standing, says Obama administration . Obama administration: "This administration will ... not use ... nuclear weapons"
 Chemical and biological weapons will be deterred by conventional means . Reservations made for new scientific developiuenfs in the biological sector .
 Exempt are the NWS and NPT members that in the US’s view do not comply with their NPT obligations, such as Iran and possibly Syria . Exempt members are exempt from the US's view are Iran, Syria and Syria .
 European political architecture would have to change in a way that substantially reduces Russian threat perceptions . In the case of Russia, this is a tall order, writes Andrew Hammond . The EU must change its political architecture to reduce Russia's threat perceptions, he says .
 The U.S. wants follow-on negotiations with Russia when New START has been ratified . The United States wants follow on negotiations when the New START is ratified .
 Pakistan sticks to a policy of first-use because of its conventional inferiority vis-a-vis India, and Israel and North Korea . Ofher obsfacles are Pakistan and Israel, which sticks to first use because of their inferiority .
 Geneva Protocol of 1925 prohibits the use of chemical and biological weapons in practice . The no-first-use protocol made these weapons illegitimate, whereupon possession of the weapons were prohibited by international treaties .
 Such doctrines have an intriguing in-built disarmament corollary . Also, such doctrines have a intriguing disarmament . The U.S. has a long history of nuclear weapons .
 They limit the functions of nuclear weapons to one and one only deterring others from using theirs . They are limited to deterring other nations from using their own weapons .
 In 1993, Russia formally dropped the Soviet no-first-use policy . Russian doctrine was formally dropped in 1993 .
 Some Westerners saw it as admission that nuclear weapons were no longer essential . Promulgated in the early 1980s, some Westerners thought it was admission that such weapons were not essential .
 In the view of others, this policy had little credibility as long as large numbers of tactical nuclear weapons were deployed along the dividing line in Europe .
 Had war broke out, there would have been strong pressures to use them early, and possibly first . Had war broken out there would be strong pressures for them to be used first .
 There is no evidence that the Soviet nuclear posture was ever optimised for first strike, as was widely believed in the U.S. under Reagan . No evidence, however, that there was ever a first strike .
 The Russian military doctrine of 1993 reserved nuclear weapons for the eventuality of global nuclear war . Like previous doctrines, the doctrine reserved nuclear arms for a global war .
 MAD policies outlasted the political rivalry with the United States . MAD policies outlived the political rivalries with the U.S.
 Inertia prevailed, despite the sea change in US-Russian relations notwithstanding . The U.S. and Russia have been at odds for years .
 By the turn of the century, renewed tension between the Cold War antagonists removed any the need for artificial life support . The U.S. and Russia were the last two countries to be in contact .
 Russia's nuclear arsenal underpins its sovereignty and helps it maintain an independent foreign policy . For Russia, the nuclear arsenal is underpinning its sovereignty . Russia says it has no nuclear weapons, but it is committed to maintaining its own sovereignty .
 The nuclear sector is the only field where Russia can claim equal status with the United States . Russia benefits from the structural impact of nuclear weapons on international affairs . The country's nuclear industry is one of the only fields where it claims equal status .
 By 2009, it had deployed a fifthgeneration silo-based as well as road-mobile ICBM . It had developed a manoeuvrable warhead for the Topol M and enhanced defence-penetration capabilities .
 Almost all of these modernisation programmes were launched during the Soviet era . Except for the Bulava, virtually all of the modernisation programme was launched during that era .
 Sharp budget reductions limited modernisation to already-existing programmes . Sharp budget cuts limited new programmes to already existing programmes .
 The background was United States and NATO expansion towards Russia’s borders and, specifically, the war over Kosovo . The background to the Kosovo war was that the U.S. and NATO expanded towards Russia's borders .
 NATO could bomb Serbia in violation of international law, without any mandate from the UNSC . It might exploit Russia’s weakness and do the same closer to its borders, or even inside it .
 In 1999, Russian leaders were worried about possible Western interference in Chechnya, where a second war broke out that year . Russia was worried about interference in the region, where the second war started in 1999 .
 If such an attack were to occur, demonstrative nuclear strikes would force the enemy to stop hostilities or face nuclear escalation . If such a strike were to be carried out, the enemy would be forced to pull back .
 The more inferior the Russian conventional forces turned out to be, the lower the nuclear threshold . The more . inferior . Russia's conventional forces, the more inferior . Russian forces, Russia's nuclear capabilities, are at risk of a nuclear strike .
 The stakes would be higher for the defender than the attacker (US, NATO), it is assumed that the attacker would not be willing to escalate the war to the strategic level, but prefer retreat .
 Limited use of nuclear weapons could be an effective tool for deterring and fighting limited conflicts . The U.S. should use nuclear weapons to deter and fight limited conflicts, experts say .
 The credibility of nuclear use would neutralise threats of force for political ends . Actual use of a few weapons might be an effective means of de-escalation, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Limited use of nuclear weapons was entertained during the Cold War as well as during the 1950s .
 Tactical nuclear weapons causing less damage and entailing lower risks of escalation than strikes with strategic systems . Such options could best be performed by tactical nuclear weapons, experts say .
 Efforts to contain nuclear war were likely to fail, leading to a strategic nuclear war that nobody wanted . Nobody wanted a strategic nuke war . Efforts failed to contain nukes would have resulted in a strategic war .
 Russian doctrine attaches realism to limited use in regional contexts, primarily to stop conventional attacks by Western NWS . But tactical weapons are not necessarily the weapons of choice any longer .
 The United States had kept important assets at considerable distance from the areas of combat . The counterstrategy had to target weapon systems and command, control and communications centres in the enemy's rear .
 Long-range aircraft equipped with dual-capable cruise missiles and precision-guided gravity bombs might be suitable for such missions . Long range aircraft could be used to carry out the missions .
 Tactical or sub-strategic weapons have lost part of their relevance, although they are still considered essential theatre-level assets . Tactical weapons have also lost their relevance to the U.S. military .
 Elements of the strategic forces, which have been justified in reference to the increasingly unlikely eventuality of global nuclear war, can be assigned to regional missions as well without undermining strategic deterrence .
 The legacies of nuclear history sub-strategic weapons may be included in US-Russian disarmament negotiations . This may facilitate inclusion of 66 sub-stategic weapons in U.S.-Russia disarmament talks .
 The Russians have been recalcitrant in the face of Western demands for transparency and reductions of this category of weapons . So far, however, the Russians have refused to comply with those demands .
 The new mission is the product of perceptions of dire threats as well as acute weakness . The mission is based on perceptions that the U.S. is at risk of losing ground in the world .
 The main threat is believed to come from the West from the United States and its allies in Europe . The U.S. may use force on a limited scale for limited political goals, similar to the wars in the Balkans .
 Pressure from the West is seen in the wider context of U.S. and allied encirclement of Eurasia . Clearly, pressures from the Western are seen in a wider context, says CNN.com .
 There is a latent concern, moreover, about Russia’s territorial integrity in the Far East, where vast and thinly populated areas in Siberia meet a populous and rapidly growing China . There is also a concern, however, about the territorial integrity of Russia's Far East .
 Russian military still considers China as a potential future adversary, and nuclear weapons feature prominently in such scenarios . However, the Russian military considers China's nuclear weapons a major threat .
 The weakness pertains to the conventional forces, which all of a sudden became inferior when the Warsaw Pact and the Soviet Union fell apart, and which labour under stricter financial consfraints than potential opponents both in the East and West .
 The new doctrine reserves the right to use nuclear weapons in response to nuclear attack, attack with other WMDs and also in attack with conventional attack . Like the earlier document, the new document reserves the power of using nuclear weapons .
 To carry out these missions, a deterrence capability at the level of sufficiency, defined as the ability to inflict predetermined or tailored damage to an aggressor under any circumstances, is required . The U.S. needs to carry out missions .
 Russia used to distinguish between nuclear and conventional firepower both in its military doctrine and in its organisational set-up . Russia used the distinction in its doctrine and organisation .
 The doctrine assigns high-precision conventional weapons to strategic deterrence . It follows the U.S. lead in equipping some longrange delivery vehicles with conventional warheads .
 In so far this happens, the organisational distinction between nuclear and conventional weapons is lost . The organisation of nuclear weapons is also lost .
 Like in the US, the mix of conventional and nuclear assets may also provide for greater flexibility in the choice of weapons to meet security challenges .
 Russia's de-escalation concept includes possible first-use of nuclear weapons in response to attack by any kind of weaponry . Russia’s de-calamity concept includes a possible first use of nuclear arms .
 It is unclear whether the military doctrine is consistent with these assurances .
 The much-emphasised threat of NATO involvement in regional conflicts near its borders indicates that it is. NATO involvement is a major concern in the Middle East . The U.S. has been involved in some of the world's most violent conflicts .
 The 2000 doctrine expanded the range of missions to include regional contingencies, and the probability of use in such scenarios has gone from nil to something more .
 The probability of global nuclear war is deemed to be close to zero . Concerns about the effectiveness of the strategic retaliatory capabilities persist regarding missile defence deployments .
 Retaliatory capabilities are maintained and modernised “just in case’s ‘just . in order to reinforce the credibility of regional deterrence,’ says Russian President Vladimir Putin . The Russian-Ukrainian-U.S. military says .
 The 2000 doctrine emphasised that the increased reliance on nuclear weapons will last only until the conventional forces are sufficiently modernised and strengthened . The doctrine is based on the fact that conventional forces need to be modernised .
 The 2010 doctrine puts stronger emphasis on conventional weapons relative to nuclear ones . Unless threat perceptions are much alleviated, it may take a long time to remove the need for nuclear stop-gap measures .
 France’s nuclear weapons were never intended for use on the battlefield . French and British doctrines were never meant to be used on battlefield .
 French weapons were deployed to deter other nuclear powers . The main target was Russia . The French weapons are aziniut omni-directionally .
 If it comes to war, the objective is to give the French armed forces a decisive advantage, says French President Nicolas Sarkozy .
 The air force may be better suited for missions that require flexibility . Deterrence of other nuclear powers is primarily for the navy, while the air force is better suited .
 In January 2006, President Chirac indicated a number of other functions .
 The leaders of states who use terrorist methods against us, as well as those who consider using one way or another weapons of mass destruction, are included in the list .
 In October 2001, Chirac had warned that France could not rule out the use of nuclear weapons against regimes which “are busy developing their own weapons of mass destruction’s” weapons .
 At that time, his statement was primarily intended for Iraq and North Korea . The statement was intended to focus on Iraq, North Korea and Iraq .
 Strategic supplies meaning petroleum, first of all, is another vital interest that may be protected by the nuclear deterrent . Strategic supplies are also a vital interest in the U.S.
 France has had regular discussions of nuclear issues with Britain since 1995 . France and Britain have been talking about nuclear issues since then .
 President Sarkozy touches on the same proposition sometimes referred to as ‘concerted deterrence” inviting a broader dialogue on the role of nuclear weapons in European security . Sarkozy touched on the idea, sometimes called "concerted deterrent"
 French doctrine has traditionally included the possibility of a nuclear warning shot to persuade an aggressor to desist or risk a massive nuclear strike . French nuclear doctrine traditionally includes the possibility that a warning shot could be used to persuade the aggressor .
 The prestige that Iran has come lo attach to its nuclear programme is similar to the pride that France takes in its nuclear achievements . The prestige of Iran's nuclear programme has been compared to that of France's achievements .
 The British nuclear force consists of four SSBNs, each carrying 16 Trident D5 missiles . Each SSBN is equipped with 16 Trident missiles .
 The time it takes to fire the missiles has been extended from a few minutes to a few days . Time it takes for the missiles to be fired from a range of missiles has also been extended .
 The British force is less flexible than the French one . Flaving eliminated its air-launched nuclear weapons, the British force has been less flexible .
 British doctrine has evolved in directions similar to the U.S. and French doctrines . British doctrine is similar to that of the United States and France .
 The strategic role is first and foremost to deter aggression against the United Kingdom and its allies, it is claimed .
 A small nuclear weapon might be used as a demonstration or “a shot across the bow” to signal to aggressors that they have miscalculated Britain’s resolve, without using the full desfrucfive power that Trident offers .
 A third role is retaliation against biological and chemical weapon attacks on Britain or its allies .
 Pre-emptive use is envisaged against a state that threatens Britain’s vital national interests . Finally, pre-emptively use of the weapons could be envisaged .
 In many respects, French doctrine is similar to that of the United States under George W Bush . Post-Cold-War doctrines are similar to those of the U.S. under Bush .
 Regional focus, emphasis on state-sponsored terrorism, putting power centres at risk, deterrence of chemical and biological weapons use and the possibility of nuclear use to deter proliferators are much the same .
 Not surprisingly, the British doctrine also ties in, but in ways that are somewhat less specific .
 The accuracy of the Trident missile allows for regional uses in much the same way that the U.S. envisaged to use its strategic systems in regional roles . Trident missile could be used for regional purposes in the future .
 China deploys road-mobile ICBMs and introduces new long-range missiles on new submarines . To maintain a credible deterrence posture in the face of improved enemy intelligence and surveillance assets .
 Groundand air-launched cruise missiles add to the survivability and flexibility of the nuclear force . Ground and air-launch cruise missiles are part of the U.S. nuclear arsenal .
 Nuclear artillery and other sub-strategic systems may be on their way in . Nuclear artillery, sub-stategic systems could be on the way in.
 A comprehensive modernisation programme is going on, probably leading to a net expansion of the force . The force is being modernised in a bid to keep the force in shape .
 secrecy remains an important part of China’s military posture . Much infonnation is missing, however, for secrecy remains a key part of the Chinese military .
 The goal is also to prevent conventional war from escalating into nuclear war, and to prevent low-intensity nuclear war escalating .
 Deterrence imposes stringent requirements on the Chinese nuclear posture, from the strategic level down to the tactical . Deterrence therefore imposes stringent restrictions on China's nuclear posture . The Chinese government has been criticized for its lack of transparency in recent years .
 The leadership of the Second Artillery Corps has consistently highlighted the importance of educating highquality officers . The training has been a success in recent years .
 China did not acquire nuclear weapons to make up for conventional weakness, experts say . China has been criticized for lack of nuclear weapons in the past .
 The fundamental motive was to avoid nuclear coercion and be able to retaliate if attacked if attacked, the government says . The government says it wanted to avoid coercion and to avoid attacks .
 By entering the core group of NWS, North Korea enhanced its status in the international system . But today, a modest nuclear force does not count much compared with the status that economic and political strength provide .
 The sequencing of disarmament measures is important to ensure that its national security is not diminished on the way to zero . For China as well as others, others, it's important to keep national security not diminished . China's disarmament initiative is important for China to ensure it doesn't go
 The U.S. is well-positioned for global disarmament to zero . The military and political utility of its nuclear weapons is limited, but the utility of these weapons is very limited .
 No-flrst-use has been China’s doctrine since the flrst nuclear test in 1964 . It remains a much-emphasised part of its posture .
 The ongoing modernisation and expansion programme addresses these questions and may put China on a rearmament path for quite some time to come . China's military modernisation programme may be the answer to these questions .
 If the People's Liberation Army faces defeat and China’s territorial integrity is at stake, there would be strong incentives to lower the nuclear threshold . If the P.L.A. forces lose, China's territorial integrity at stake .
 India issued a draft nuclear doctrine in 1999 and unveiled a final sef of polifical principles and administrative arrangements in January 2003 .
 The ultimate size and structure of the force the operationalisation of credible minimum deterrence remains to be seen .
 While China has a rudimentary capacity for tactical nuclear warfare, India has none so far . India has no nuclear capability so far, China has no so far.
 Nuclear weapons would only be used in retaliation of a nuclear attack on It territory or Indian forces elsewhere . Indian forces would not be able to use nuclear weapons in retaliation for an attack .
 Official doctrine of 2003 extended the mission to include deterrence of chemical and biological weapons as well . However, in a departure from this announcement, the mission was extended to include biological and chemical weapons .
 India treats nuclear weapons as political instruments of deterrence rather than military tools of war-fighting . Nuclear weapons are political instruments, not military tools, says India .
 This is in line with idealist and liberal currents in the Indian political culture . This is a nod to the ideals of idealism and liberal ideals in India .
 India aligned itself with the international arms-control order after the 1998 tests in 1998 . The tests were followed by a hostile international environment .
 Elements of NNWS disarmament policy were retained . However, elements of its traditional disarmament policies were retained, including a nuclear disarmament convention .
 India took a step away from its original no-first-use stance . But it may not take much to drop the reference to chemical and biological weapons again .
 The U.S. routinely maintains its nuclear capabilities at low levels of readiness . It routinely keeps warheads and delivery vehicles at different locations .
 For both, the primary function of nuclear weapons is to avoid coercion and ensure retribution in case deterrence breaks down . For both the U.S. and the UK, nuclear weapons are designed to prevent coercion .
 There is no strategic dialogue between Beijing and Delhi, but they have common interests in avoiding a competitive arms build-up . Delhi and Beijing have no plans to engage in a strategic dialogue .
 First, it wants to establish its minimum-deterrence force at a level it may have defined, but not declared . The U.S. has not declared this level, but wants to set it at a lower level .
 If it is to be included in multilateral disarmament negotiations, de jure recognition is a sine qua non . The UN says it is a 'non-discriminatory solution' to the problem .
 India may be ready to participate in good faith. However, when that has been achieved, it may not be achieved . India may also be ready for good faith .
 Status and prestige were important in going nuclear, but once a seat at the table has been obtained, that ambition is fulfilled . Status was important in Iran's decision to go nuclear, according to the Iranian president .
 India’s international status would no longer depend on the possession of nuclear weapons . Much like China, India would not have to rely on nuclear weapons to maintain international status .
 From then on, it might revive its strong disarmament tradition and build on that heritage in pursuit of global disarmament . The U.S. might revive that heritage and build upon that heritage .
 Inspired by the American gang of four and President Obama, it has already begun to do so . Inspired by American gangs of four, the gang has already been inspired by the Obama administration .
 A fundamental reconsideration of the role of nuclear weapons would have been appropriate . The bipolar world order that fuelled the nuclear arms race came to an end would have led to disarmament .
 When so much else is in for radical change, a radical change of nuclear doctrines would have been natural . The U.S. government has been in for a long-term rethink of the nuclear system .
 The underlying premise for the main mission of the weapons the confrontation between the U.S. and the USSR disappeared, inviting a fundamental rewrite of nuclear logic . "The underlying premise" for the nuclear weapons was that the United States and the Soviet Union would use nuclear weapons .
 The Clinton administration’s nuclear posture review carried the stamp of inertia . On the contrary, the Clinton administration's nuclear posture reviews were met with inertia .
 The changes boiled down to elimination of surplus weapons from the Cold War and to management of the disintegration of the Eastern bloc and the Soviet Union .
 More significant doctrinal changes came later, and they went in the opposite direction of what the end of the Cold War had invited . The U.S. became the first major Western state to adopt a new policy .
 UNSC Resolution 984 opened up gap between national strategy documents and negative security assurances . Except for China, a gap opened up between the national security documents of the five NWS . UNSC resolution 984 summarised in UN resolution .
 The strategy documents became more permissive of nuclear-weapon use than the UNSC resolution . The documents were written in advance of UNSC's UNGA resolution .
 These doctrinal changes may be understood in the context of ongoing changes in the international system, says the U.S. President .
 By the turn of the century, international affairs were in a state of flux . This is the first time the U.S. government has been involved in a major political crisis in the world .
 In the state paradigm there were conflicting elements of unipolarity and multipolarity . In the non-govermuental sphere international terrorism became a big concern, especially after 9/11, writes .
 The emergence of slates that could challenge the world order Iran, in particular, also drove policy developments, especially in the U.S. Iran, especially Iran, is a key factor in policy developments .
 During the Cold War, elaborate plans were made for the use of nuclear weapons, including thousands of weapons for battlefield use . Yet, it was widely believed that any use would lead to large-scale war .
 This century, assumptions were entertained that in regional contexts, where the big powers were not at loggerheads with each other, nuclear war could be contained, were entertained . This century’s first nuclear war was thought to have been contained .
 Russia upgraded role of nuclear weapons under influence of Kosovo . Russia upgraded the role of its nuclear weapons in the influence of the Kosovo-Kosovo region .
 The United States did the same under the influence of 9/11, the author says . Seized by the unipolar moment, the U.S. used to be the world's most powerful state of power .
 The U.S. set an example that other powers found it convenient to imitate . What followed was a series of strikingly similar doctrinal developments . The United States leant on other NWS to do the same .
 This served to uphold the utility of nuclear weapons in world affairs, counteracting the restraints that the testing moratoria and the Presidential Initiatives imposed imposed . This served as a deterrent to nuclear weapons, counteracts the restraints .
 Whether such considerations were part of the motivation for the new doctrines is not known . The new doctrines are not known whether they were intended to address such issues .
 It may not have been designed to stem the norm of non-use, but it had that effect . It was designed to stop people using it, and it did .
 Generally, the doctrinal changes detracted from the inhibitions of international norms . Generally, these changes were not to be seen as significant enough .
 When the one and only global superpower turned its back on important international agreements, it could not but influence the salience of international law . The U.S. is the only superpower in the world, and it could influence international law.
 Another opportunity to enhance the applicability of nuclear weapons emerged, and the big powers seized it, to the detriment of the norm of non-use . Big powers seized the opportunity to use nuclear weapons to enhance their applicability, the author says .
 The new U.S. policy may once again lead other NWS agencies to follow the United States example . The new NWS policy may lead other nations to follow .
 Russia hardly considers the non-nuclear members of NATO to be a threat, and may therefore extend assurances to them . Russia may therefore retain the option of using nuclear weapons first if confronted with NATO as a whole if confronted .
 Since the end of the Cold War, the arsenals of the NATO powers have been reduced and so has Russia’s . NATO powers are reducing their arsenals since the end . Russia's arsenals have also been reduced in the past decade .
 Weapons withdrawn from active service are kept in reserve or slated for dismantlement . Weapons are withdrawn from service and kept to reserve, or slated to be dismantled . Weapons withdrawn are withdrawn and slated for dismantling .
 While Western world and Russia cut arsenals, Asia is on a different trajectory . Post-Cold-War doctrines are different from the Cold War era, Asia has a different approach .
 The introduction of new systems will probably outweigh the withdrawal of old ones . China modernises its forces, and in numerical terms, the introduction will outweigh withdrawal . China's military is modernising its forces .
 None of the weapons will end up in the low hundreds of weapons, none of them will be more than halfway towards such levels .
 India claims one of the 1998 tests was a thermonuclear one, which may lead to an arsenal of fusion as well as fission weapons . India claims, moreover, that one of those tests was thermonnuclear one . The 1998 tests were conducted by India, which is believed to
 In Asia, more states are acquiring ballistic missiles of longer range and higher precision that may carry nuclear, chemical and biological weapons . The missiles could carry chemical, biological and nuclear weapons .
 One of them has acquired nuclear weapons; another may or may not do so . Yet others may be taking steps in this direction . The U.S. has a history of acquiring nuclear weapons .
 Middle East and East Asia are the main regions of proliferation concern . The Middle East is the main region of concern .
 In South Asia, Pakistan is under scmtiny for fear of proliferation to non-state actors . Pakistan is also under scrutiny for the proliferation of weapons .
 Asia began to assert itself economically in the 1960s and 1970s, by the turn of the century it was doing so militarily . Bracken argued that, just as Asia began asserting itself economically, it was also doing so military .
 Not by taking up a competition with the U.S. and the Western world on their terms, but by exploiting Western military vulnerabilities . Russia's Putin says he wants to take advantage of Western vulnerabilities by exploiting them .
 Asian weapons of choice were ballistic missiles and WMDs . The Achilles heel of the U.S. was fixed military bases in the region .
 Some of them pursued chemical or biological weapons, and some were building nuclear weapons . Some of the world's most powerful nations were involved in developing nuclear weapons, experts say . Others pursued chemical, biological and biological weapons .
 Asian ballistic missiles and WMDs might trump the West’s technological lead, making state-of-the-art technology a somewhat irrelevant measure of actual military capability . Targeted on U.S. vulnerabilities, Asian ballistic missile technology might trump technological lead .
 Distinguishing between technologies that sustain advantage and technologies that disrupt it . Technology that disrupts it can be used to sustain advantage, say experts .
 Bracken made a powerful analogy to the way IBM was outflanked by Microsoft . IBM has been overtaken by Microsoft in recent years . Microsoft has been a dominant force in cloud computing .
 IBM was undercut as Microsoft wrapped up the software market . IBM had a strong lead in PC hardware hardware and how best to maintain it .
 The US’s focus on further improvement of electronic surveillance systems, aircraft and mechanised land power made it vulnerable to asymmetric, disruptive Asian responses . Similarly, the focus on improving surveillance systems and aircraft makes it vulnerable .
 The stage is set for a major contest between U.S. efforts to sustain its advantage and Asian efforts to undermine it . The stage was set for the United States to challenge its advantage .
 The full significance of these developments emerges when seen when seen in conjunction with the deployment of missile defences, the author says . This is particularly true when seen alongside the deployment to missile defences .
 The U.S. has deployed ballistic-missile interceptors in Alaska and California . The interceptors are intended to thwart intercontinental capabilities in East Asia against North Korea, but affecting the Chinese deterrent .
 The US is building a missile-defence system to neutralise Iranian and other Middle Eastern short and medium-range missiles . Together with NATO, the US is also building a 74-year-old missile system . The system will neutralise Iran and other Mideast shortand medium
 For a long while, it has been deploying theatre defences in the vicinity of United States and allied bases and forces . The US has deployed theatre defences around the world .
 A race in asymmetric technologies is going on between Asian efforts to exploit U.S. vulnerabilities and Western efforts to hold Asian states at risk from a position of impunity . A race is on between Asia and the West, and Western nations, for example .
 As the role of nuclear weapons is reduced, conventional weapons will take on a greater share of the mission requirements . The role of conventional weapons is also being reduced in the US .
 Additional options are being explored to be able to destroy targets around the world on shorter notice . Additional options to be explored are also being considered to be possible .
 The Obama administration proposes a new spin on the Bush administration’s Global Strike plan . Prompt Global Strike would use the most advanced technology in the military today and some not yet invented .
 The Bush administration shelved important parts of Global Strike . Russia feared that if conventional weapons were placed on ballistic missiles, it would be impossible to know whether the missiles carried nuclear warheads or conventional ones .
 The Russians and Chinese are worried that they could be targeted at them . The U.S. would be more inclined to use them because they are conventional . Russia and China are worried they could target them .
 Anti-satellite capabilities in central China may be destroyed promptly and pre-emptively at the start of a potential conflict . For instance, the Chinese government may be able to destroy satellite capabilities in China's central region .
 PGS concept envisages that other powers would be invited to regularly inspect the silos to assure themselves that the weapons are conventional and not nuclear . The silos would be placed in locations far from the strategic nuclear forces .
 A benign interpretation would put this concept in the context of nuclear disarmament, facilitating deeper cuts in U.S. arsenals . But sceptics see it as part of a broader effort to sustain United States military superiority .
 This poses three major challenges to the drive for disarmament . Post-Cold-War doctrines 75 pose challenges to disarmament drive .
 The growth of Asian nuclear arsenals represents a challenge, especially the South Asian ones . India and Pakistan may go for fullfledged minimum-deterrence postures before being ready to accept arms-control measures .
 The asymmetric offence-defence competition between the U.S. and other Western powers has to be defused in the name of disarmament and non-proliferation . Second, the asymmetric defence competition between Western powers and Asian states has been defused . The U.
 This question taps into the broader debate about the relationship between disarmament and ballistic-missile defence . This question is part of a broader debate on disarmament .
 The ABM Treaty of 1972 was built on the premise that ballistic-missile defences were destabilising . The treaty was designed to prevent the spread of missile defences .
 The Treaty is gone, but in the view of many states the premise remains valid . Today, that Treaty was gone, it is thought to be valid in many states .
 Third, PGS adds to the fear that the transition from nuclear to conventional weapons is a way to enhance U.S. military superiority .
 The Russians will certainly want to include both PGS and ballistic-missile defence . US-Russian disarmament negotiations will certainly include both .
 There is the risk that a programme that can win broader support for nuclear disarmament within the U.S. political system creates additional obstacles for global disarmament and non-proliferation endeavours .
 The end of the Cold War brought significant progress both in terms of disarmament and non-proliferation . The Cold War ended with significant progress in disarmament .
 Russia became sole heir of Soviet nuclear weapons; South Africa abandoned its weapons and joined the NPT . NPT membership increased considerably; the Conference of Disarmament agreed on a mandate for FMCT negotiations .
 At that point, the P5 may have thought that the proliferation problems could be managed irrespective of their own own investments in nuclear weapons .
 Experts say nuclear proliferation is driven by security concerns of a regional nature . Security concerns are unrelated to nuclear investments of the major powers, experts say .
 The NNWS had reasons to believe that the downsizing of nuclear arsenals would continue in the years ahead . The downsizing is expected to continue in years to come .
 A global consensus 77 The delusion of 1995 proved to be shallow, misleading analyses, however . This proved, however, to be a shallow and misleading analysis of the world .
 The NNWS were wrong for the simple reason that the end of the Cold War naturally gave way to significant reductions of arsenals . First, they were wrong . The end of Cold War was the result of significant reductions .
 After the breakdown of the Soviet Union and the end of the world order characterised by arms racing, elimination of overkill capabilities had its own unavoidable logic . The elimination of the overkill capability was a result of the collapse of the Cold War era .
 In 1995 the future of international affairs seemed to be an open question . In 1995 this was not yet clear, for in so many respects the future was still unclear .
 NWS seemed firmly intent on keeping major arsenals for the foreseeable future . The NWS seems to be intent on the future of the country .
 The analysis was shallow for lack of consciousness about the special nature of post-war politics . Second, the analysis was. Second, it was. There was a lack of . consciousness about . the special . nature of the post-WWII politics .
 There is a period of opportunity after all major wars and so, too, after the Cold War . There is an opportunity after major wars, and so is after Cold War. There is also an opportunity in the Middle East, says David Cameron .
 Decision-makers have to rely on current information flows and are therefore freer and more likely to move in new directions . In these situations, decision-makers need to rely upon current information flow .
 For the first time in UN history except for a brief interlude immediately after the Second World War, the UN Security Council functioned the way the founders had envisaged . For instance, in the beginning of the 1990s, for the first . time in the . 1990s for the
 In the minds of many, many, the period of opportunity was misread as a new, encouraging trend in international affairs . In the past, many thought it was an opportunity to take advantage of the situation .
 1995 NPT Review and Extension Conference was unfounded . With the benefit of hindsight, the sense of progress that inspired the 1995 conference was unfounded.
 A few years later, indefinite extension would no longer have been possible . "I wouldn't have been able to extend my contract," says President Obama . "It's a good sign that we're not going to have to wait," says Obama .
 The outcome would have been a limited extension of the Treaty for one or more periods . It would have given the NNWS more leverage in relation to nuclear powers .
 In the absence of such checkpoints, the NWS are freer to behave the way they see fit, which they did, to the point of jeopardising the entire Treaty . The NWS were free to behave their way they saw fit and jeopardised the Treaty .
 The legacies of nuclear history non-proliferation, disarmament and peaceful uses came apart . The bargain that had been struck between the three pillars of the NPT 78 was struck . The NPT was struck between non-nuclear weapons and peaceful use of nuclear weapons .
 After 1995, India and Pakistan tested; North Korea did the same; and Iran became a case of grave concern . Iran is the latest nuclear-armed state to test nuclear weapons in the world .
 The NPT was in jeopardy not least because the NWS paid little attention to their disarmament commitments . The NWS was in danger because of the NPT's lack of disarmament commitment, the author says .
 The 1995 Resolution on the Middle East an integral part of the decision to extend the NPT indefinitely was not followed up upon . The United States and others treated Article VI much like Article V ,^ and Article V,^ . The U.S. and others treat Article VI like Article
 NNWS found it hard to accept more comprehensive safeguards and more proliferation-resistant peaceful-use practices that would qualify their rights under Article IV . Under these circumstances, the N.NWS would further aggravate the skewed implementation of rights and obligations, he says .
 Only North Korea has left the NPT and the ‘holdouts’ have shrunk to comprise Israel, India and Pakistan .
 In theory, coercion, economic and diplomatic pressures may substitute for voluntary compliance . The U.S. government may be able to use coercion to coerce compliance with the law .
 The United States tried that, largely in the shape of policies of regime change, but without success . The U.S. tried that in the form of trying to change regime change .
 The U.S. threatened North Korea and Iran; they responded by intensifying their nuclear programs . The United States used it to strengthen its own case against these regimes, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "It's a good example that the United States is trying to
 In the case of North Korea, many years were lost until a negotiating approach based on reciprocal concessions, step-by-step, was agreed in early 2007 . North Korea's North Korea is one of the most isolated countries in the world .
 These policies did not compensate for the legitimacy deficit, but compounded them to the detriment of the NPT, he says . The NPT is a non-proliferation regime in general, he writes .
 This century, the United States withdrew from the ABM Treaty, and the grand NPT bargain from the second half of the 1960s eroded . The U.S. withdrew from this century's ABM treaty .
 In Northeast Asia and the Middle East, where proliferation may occur and get out of hand, there is broad support for the Treaty . The Treaty is expected to be ratified by the U.S. Congress .
 If the world unravels, there are no nuclear-weapon-free zones to fall back on in these regions . If the region unravels there will be no nuclear weapon-free zone to fall for the region .
 International safeguards may continue on the basis of facility agreements . This is an incomplete substitute for NPT-type safeguards . Facility agreements may continue but this is not a substitute .
 For the great majority of states, breakdown of the NPT would be a significant loss . Breakdown of NPT is a 'significant loss' for most of the world's most populous states .
 The best, and possibly the only, realistic chance for a new global consensus on non-proliferation is to reconfirm the validity of the old one, e. the grand bargain struck in the second half of the 1960s, which led to the NPT and a comprehensive
 They tie into each other, so the order in which they are listed is neither an order of importance nor a priority . The list is neither a priority nor a matter of importance .
 A global consensus to be re-established, requirement number one is to forge agreement on the unit of account . Unit of account is a key component of the global consensus .
 It is the weapons that should not proliferate and it should be eliminated . The weapons should not be proliferated and should be banned from being used, the author says .
 The President frequently asserted that the weapons had to be in the right hands, or that the worst weapons had been kept out the worst hands . The President said the weapons must be in right hands .
 One favoured way to do it was by regime change, if need be by use of force, if needed, is by force . A regime change was favoured way of doing it, with the help of force .
 The United States would itself be the arbiter of the new two-tier system . The U.S. would be an arbiter in the new system .
 The novelty of the Bush administration was that it took it to the extremes, both in its declarations and in its actions . The legacies of nuclear history its actions are its legacies its actions.
 He entered negotiations to steer Iranian nuclear programme away from weapons . He showed respect for the Islamic Republic of Iran, its leaders and its people, as is ordinary code of conduct in inter-state affairs .
 Regime change may not have been completely abandoned for instance, it was unclear whether or to what extent the covert programmes that Bush ran in Iran were cancelled .
 With Israel, Obama remained true to the understanding originally reached by Richard Nixon and Golda Meir in September 1969, i.e. to the policy of opacity . Obama's relationship with Israel was based on the understanding of Nixon and Meir .
 The United States supports the objective of NPT universality, but for all practical purposes Israel is treated as an exemption . The U.S. supports the objectives of the NPT universalality .
 Negotiations must be reinstated as a bona fide modality of nonpro-proliferation policy, says N.J. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton . The U.N. Security Council says negotiations must be reinvoted .
 As long as the U.S. was unwilling to talk with its most ardent adversaries, there could be no agreed strategy for non-proliferation and disarmament . The United States should talk to representatives of the nexus of terrorism and weapons of mass destruction .
 As noted above, the quest for regime change and the refusal to negotiate became proliferation drivers . The quest for a regime change is one of the key drivers of the regime change .
 It stands to reason that, under such a policy, the other side was not keen to talk either . The other side is not keen on talking either .
 Knowing that the U.S. objective was to cut their throat, the adversaries had little incentive to negotiate . Knowing the United States . had little motivation to negotiate. Knowing that . the . United States objective was . to cut . their throat .
 North Korea test in 2006 seemed to confirm the political utility of nuclear weapons . Unfortunately, it happened on the heels of the North Korean test in October 2006 . North Korea's nuclear test was the first to confirm its political utility .
 The P5+1 were ready to negotiate with Iran if Iran brought all fuel-cycle works to a halt and accepted an Additional Protocol to the NPT safeguards agreement . Iran's nuclear programme is believed to be the world's largest source of nuclear material .
 This position turned what should have been the object of negotiations restrictions on uranium enrichment first of all into a precondition for them . This position has been turned into a pre-condition for them, writes Andrew Hammond .
 To Iranian eyes, it was tantamount to saying that, first, you must accept defeat, and then we may sit down to talk . Iran's refusal to accept defeat was seen as a signal that it is time for talks to begin .
 Negotiations with Iran began in Geneva on 1 October 2009, and ways to resume talks with North Korea were explored . North Korea was also explored in Geneva .
 Diplomatic and other non-military measures were favoured instruments of non-proliferation policy . But preventive use of force was not deleted from the agenda .
 The United States must deter and defend against the threat of weapons of mass destruction before they are unleashed . The U.S. National Security Strategy of 2002, updated in 2006 (see White House 2006), stated .
 "It will not do to wait until the enemies have built their weapons and can use and retaliate with them," says President Obama . "We will not wait until we have built our weapons," says Obama .
 President Bush called it a strategy of pre-emption, in accordance with the way this expression had been used for a decade . Bush's use of the term blurs the important distinction between pre-empting and prevention .
 In international law, pre-emption at the moment an attack is about to be launched is permitted . Pre-emption is permitted in international law in the moment of an attack .
 A1 Kibar may have been a success on Israeli premises, but a mixed blessing for the non-proliferation regime the results have been discouraging .
 The international non-proliferation regime is rooted in international law, says CNN.com's John Sutter . He says the regime is based on international law .
 Had the intelligence on El Shifa been right this pharmaceutical plant allegedly produced precursors for chemical weapons and had links to bin Laden the bombing of it could have been justified as an act of self-defence in reference to Article 51 of the UN Charter .
 The United States admitted that it had made a mistake eight months later . However, eight months after, the U.S. admitted to having made the mistake .
 The actions have been marred by intelligence failures (admitted in the cases of Iraq and El Shifa) and flawed diagnosis and failure to grasp the consequences of bombing in the case of Osiraq .
 The target appears to have been a nuclear reactor built with the assistance of North Korea . North Korea is believed to be behind the attack on the target .
 The political implications have been detrimental to non-proliferation endeavours, says the diplomat . "The political implications of the nuclear weapons programme are detrimental," he says .
 Illegal acts of war trigger strong sentiments and much emuity, especially when based on claims that are unfounded . Illegal act of war triggers strong sentiments, especially based on unfounded claims .
 The case of Osiraq leaves a lesson that is pertinent to Iran and possibly also Syria . Iran and Syria have been involved in the Syrian conflict .
 The legacies of nuclear history bombed, Iran may try even harder the next time . Iran's nuclear facilities are 82-years-old, according to experts .
 If it was not going for nuclear weapons before being bombed, it would be more likely to do so afterwards . If it wasn't going for nukes before it was bombed, the odds would be less likely to be the case again .
 Its territory is much smaller than Iran’s, and it is more vulnerable to Israeli intelligence and military capabilities than is Iran . Iran is more likely to be vulnerable to Israel's intelligence capabilities than Iran is .
 Israel did not inform the IAEA either . Israel is well known for being critical of the effectiveness of international safeguards . Israel has been criticized for not informing the IEAA about the issue .
 Unilateral action substituted for the way the non-proliferation regime is designed to handle such a matter, undercutting its international verification instrument . The U.N. Security Council says it is concerned about the possibility of a nuclear arms deal .
 The third requirement is therefore that preventive military action yields to legal, treaty-based approaches . The U.S. should not use military action to prevent it being used in the future .
 Military action to stop nuclearproliferation programmes is central to Israeli political and military thinking . President Obama upgraded the role of diplomacy and downplayed the use of force .
 Unilateralism is a stmctural phenomenon rooted in the superior position of the United States in world affairs . The U.S. is strongest in the world, and unilateral action is nearest at hand where it is strongest, i.e. in the military field .
 The question is how best to co-exist with policies which, when enacted, may weaken it . So the caveat is that for the NPT, the question is: How best to live with policies that weaken it? So the answer is that the question must be how best co-
 Tensions between regime procedures and unilateral counter-proliferation policies may be alleviated and even transformed to become mutually supportive . Playing on the assumption that differences do not necessarily amount to incompatibilities, but can be made complementary, may help ease tensions .
 The original NPT verification standard was full-scope safeguards following all fissile materials in member states . The original verification standard had full scope of full-scale safeguards . The NPT has now been replaced by the NPT standard .
 Model agreement provided for more intrusive international verification than had previously been accepted by states . Model agreement provides more intrusive verification than was previously accepted .
 There were concerns in highly industrialised NNWS that industrial secrets might be revealed . But they were put to rest already by the mid-1970s .
 Saddam’s secret nuclear weapon programme of the 1980s proved them Inadequate . An Additional Protocol was elaborated that greatly improved the Agency's ability to look for activities that might not have been declared .
 To oppose the Additional Protocol on the ground that it was not a part of the original bargain is therefore misguided . To oppose it on the grounds that it wasn't part of an original bargain, is misguided, says the UK.
 This is the fourth requirement for reconfirmation of the basic bargain . This is a four-point-point commitment to the U.S. government .
 In 2003, the United States did not allow UNMOVIC to come to a conclusion . The United States has not allowed UNMovIC to end .
 Recurrent demands that it should ratify the Additional Protocol; provide early design information; and offer voluntary transparency measures . Nobody can prove the negative and in the hope that incriminating evidence will be found .
 It is obliged to provide information to the IAEA; on the other hand, it wants to minimise its vulnerability to attack . On the one hand, the U.S. wants to minimize its vulnerability .
 As long as this is the situation, transparency demands for Iran to come clean enhance suspicions rather than build confidence .
 Cooperation between the IAEA and possessors of relevant national intelligence data has been mixed . Cooperation has been described as 'mixed'
 Some governments have shared some information with the Agency, but there is no systematicity to it . It is not always clear for what purpose it is done .
 In the later phases of UNSCOM’s work, national intelligence agencies also infiltrated the Commission . National intelligence agencies were also infiltrated .
 Provision of national intelligence information to the IAEA was not a part of the original bargain, and it is fraught with difficulties . Provision of intelligence information was not the original deal, and there have been difficulties .
 To use national intelligence to complicate and obstruct the verification process was certainly not part of the bargain either . But to use national . intelligence to . complicate and . obstruct the . verification process is certainly not what the government intended to do with the .
 Reconfirmation of the basic bargain means that member states should refrain from any activity or policy that may detract from adequate verification procedures .
 Those who are in a position to enhance the effectiveness of international safeguards should be encouraged to do so in good faith . Those who have a role in enhancing international safeguards are encouraged to .
 The U.S. has failed to meet the disarmament obligation of Article VI, while imposing a number of supply-side measures restricting the right to peaceful uses under Article IV in the name of non-proliferation .
 Article IV was deliberately written to avoid attempts to reinterpret the NPT in ways that would make peaceful utilisations more difficult . Article IV has been deliberately written so that it does not make peaceful use of it more difficult to use it .
 Only qualification was that international transactions must be in conformity with Article I and II, excluding acquisitions for weapons purposes . The only qualification is that international deals must be agreed to comply with Article II .
 Trade-offs have long been discussed over nuclear supplies and nuclear technology in return for restrictions on national fuel-cycle programmes . One type of trade-offs has been discussed in the past .
 In 1971, the Zangger Committee was established to operationalise the NPT export control provision contained in Article III.2.2 .
 Nuclear Suppliers Group was established following India’s nuclear explosion the year before . In 1975, the group was set up to control the export of dual-use items .
 NSG a self-appointed group of supplier states originally referred to as the London Club . The NSG was originally known as a group of suppliers states originally known to have secret discussions in London .
 Critics recommend mutually agreed rules of international nuclear commerce between suppliers and recipients .
 These diverging approaches have existed ever since and they have been further accentuated recently . The diverging approach has existed since then and has been accentuated in recent years .
 Technology restraints may still be clarified, improved and consolidated . Technology restraints still need to be clarified and consolidated, says CNN.com .
 There are proposals for a division of labour between the Zangger Committee and the NSG . There are also proposals for linking export control information with the IAEA verification system .
 There are merit to moves that can shore up present arrangements along such lines . Clearly, there is merit to such a move .
 Many NNWS object to restrictions on their Article IV rights as long as long A global consensus 85 as the NWS pay so little attention to their own obligations . Many of the world's most powerful nations have no obligation to comply with Article IV as long a global consensus agrees .
 In their view, the original balance of rights and obligations has shifted too much in their disfavour already . In the UK, they argue that the balance has already been shifted already .
 Failure to take “effective measures relating to cessation of the nuclear arms race at an early date and to nuclear disarmament” does not necessarily amount to non-compliance by any particular state . Legally speaking, failure to take effective measures does not mean a particular state is non-
 Article is simply too vague to provide benchmarks for legal assessments of compliance, the way, for example, safeguards agreements do . Article is too vague for legal assessment of compliance the way it does with safeguards agreements .
 Right from the beginning of the NPT negotiations in the mid-1960s, disarmament was considered to be a quid for the non-proliferation quid . The NPT was considered a 'quid quid' for a non-nuclear weapons deal .
 NNWS that had wanted commitments to specific measures to be written into the NPT were willing to leave it for follow-up action . The USA and the USSR presented an agenda for the Committee that struck a compromise . The NPT was opened for signature in August 1968 .
 The nuclear part of the agenda was essentially a package proposed by India and Sweden . Sweden and India had argued for inclusion of specific measures in the Treaty text .
 A month later, the non-nuclear members of the Committee presented a comparable agenda . A month after the nuclear issue, the committee presented a similar agenda . The non-nuke members presented a different agenda .
 Both agendas included a test ban, a cut-off of all production of fissile materials for military purposes, security assurances for NNWS, and reduction and subsequent elimination of nuclear weapon stockpiles .
 Measures were identified, converging expectations were created, and a review mechanism was set up to facilitate the realisation of them . Measures have been identified and converged expectations are created .
 The Treaty became the backbone of an international regime, including arms-control agreements, nuclear-weapon-free zones and full scope safeguards . In the years following signature and entry into force of the NPT, the Treaty has become the backbone .
 Swedish negotiator and Nobel Peace Prize winner Alva Myrdal felt betrayed . In her account of the negotiations, she said she felt betrayed by Israel .
 Review conferences of 1980 and 1990 failed over Article VI issues . The 1975 and 1985 conferences papered over profound divergences of views on the same issues . Review conferences failed to reach consensus on Article VI .
 SORT was not a disarmament treaty . No negotiations were conducted . The treaty was a non-conventional treaty .
 The CTBT had not entered into force; negotiations for a Fissile Material Cut-Off Treaty had not started; and the security assurances for NNWS always conditional were further weakened .
 Article VI sets the world on a path towards a nuclear-weapon-free world . Substantial progress in implementing Article VI is requirement number seven for the original bargain .
 President Obama has taken a series of initiatives in this direction, but how far they will lead is an open question . President Obama's initiatives have been taken in the direction of the president .
 Security assurances for NNWS were part of the NPT bargain from the beginning . A global consensus 87 Security assurances are part of a global consensus of 87 . The NPT is the world's largest non-prolonged nuclear power accord .
 NNWS demanded assurances that they would not be subject to use or threat of use of nuclear weapons . In return for accepting a temporary division of the world into nuclear and non-nuclear-weapon states, the world was divided into nuclear states .
 All the assurances were qualified in various ways, except the Chinese no-first-use assurances . All of the assurances are qualified in the various ways .
 P5 summarised their assurances in Security Council Resolution 984 . NPT Review and Extension Conference was held in 1995 . Security Council resolution 984 was passed in 1994 .
 The assurances remained qualified in ways that limited their value . Except for China, the assurances remained limited . China is the only country to offer assurances .
 Reversing this development, extending assurances that are more forthcoming to the NNWS, is the seventh requirement for a new non-proliferation consensus, the U.N. says . Reversal of this development is the 7th requirement for the N.NWS .
 It will not use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against NPT members in good standing . The U.S. has not threatened to use such weapons against good standing members of the NPT . NPT member states that it will not threaten or threaten use of nuclear weapons .
 Chemical and biological weapons will be deterred by conventional means . Reservations made for new scientific developments in the biological sector .
 Exempt are the NWS and NPT members that, in the U.S. view, do not comply with their NPT obligations, such as Iran and possibly Syria . Exempt members include Iran, Syria and possibly Iran .
 Where mutually assured destruction applies, resort to nuclear weapons is an ordained act of suicide . While in relation to NNWS, the aggressor may get away with it .
 Non-aligned states have called for an international convention committing the NWS not to use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against NNWS parties to the NPT, no qualifications added . Non-alleged states have therefore called for the international convention committed to an international .
 The question would certainly also be raised in connection with a Security Council resolution . But if the resolution is a collection of national assurances, the question does not require a uniform answer .
 North Korea withdrew from the NTP in 2002 . North Korea is in a category of its own. North Korea has withdrawn from the North Korea-sanctioned pact .
 It has been a member of the NPT , and the objective must be to bring it back into the Treaty . The objective is to bring the country back in the Treaty, writes CNN.com .
 From being the world’s leading protestor against discrimination in the nuclear order, India transformed itself into a nation ready to support the existing order . From being a protestor of discrimination against discrimination, India has transformed itself .
 The nuclear deal with the U.S. rubbed some of these commitments in the commitment to world-class export controls in particular . The deal also rubbishes some of the commitments in particular, he says .
 India's orientation towards the existing order makes it easier to forge a new global consensus on non-proliferation and disarmament . India’s orientation to existing order will make it easier for the world to forge new consensus, experts say .
 India has a strong tradition to uphold in the disarmament held, and a legacy from Rajiv Gandhi to honour . The country has a tradition of honouring its disarmament .
 It has put renewed emphasis on its traditional pleas for nuclear disarmament . Influenced by the ‘gang of four’ and President Obama, it has been put on the front foot .
 It maintains support for a time-bound international convention for elimination of nuclear weapons . It maintains its support for an international convention to eliminate nuclear weapons.
 In principle, the “as if’ fonuula is applicable to Pakistan and Israel, too, too . The ‘as if, if” is a reference to Pakistan, Israel and Israel .
 For the near term, efforts to extract non-proliferation commitments from Israel should not be predicated on a change in declaratory policy . Israel is not expected to change its policy on non-nuclear weapons .
 Israel has been criticised for being recalcitrant and arrogant and for blocking arms control in a region that desperately needs it . The merit of this for Israel would be to soften that perception of the country .
 De jure recognition of India as an NWS may have to wait until it undertakes a full “as if’ commitment’s commitment to the NWS . India may not be able to be recognized as a NWS by the World Health Organisation .
 Pakistan must live up to the same standards in order to be treated the same way . Pakistan must be treated as a nation by the international community, says Imran Khan .
 Pakistan is far from that standard today, but it is in the best interest of non-proliferation that it gets there . Pakistan is not far from the standard today but it would be best interest for the country .
 The NSG has proposed a more comprehensive criteria-based approach to all outliers . It would include disarmament commitment equivalent to Article VI . Other requirements would include restrictions on fissile material production while waiting for a cut-off treaty .
 Sooner or later, de facto nuclear weapon status will lead to de jure recognition . Recognition is necessary in order to bring them into armscontrol and disarmament negotiations .
 This, however, is unlikely to happen unless it becomes part of a broader package to redress the balance of rights and obligations under the Treaty . This is likely to happen, but it is unlikely it will be enough for a wider package .
 Universality was always the ambition, reiterated at all review conferences of the Treaty . Universality is the ambition of the treaty, reiterated by all reviews of its progress .
 In this respect, the NPT has already been more successful than any other multilateral arms-control treaty . The NPT is already the most successful multilateral weapons control treaty, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 If North Korea can be brought back to the NPT as an NNWS, application of the “as if’ formula to the remaining three would bring the Treaty as close to universality as is practically possible .
 Some version of this controversial proposition may be element number eight in a new 22 consensus . Some of the controversial propositions may be part of a new consensus .
 The strategy must be to reduce the incompatibilities and exploit potential complementarities between U.S. positions and those of others whenever possible . In so far, this is the case, the strategy must also be to cut the differences .
 Counter-proliferation preventive action could be used to eliminate nuclear installations . One such element is that of using military or non-military means to eliminate nukes .
 Counter-proliferation and unilateralism may change with changing administrations, but there may be more or less of it . The changes are likely to be variations of one and the same theme, writes Andrew Hammond .
 These policies derive from the superior status of the United States in world affairs, writes David Gergen . United States military superiority, in particular, is unlikely to go away any time soon .
 The nonproliferation regime will have to co-exist with these elements of U.S. policy, the U.N. says .
 Counter-proliferation policies may be incompatible, say experts . Counter-policies may not be compatible with non-prosiferation policies, they say .
 When the IAEA reports a case of non-compliance to the Security Council, authorisation of the use of force in a counter-proliferation mode is not excluded . The Council is free to decide on questions of international peace and security .
 Such action is more likely to be taken unilaterally or by ‘coalitions of the willing” and be conducted in defiance of the regime . Such action would likely be conducted by “coalition of the unwilling”
 For instance, bombing of nuclear facilities in Iran would be a violation of international law, for it could not be justified as an act of selfdefence in reference to Article 51 of the UN Charter .
 U.S. counter-proliferation policy may be a useful supplement to the non-prosiferation regime . On the other hand, by extending credible threats of the use of force, it may be useful to the U.N. policy, it could be useful for the
 Such threats can have a deterrent effect which the international regime has little or no prospect of providing . The international regime will not be able to provide such a deterrent, he says .
 Deterrence does not address the root causes of proliferation, and in that sense does not solve the problems, but it can affect the balance of incentives in favour of staying non-nuclear . Deterrence is not a solution to the problems of nuclear proliferation, but can affect incentives to stay non
 A wouldbe proliferator may defer a decision to go nuclear, or refrain from weaponising the programme, or seek political solutions to security concerns instead . For instance, a wouldbe proliferationist may defer to a decision, or not weaponise the programme .
 For threats to be credible, there has to be a capability and a will to implement them, says CNN.com chief executive .
 Actual use of force to destroy nuclear facilities may, however, do more harm than good . Use of force against nuclear facilities could harm the nation's nuclear facilities, experts say .
 Bombing would set the nuclear programme back, but in the long run it is more likely to become part of the problem than of the solution . Bombing is likely to set back Iran's nuclear programme, but it is not the only solution .
 Requirement number nine is to live with the differencenees between non-proliferation and counter-prosiferation and exploit opportunities to turn them into mutual advantage .
 Security Council Resolution 1540 dealing with measures to be taken against non-state proliferators was passed by consensus under Chapter VII of the UN Charter . Security Council resolution 1540 deals with measures against non state proliferators .
 Usually dubbed terrorists, they tend to be resolutely addressed, including by use of force if needed and at all possible . Usually called terrorists, it tends to be seen as a serious threat .
 For international regimes to function properly, some important actor must exercise leadership . Leadership must be shown leadership in order to help international regimes function .
 A new global consensus on nonproliferation and disarmament depends on United States leadership . U.S. leadership is needed in the world's nuclear disarmament efforts, experts say .
 Nuclear weapons are usually regarded as a source of strength, but they can also be seen as signs of weakness and vulnerability . Nuclear weapons can be considered a sign of weakness or vulnerability .
 For the UK and France, nuclear weapons served to underwrite their big power status . Their nuclear weapons status rests on narrow grounds, which rests upon narrow grounds .
 Currently, it modernises and probably expands its arsenal in response to the U.S. missile-defence programme . It is also likely to expand its arsenal .
 India largely driven by status ambitions justified its tests in reference to China, and Pakistan . Pakistan tested its own nuclear tests in Pakistan in Pakistan .
 For North Korea, it is a matter of regime survival, and for Israel the nuclear arsenal is the ultimate national insurance premium . For Israel, it's a national security insurance premium for the country .
 When considering how best to facilitate nuclear disarmament, this perspective is indispensable guide to what to do . This perspective is an indispensable guide for what is best to do in dealing with nuclear weapons .
 All parties are obliged to work for nuclear disarmament, NNWS says . U.S. leadership is vital, says U.N.NWS .
 Political chain reaction outlined above started in the US, and reversal of it also has to begin there . The political chain reaction started in U.S. and reversed it has to start there .
 The logic of the argument rests on the fact that the nuclear weapon acquisitions of the other big powers can be fully understood only in reference to that of the US, i.e. coming back to the country of origin . i.E.
 The realism of it lies in the fact that the U.S. is strong on so many dimensions and in a category of its own when it comes to conventional military strength, CNN's John Sutter says .
 The Council’s Heads of State reconfirmed the validity of the three pillars on which it is built nonproliferation, disarmament and peaceful uses . First, because the Council reconfirms the validity .
 The disarmament pillar got little attention in comparison with the non-proliferation dimension, and no mention was made of the 1995 Middle East Resolution . The initiators were consumed by the Iranian problem in particular .
 The summit was convened and chaired by a United States President who had made nuclear nonproproliferation and disarmament his number-one priority . Third, the summit was held by a U.S. President who has made disarmament and non-nuclear disarmament a priority .
 In the diplomatic process that led to the resolution, the negotiating sequence was unfortunate, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "It was unfortunate that the negotiations were unfortunate"
 It failed to properly reflect the shift of power to the east and south, it has been claimed . It has been criticised for not reflecting the shift in power in the past .
 The Security Council is often perceived as ignoring the interests of less powerful states . The veto protects the interest of the NWS and their allies, the author says .
 Many non-aligned states found that their interests were poorly reflected in the world's most powerful countries .
 NWS and allies see the Council as a means by which they can short-circuit the international decision-making process . There is no consensus among UN member states, according to the NWS .
 The U.S. should be able to tailor disarmament and nonproliferation affairs to evolving world order changes, experts say . U.N. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton says disarmament must be tailored to the changing world .
 The case of North Korea is, therefore, different from that of India, Israel and Pakistan . While the realism of this is open to doubt, the case of N. Korea is different than that of Israel, Pakistan and India .
 North Korea apart, universality for the NPT is a question of how to draw the outliers into the web of obligations that the Treaty harbours . North Korea is one of the most isolated countries in the world .
 Pakistan to India, India to China, China to the United States and Russia, France and the United Kingdom to Russia, and Russia to the U.S.
 UN Security Council Resolution 1172 of 6 June 1998, adopted after the testing in South Asia that year, never had the intended effect . The paternalistic language of the resolution was adopted after it was adopted in 1998 .
 The author concluded that under the circumstances, status quo might be the best option . The author concludes that the status quo is best option.
 One year later, that option was no longer available, for at long last the US-India agreement was clinched . U.S.-India agreement clinched a year ago .
 India is an NWS, but stopped short of formal recognition of it . That agreement recognises the fact that India is a NWS but stops short of recognition .
 India is a bona fide commercial partner in the nuclear field, NSG says . Subsequently endorsed by the 45-member NSG, it redefines relationship between India and the rest of the world .
 Status quo would have been untenable situation anyhow, just waiting for a better way to engage the outliers . Status quo was untenable anyhow anyhow .
 The failure of the 2005 NPT Review Conference and the September 2005 UN Summit to agree on anything regarding nuclear nonproliferation and disarmament fully demonstrated that the Treaty was in danger . The UN Summit was held in September 2005 to discuss disarmament .
 There was a growing realisation that it should be re-established as a matter of urgency . Amidst all the conflicting interests and diverging policies, there was a 'growing realisation' that it was needed .
 UNSC Resolution 1887 reconfirmed the validity of the old bargain in 2009 . UNSC resolution 1887 did so in 2009 to reconfirm its validity .
 A better approach to the three-state problem must be sought in that framework . The U.S. needs to find a way to deal with the problem of three states .
 Some 40 years after the bargain was struck, this is to note the obvious . This is not the first time the U.S. government has been in contact with the British government .
 It applies to the international system in which the non-proliferation regime functions, it says . Also, it applies to international system which functions, also applies .
 The first is India-specific,but influences considerations of how to engage the other outliers . The first-person's role in India's democracy is India's first .
 The origin of the US-India Peaceful Nuclear Cooperation Agreement goes back to nuclear-weapon tests in 1998 . India began to rework its nuclear diplomacy in 1998, when India began rework nuclear diplomacy . The agreement was signed by the U.S. and India .
 From being the world’s leading protestor against discrimination in the international non-proliferation regime, India transformed itself into a nation ready to support the existing order . From being a protestor, India turned itself into an ally of the existing regime .
 It stepped up its support for incremental arms control, endorsed the objectives of the NPT, declared its readiness to join negotiations for a Fissile Material Cut-Off Treaty . It also endorsed the NSG guidelines without being a member of NSG, issued a moratorium on testing, issued
 The agreement with the United States, the safeguards agreement . with the International Atomic Energy Agency and the NSG decision to give India access to the international nuclear market in reference to its non-proliferation commitments turn these undertakings originally unilateral into international obligations .
 The deal grew out of many years of pragmatic, concrete reorientation towards the existing arms-control order . The deal is expected to last for a decade .
 In view of the fundamental change of Indian foreign policy that it amounted to, the gestation period ten years was surprisingly short . The gestation period 10 years is surprisingly short, says the author .
 The big political battle that followed can be fully understood only against this background . The big battle for the presidency can be understood only in this context .
 Right-wingers were concerned that the agreement would block further testing and constrain the nuclear arsenal . Left-winger feared that India would become subservienti lo the United States . Right-worsers were also concerned that it would restrict further testing .
 Since 1974, the U.S. had systematically denied broad categories of sensitive technologies to India, such as supercomputers, missile and space technology, satellites, advanced fighters, microelectronics and fibre optics . Now, the door to those technologies was opening up .
 Access to nuclear technology was important both substantially and symbolically . Access to the nuclear power was important to the U.S. government in the 1960s .
 India has a comprehensive nuclear programme since the 1950s, largely on its own . Nuclear energy resonates well in Indian public opinion, says author .
 It helped meet India’s rapidly growing energy needs and reduce carbon dioxide emissions in a country where almost 70 per cent of the electricity production was based on coal . It paved the way for India to join global efforts to stop the proliferation of nuclear weapons .
 India’s test of a nuclear device in 1974 and its nuclear-weapon tests in 1998 freed the bilateral relationship from the limitations that were introduced after the tests . The bilateral relationship was freed from limitations that had been introduced after India's nuclear-weapons tests .
 In the words of Nicholas Burns, the United States chief negotiator, the nuclear agreement is the symbolic centrepiece of something much larger a comprehensive engagement between the world’s oldest and largest democracy .
 Twoand-a-half years later, when the agreement was clinched, the contours of a multicentric world had become clearer . The geopolitical importance of the Agreement more obvious .
 National security of the United States would be enhanced by a strong and enduring partnership with India, it was argued . In view of the rise of China and of Islamic radicalism in Afghanistan and Pakistan, the U.S. would be better served by India, the government said .
 The geopolitical arguments were easily understood by the politicians themselves, irrespective of lobbies . The politicians themselves were able to understand the geopolitical arguments, regardless of lobby groups .
 sceptics were critical to suspecting that the government had reassured the U.S. by extending promises in secret . India cares very much about its sovereignty and independence, and sceptics suspect it was done by secret .
 Some suggestions for how to get beyond the dilemma described above have addressed India, Israel and Pakistan in joint fashion . An ‘as if’ kind of deal’ would be an ‘As if” kind of a deal .
 This was French policy for quite a while, until it became a regular member in 1992 . France became a member of the European Economic Forum in 1992, but it has since become a permanent member .
 Unlike the NPT parties, they are not under any legal obligation to disarm . Unlike other NPT countries, they do not have an obligation to arm themselves .
 The UK should join other elements of the non-proliferation regime, he says . The U.S. should also be asked to join other parts of the Non-Proliferation Regime .
 The statement treated India for what it is, a de facto NWS, yet without formally recognising India as a nuclear power .
 The US-India Peaceful Nuclear Cooperation Agreement stopped short of being a fully-fiedged “as if’ agreement . However, the end result of the agreement is often called the “123 Agreemenf’'^ .
 It turned around from being world champion in criticising the NPT for being discriminatory and the big powers for being hypocritical, to supporting and promoting the Treaty and the regime that it anchors .
 The non-proliferation rationale for the agreement is simple. Basically, it's a non-nuclear weapons deal . The agreement was signed in 1998 .
 To lean on India to eliminate its nuclear arsenal and join the NPT as a non-nuclearweapon state is counterproductive . The U.S. government should not lean on the Indian nuclear arsenal, it says .
 The NPT recognises five NWS only and, in practice, cannot be amended . Neither can it join as an NWS, for the NPT, for it cannot .
 Better, then, to treat India for what it is an NWS and commit it to the non-proliferation regime on an “as if’ basis .
 In the long run, policies are best when based on facts and not on fiction, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 In view of all the pressing proliferation concerns both in the state and non-state paradigms, the universality of the regime is more important than ever . The universalality of a regime is important more now than ever, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 It substitutes engagement of India and commitments to nonpro-proliferation standards for isolation and top-down talk . India's engagement with the U.N. has been replaced by isolation and talk, it has been claimed .
 Access to nuclear materials, equipment and technology on a par with NPT parties was a major concession to India . India was given access to nuclear material, equipment, technology on par with other countries .
 A fast-breeder test reactor and a prototype breeder under construction at Kalpakkam are on the military side of the line and will, therefore, not be safeguarded . The fast breeder test reactors will be used by the military .
 Eight heavy-water reactors exempted from safeguards in order to provide plutonium for current and future breeders in their start-up phase . Eight heavy water reactors are exempt from safeguards .
 It takes some years to make the prototype operational . It takes a decade or two before it can start producing plutonium for weapons .
 Its plutonium potential has the character of a nuclear insurance premium for the long term . Therefore, it has the potential to be a long-term nuclear insurance policy premium .
 HWRs also yield plutonium of weapon quality and are used for that purpose, but at the cost of reduced efficiency in electricity production . HWR’s are also also used to produce plutonium of weapons quality .
 Cirus which produced the plutonium for the test in 1974 will be decommissioned in 2010 . The other two Dhruva and Kamini are used for military ends . Cirus is the research reactor which produced plutonium .
 The core of the oldest reactor, Apsara, will be removed from the Bhaba Atomic Research Centre in 2010 . It will be submitted to safeguards in 2010, with the core submitted to the safeguards .
 India has an enrichment plant in Mysore, which enriches uranium for use in Indian submarines . India has a uranium enrichment plant .
 This plant and all enrichment research programmes are exempted from safeguards . This plant is exempt from safeguards and is exempted from other plant programmes .
 India will build a new reprocessing plant to make the distinction between civilian and military uses clearer . The plant will be built in a bid to make it clear that it is for civilian use only .
 The United States will then treat India the same way as Japan and the European Atomic Energy Community . The U.S. will allow reprocessing of fuel of American origin .
 Heavy-water production facilities are not safeguarded on the basis of INFCIRC 153, but will be reported under the Additional Protocol . India will accede to the additional Protocol to which the country accedes . Heavy water production facilities there are six of them .
 It remains to be seen how many plants will be placed on the civilian side and covered by safeguards .
 Without the Agreement, only six of 22 power reactors would have been safeguarded;'^ under the agreement, 14 will be covered under the Agreement . The Agreement covers 14 power reactors .
 The Agreement permits India to import uranium fuel for its civilian reactors . India’s own uranium production, which did not allow all reactors to work at full capacity, can be used for military purposes instead .
 The bottleneck concerns the mining and processing of the uranium rather than the size of the reserves, and is about to be removed . However, the problem is not about the amount of uranium reserves .
 The NSG provision of full-scope safeguards is, furthermore, a guideline for its 45 members, not a rule . NSG provides full scope safeguards for all 45 members of the NSG .
 India has received much safeguarded assistance over the years, subject to INFCIRC 66-type controls . India has been given the most of the assistance in the country under the guidance of INFCIRIR 66 .
 By and large, India can continue its nuclear-weapons programme according to existing plans . India's nuclear weapons programme is set to continue according to the existing plans, experts say .
 The United States argued that it was unnecessary to repeat it in the Agreement . The U.S. argued that the U.N. should not repeat it .
 In the United States, Russia and China, the IAEA applies safeguards to select facilities only . The U.S. and China apply safeguards on a voluntary basis . The IAEa applies safeguards only to select sites only .
 Protocol was developed to help detect undeclared activities in NPT member states . However, the value of the Protocol is limited in the case of India . The Protocol is designed to help find out what is illegal in the country .
 The NSG guidelines say triggerlist items or related technologies can only be transferred to an NNWS when the receiving state has brought into force an agreement with the IAEA for safeguards on all source and special fissionable material in its current and future peaceful activities . The receiving state
 There is nothing more to achieve by stressing the full-scope safeguards requirement . There is, in other words, nothing more than a full-scared requirement .
 It is by accepting India as an NWS and applying safeguards to the civilian activities that the safeguards coverage can be further extended . The safeguards will be extended to include civilian activities .
 The Additional Protocol is the equivalent to the full-scope safeguards requirement introduced by some suppliers already in the 1970s and adopted by the NSG in 1992 . It is the attempt to make the Additional Protocol part of a new, enhanced safeguards requirement for nuclear transfers . Today, it is the
 India's acceptance of the Protocol is a minor step towards universal application of the new requirement . India’s acceptance of it is a 'minor step' towards universal use of it .
 There is a tipping point at which the NSG might agree to make acceptance of the Protocol a condition for transfers, but that would be at a much higher number of acceptances .
 India’s record of compliance with the rules of international nuclear commerce sheds credibility on its commitment to go by the NSG guidelines . The country should refrain from transferring fuel-cycle technologies to states that do not have them, says India .
 Under UNSC Resolution 1540, India is already committed to the strongest possible non-proliferation practices in this respect . India is also committed to UNSC resolution 1540 on non-nuclear weapons .
 Legally, the Agreement, therefore, does not add to the obligation already undertaken, it says . The Agreement, however, is not legally binding, it adds to the obligations already undertaken . The agreement was reached in December 2013 .
 Concrete export-control improvements can just as well be worked out on the basis of Resolution 1540 . The UK has been in the process of working out a deal with the EU .
 The Agreement raises the awareness and stresses the importance of strict controls . However, it also stresses the need for strict controls on the site .
 The commitment under Article I of the NPT is not limited to the governmental sphere . It is not only the government, but also the international community . The commitment is not just limited to governmental sphere, it is said .
 Governments must see to it that the private sector complies with it, too, complies . The governments must see that they comply with the law, too .
 In order to live up to these commitments, effective export-control systems and proper reporting routines to the IAEA are needed, experts say .
 Under an international legal arrangement to this effect, other states can legitimately raise questions about export regulations and offer cooperation in establishing more effective domestic-control systems . Under this arrangement, other countries can legitimately .
 NSG guidelines do not have that status, but UNSC Resolution 1540 has . UNSC resolution 1540 is based on the guidelines of the NSG . NSG has been criticized by NSG for not having that status .
 The commitment to work for an FMCT is not new either . Fissile Material Cut-Off Treaty is a non-nuclear bomb treaty .
 The 1998 tests were part of the Indian policy package to soften the political shockwaves created by the 1998 tests . It included a moratorium on new nuclear tests, a no-first-use pledge and a minimum deterrence posture .
 The Conference on Disarmament adopted a mandate for FMCT negotiations in 1995, but no negotiations have taken place . FMCT talks have not taken place since 1995 .
 Bush administration says FMCT would not be verifiable . Bush administration: FMCT not verifiable, FMCT will not be verified .
 India promises to work towards a treaty which is not expected to come about, or the negotiation of it may be marred by so many difficult problems that it may go on until a sufficient amount of materials has been produced .
 Four of five recognised NWS have issued a moratorium on production of fissile materials for weapons . Four of the five NWS issued a ban on the production of such materials .
 Critics of the Agreement see the lack of such a commitment by India as a weakness .
 India declared a moratorium on nuclear-weapon tests in 1998 and has an understanding with Pakistan not to be the first to resume testing . Pakistan has also agreed not to resume nuclear-weapons tests .
 U.S. law entitles the administration to stop further cooperation with India . This is the likely consequence if India is the first to break out of the current moratorium on cooperation .
 If another NWS starts testing and India follows suit, the reaction is not so obvious .
 A party signing an international agreement commits itself not to do anything that may complicate ratification of it . A party committing itself to not complicate the ratification of the agreement commits to not doing anything to complicate it .
 Bush administration had been looking for ways to erase Clinton’s signature of the Treaty . Bush administration was not in a position to urge India to sign, it said .
 Missile technology control regime India committed itself to follow the guidelines of this regime . India has been criticised for not following the guidelines .
 The commitment is important, for India has an advanced missile programme . The commitment was important for India, which has advanced missile programmes . India has a long-range missile programme.
 Similar to its nuclear export controls, India already has a good record of compliance with these rules . Similar to India's nuclear export control, the country has a history of compliance .
 All members of the NPT are under an international legal obligation to work for nuclear disarmament, but non-members are not . Non-member states are not required to work to disarmament but not members of NPT . The U.S. is the only member state to work
 The same undertaking by India would not necessarily make much of a difference . In view of the dismal disarmament record of the NWS parties, the same undertaking would not make much difference .
 The United States could not be expected to press India to undertake a disarmament commitment that it itself belittled . Similar to the test-ban issue, the U.S. could not expect India to accept a test ban .
 The domestic debate about the agreement hardened India’s opposition to it . The rightwing feared that the nuclear arsenal would be unduly constrained .
 Traditionally, India has had a high profile on disarmament issues . Under the influence of recent U.S. policies, it revived that policy .
 It continues to support the proposal for a nuclear-weapon convention to abolish such weapons worldwide on an agreed timeline . The U.S. supports the proposal .
 As the controversies about it are put to rest, it may see fit to make such a commitment, especially if, in the meantime, progress is made on disarmament and non-proliferation matters .
 If India exploits its capacity fully, it can produce in the order of 50 nuclear weapons per year without violating the Agreement . Assessment: If India exploited its capacity, it could produce up to 50 nukes per year .
 The U.S. modernises and expands its nuclear forces at the risk of provoking India, but with no special intention of doing so . Challenged by the evolution of the United States force posture, it modernises .
 China tries to maintain its retaliatory capabilities while avoiding steps that may lead to a more demanding security environment . China is wary of steps that could lead to an increase in security threats .
 "This is a delicate balance, conducted in the best interest of domestic economic and political development and reform," says President Obama .
 It justifies its force acquisitions in reference to China, but has no interest in triggering any arms competition with it . The U.S. says it is not interested in triggering arms competition .
 Its maximum production capacity is therefore of little or no practical interest . It is not a long-term solution to the problem of over-capacity .
 India also has a balancing act to conduct between China and Pakistan, building a nuclear arsenal that addresses both without being trapped into arms-racing . However, India has also has to balance its nuclear arsenal with Pakistan and China .
 For the Bush administration, a strategic partnership with India was a major foreign-policy objective . The Bush administration had a major interest in the relationship with India .
 A breakthrough in relations with one of the heavyweights on the Asian scene would be a major achievement . A breakthrough would be the first major achievement for the country .
 Pressure for such a partnership had been building up in India, too, too . However, pressures for such an alliance were building up, too.
 India worked hard to become a legitimate partner in international affairs, especially after the tests in 1998 . The nuclear deal lifted it from a lower tier of nations to a bona fide partner wifh the United States .
 The Agreement was passed with the smallest of luargins in India, while both Houses of the U.S. Congress endorsed it with big majorities . If any of them could have offered more without risking defeat at home, it was the United States rather than India .
 Critics say the U.S. gave priority to economic interests at the expense of nonproliferation concerns . The U.N. has been accused of prioritizing economic interests and geopolitical considerations . The Obama administration has been criticized for its actions in the past .
 The critics seem to ignore India’s new-won economic and political strength . Critics seem to be ignoring India's new, won political strength, says Pundits .
 Powers that are strong and about to grow even stronger usually have the confidence to pursue their interests with particular vigour . India is no exception, and it's no exception .
 India stiffly opposes exfemal attempts to dictate its foreign policy . In its current phase of rapid growth, India opposes foreign policy attempts .
 The United States never had a say in Indian affairs anywhere near its influence in Pakistan and many countries in the Middle East and East Asia . The U.S. never had an influence in India's affairs .
 The nuclear deal was important enough to warrant accommodation to U.S. interests . Still, the nuclear deal is important enough for the United States to make it happen .
 On both occasions, it may have yielded to U.S. and Western pressure not to jeopardise the deal . The deal may have also yielded to United States and Western pressures .
 Had it not gone with the majority, it could also have complicated India’s relations with Israel, its second largest defence supplier . Israel is India's second-largest defence supplier, Israel .
 The United States also lent on India to cancel the plans for a gas pipeline from Iran via Pakistan . The U.S. also called on the Indian government to cancel its plans for the pipeline .
 India had reasons of its own to oppose another NWS in the region . It kept stressing that it had friendly relations with Iran . Iran is the only country to have a nuclear reactor in Iran .
 The Indian opposition remained suspicious of hidden concessions to the United States, and kept questioning the government about it . However, the Indian opposition remains suspicious of the hidden concessions .
 Non-proliferation experts argue that the Agreement amounts to a reward for bad behaviour . Non-Proliferation expert says that as a consequence, other states would feel less committed .
 They feared that some states would actively exploit it for objectives of their own other than nonproproliferation . They feared some states might use it for their own purposes, not just for nonprosprositution .
 Critics argued that the Agreement left the door wide open for Israel and Pakistan to emulate it . They argued that it was a way to gain access to the international nuclear market .
 Iran and other NPT members in dubious standing might see fit to do the same . Iran is one of the world's worst offenders in the nuclear arms race .
 The cause of non-proliferation would have been better served by sticking to the full-scope safeguards requirement as a condition of supply, avoiding any exception .
 The Agreement is flawed for lack of non-proliferation and disarmament commitments from India . In the view of others, others, the agreement is flawed because of India's lack of disarmament .
 Pakistan wants an agreement with the U.S. similar to India’s . It has been speculated that China and Pakistan may emulate it. True, Pakistan wants to an agreement similar to that of India's .
 Israel has explored the possibility of being exempted from the NSG guidelines . Israel has also explored the idea of being exempt from the guidelines .
 Pakistan has not reoriented itself the way India has, and does not enjoy the same status as India . However, Pakistan does not have the status of India as a major nation .
 This is not the time, therefore, to invite the NSG to make an exemption for Pakistan . Pakistan should not be invited to an exemption from Pakistan, writes Shah .
 China hardly appreciates the US-India agreement certainly not its geopolitical aspects . But went along with it so as to not antagonise the United States and others . China hardly appreciated the geopolitical aspects of the agreement .
 Israel does not admit to having nuclear weapons and is therefore not prepared to draw any separation line between civilian and military programmes . Israel has not admitted to having any nuclear weapons .
 It follows that it is not in a position to claim exemption from the NSG guidelines in reference to India . India will not be able to say exemption from NSG .
 Russia and China, the Asian members of the P5, are holding back on UN sanctions . India is a big potential customer of Iranian petroleum .
 Asia is about to become a comfort zone for Iran, compensating for the restraints imposed by the Western world . Economically, Asia will become a comfortable zone for the Iranians, says Iran expert .
 In the history of Iran, relations with countries to the East and North East have been at least as important as relations westwards . Relations with countries in the region have been important as well as those in the West .
 A reorientation in that direction means resumption of long traditions, says the BBC . The BBC is proud of its long tradition of broadcasting .
 Arab states strongly criticised the exemption and continue to do so, mainly out of concern for the potential implications for Israel . Arab states continue to criticise the exemption from Israel .
 Some NSG members that argue for stricter non-proliferation provisions may have succumbed to pressure from the United States and others, but the great majority willingly supported the Agreement . Other NAM countries likewise .
 States in the South (Argentina, Brazil, South Africa) as well as vendors in the North came out in favour . States in Argentina, Brazil and South Africa also supported the move .
 No NPT member has signalled reduced support for the Treaty because of the exemption . No one has withdrawn from any other part of the international non-proliferation regime .
 Those who favoured stricter provisions will shift their attention from criticising the Agreement to becoming first-line guardians of nonproliferation commitments that were listed in the NSG decision .
 The NSG decided to review the implementation of the Agreement on a regular basis . NSG has agreed to review implementation of Agreement on regular basis.
 In one way, the US-India agreement is stricter than the NPT; in another, more permissive . The agreement is based on the U.S.-India agreement, but it's not strict or permissive.
 Under the NPT, NWS are free to assist each other in developing nuclear warheads and in testing them . They are also free to receive from any state the material necessary to pursue their nuclear-weapon programmes . They can decide by themselves whether to accept international controls over peaceful activities .
 The United States wanted to ensure that India applies world-class export controls, blocking Indian contributions to any and all weapon-oriented programmes . The U.S. wanted to . ensure that . India applies . world-grade export controls .
 The prohibition of enrichment, reprocessing and heavy-water technology transfers in the NSG guidelines is not explained in the agreement .
 The fact is that India is an NWS and is unlikely to eliminate its arsenal any sooner than any of the five . India is likely to continue to use its arsenal as a weapon of choice .
 Since it cannot become a member of the NPT, this means that the only way to commit it to the principles and practice of non-proliferation and disarmament is to urge it to behave “as if’ it were a member’ of the Treaty and commit
 The US-India agreement is a step in that direction, a building block that may lead to full-scale involvement in the regime . The US and India agreement is one example of cooperation in the region .
 The warnings of negative effects, so strongly propounded by alarmist non-govemmental critics, were exaggerated . The warnings were so strong propounded that they were exaggerated, the warnings were not true, the author says .
 Given the differences between the three outliers, there was always a case for addressing them separately, one by one . The differences between these outliers are very different, and should be addressed separately .
 If they follow the Indian example and move closer to the international regime, similar agreements may sooner or later be agreed for the other outliers . India is one of the most populous countries in the world, but it has not yet agreed a deal .
 For all of them, however, there is a point at which they cannot be brought deeper into non-proliferation and disarmament endeavours unless they are formally recognised de jure for what they are .
 Unless international law has a life of its own, de jure recognition of India is a matter of time . International law is disconnected from the realities of the world, international law must live in its own .
 The question is not whether it will happen, but when and under what circumstances, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "I'm not sure if it's going to happen, it's when and when it happens"
 In the following analysis of arguments for and against recognition, “recognition” is used in the full de jure sense of the term .
 Representatives of some states have indicated that if the nuclear club were to be enlarged beyond the five nuclear club, they might have to reconsider their nonnuclear status .
 Such voices have been heard in Japan, despite the difficulties that this would pose in the consensus-minded Japanese political system and the pain that nuclear issues evoke among the victims of nuclear bombing. For instance, such voices have also been heard .
 Geopolitical factors favouring closer relations with India out of concern for China, and economic interests in the Indian market, played a role in this connection . For Japan, like the U.S., like the United States, it was a geopolitical factor . The United States is keen to
 None of the countries that entered the NPT on the understanding that there would be only five NWS can credibly claim that their security is jeopardised by the nuclear-weapon acquisitions in South Asia . Algeria, Argentina, Brazil, Japan, South Africa and South Korea cannot claim their security
 As India acquires missiles of longer range, some of them may come within their reach . Some of the missiles could be within the reach of the Indian military .
 It would be far-fetched to argue that recognition of the nuclear facts is a factor upsetting their security calculations . Still, it would not be far from farfetched to say that .
 States base their security policies more on tangible facts than on formalities . States based their policies on facts and facts, rather than formalities, officials say .
 There is a category between tangibles and formalities political perceptions of prestige and civilisational pride that affect security policies . However, there is an important distinction between the tangibles, formalities and the formalities .
 For instance, deterrence relies not only on tangible facts but also on impressions of willpower . deterrence relies on impression of willpower, rather than tangible facts . deterrence is based on impressions, not facts, but impressions of willfulness .
 Recognition would be a sign of success and strong will on the part of those who were determined to follow through on their nuclear ambitions . Recognition of success would be sign of strong will, says the BBC .
 Recognition would recognise India’s nuclear assets, pay tribute to its assertiveness and willpower as well, leaving other states a bit inferior in comparison . In a sense, recognition would not only recognise India's nuclear assets .
 At least in rudimentary terms, states distinguish between the mighty and the less mighty, and adjust their behaviour to that ranking order . States distinguish themselves from the mighty to the less powerful .
 Nuclear weapons have not been used since 1945, but they remain attractive because they translate into status and weight in the international system . Nuclear weapons are still attractive because of their status and status .
 Higher status for some means lower status for others, so there is a feeling among some NNWS that higher status for India will leave them at a loss . There is also a feeling that the higher status will leave some NNAWS at an economic loss .
 India’s nuclear programme may be invoked against a permanent seat in the UNSC, not to provide any reward for the 1998 tests . But in the long run such arguments are likely to dissipate in favour of gross size and weight, to which its nuclear weapons contribute .
 There is probably a bonus to be reaped both in absolute and relative terms. So there is probably an extra in absolute terms. It's probably not a bonus in absolute or relative terms, it's a bonus .
 Fifth, the agreement provides full access to civil nuclear technology in return for stronger non-proliferation commitments . The agreement provides access to nuclear technology to the U.S.
 Some see this as a reward for imprudent behaviour; others consider it a win-win situation . Some see it as a win for impudent behavior; others say it is a reward .
 The implications are clearly unfortunate for the cause of nonproliferation . If it leaves the impression that threshold countries could move ahead to test, it could gain access to nuclear technology .
 Should other states want to go nuclear, they would have to renege on their NPT commitment . The NPT is a non-prohibitive nuclear weapons treaty .
 Recognition of India qua NWS would make it possible to draw it into arms-control arrangements from which it is now excluded . Recognition would allow India to participate in arms control arrangements now excluded from such arrangements .
 It could be asked to extend security assurances to members of NWFZ . A bilateral no-firstuse commitment between India and Russia might be possible, says India .
 If U.S. and Russia were to reduce their arsenals to no more than 1,000 operative weapons while inviting the other NWS for multilateral disarmament negotiations, excluding India and others on the ground that participation would confer recognition on them would be absurd .
 Given that we are dealing with an NWS that has come to stay, it would be unwise not to extract commitments from it . The NWS is a long-term solution to the problems of climate change .
 The cost is, first of all, the enhanced status that recognition confers on India . The cost of the recognition is the recognition of India's status as a member of the world's most powerful nation .
 This is nothing new, but reconfirmation of the status benefits of nuclear weapons is bad enough . This is not the first time nuclear weapons have been declared a state of state .
 Recognition allows for Indian involvement in arms control and disarmament agreements . The main advantage is that recognition allows for India to participate in disarmament negotiations .
 Since India stands to gain from being recognised, it should be invited to undertake additional arms control and disarmament commitments . The list of criteria to be applied to all three non-parties should apply to India, writes Andrew Hammond .
 All states the members of the NPT as well as the non-parties should be drawn into a new consensus on non-proliferation and disarmament based on the grand bargain of 1968 . The grand bargain was based on a new agreement based on 1968, the author says .
 Tying into the ten requirements of a new global consensus outlined in Chapter 4, eight of them have implications for one or more of the three non-parties . Eight of the 10 requirements are tied into the 10 demands outlined by Chapter 4 .
 In the NPT, it is the weapons that are the units of account, not their possessors, writes CNN's Peter Bergen . Bergen: The NPT is a non-prohibitive form of account .
 India and Pakistan follow the NPT in this respect, while the Israeli position is ambiguous . Israel's position on the issue is ambiguous, but India, Pakistan and Israel follow NPT, while Israel has ambiguous .
 India and Pakistan also favour negotiations, while Israel has little faith in such an approach towards Iran . Israel and Israel have little faith that such a diplomatic approach will work .
 In international law, preventive attack against an opponent who may or may not become a real threat is not permitted . Third, in international law,. preventive attack . not permitted in the future is not allowed in the U.S.
 Such attacks are at odds with the non-proliferation regime, which is part and parcel of international law, the U.N. says .
 In Israel, preventive attack has been military doctrine for more than 25 years . It has been advocated as a means of last resort to stop the Iranian nuclear programme .
 India and Pakistan do not favour preventive attack against the nuclear programmes of other states . They have agreed not to attack each other’s nuclear facilities .
 Pakistan and Israel stay with pre-NPT facilityspecific INFCIRC 66-type agreements . Israel and Pakistan stay with INFCIRIR 66 type agreements .
 Pakistan is known to be one of the worst proliferators ever . Among the outliers, Pakistan has been known to have proliferated the most prolific .
 All of them would like to be admitted into the international market for nuclear material, equipment and technology, but for Israel this has been a lower priority than for the South Asian states . Israel has not been able to get access to nuclear material from South Asian countries .
 India and Pakistan have been world champions in criticising the NPT for being unbalanced and discriminatory, and the NWS for being hypocritical . The NWS has been criticised by both countries as being hypocritical and unbalanced .
 After 1998, that criticism has abated, but it remains a significant undercurrent in both countries . The criticism has since abated after 1998 .
 All parties to the NPT are obliged to work for nuclear disarmament . Sixth, all parties to NPT must work for disarmament, says Dr. David Cameron .
 India and Pakistan have criticised the NWS vehemently for their failure to disarm the United States and the Soviet Union/Russia in particular .
 Israel was never very outspoken on behalf of nuclear disarmament, in reality being an NWS itself from the late 1960s . Instead, they are trying to fend off global measures to implement the first part of Article VI “cessation of the nuclear arms race at an early date�
 Seventh, the relationship between counter-proliferation and non-Proliferation is ambiguous and complex . The relationship between the two is "ambiguous and complex," says Seventh . The U.S. has a history of nuclear proliferation .
 Counter-proliferation threats may supplement the regime in the best interests of non-Proliferation, says the U.S. State Department . Actual use of force may undermine the same objective, the official says . Counter-threats may supplement regime in best interests, he says
 The aim must therefore be to live with the differences between non-proliferation and counter-prosiferation as best one can, and exploit opportunities to make them mutually re-enforcing, he says . The aim is to live in between the two approaches, he adds .
 Eighth, for international regimes to function properly, some important actor or actors have to exercise leadership . Eighth, some of the world's most important actors must exercise leadership, says Nelson Mandela .
 The roles of India, Israel and Pakistan can only be secondary in this respect, for the very reason that they are outliers . India, Israeli and Pakistan are not the only outliers in the world, but they are exceptions .
 By endorsing the agreement and exempting India from the NSG guidelines, all NSG members did the same . India is exempt from the agreement, and the agreement was endorsed by NSG .
 International law currently holds that there are only five nuclear powers will have to be reconciled with the realities of the contemporary world . International law which currently holds . only 5 nuclear powers must have to reconcile with the reality of the . contemporary world.
 In October 2006, the U.S. outlined a set of proposals for nuclear disarmament . The U.N. determined that its post-1998 alignment with the existing arms-control order should not erase its traditional push for disarmament.
 The pronouncements at the Rajiv Gandhi anniversary were clearly inspired by the American ‘gang of four’, and the Munich speech, likewise, by President Obama’s disarmament vision . President Obama also inspired the speech by President Hussein Hussein .
 The new U.S. policies have enabled India to revert to its pro-disarmament stance . The new United States policies have allowed India to re-evaluate its stance .
 To be fully recognised as an NWS, it plays on its disarmament credentials to curry favour with Western powers and with NAM countries .
 One possibility is to wait for this commitment to come forward before extending de jure recognition to it . Let this be the standard that Pakistan must live up to in order to be treated the same way . Pakistan must also live up by this standard, says the writer .
 Pakistan is far from that standard today, but for the sake of disarmament and non-proliferation NPT parties should encourage and assist Pakistan to get there . Pakistan is not far behind the NPT standard today .
 The prospect of an agreement similar to the Indian one could help it walk the last mile . It is hoped the prospect of a similar agreement will help the Indian government .
 It could build on the elements that were highlighted by the NSG when the exemption was made for India . The exemption could be built on those highlighted by NSG .
 In addition, a disarmament commitment equivalent to Article VI; signature, if not accession, to the CTBT; limitations on fissile material production while waiting for a cut-off treaty . A stronger separation line between civilian and military activities may be required .
 For Pakistan, it also remains to meet some of the criteria listed above, the export control requirement in particular . Pakistan still faces the same hurdles as other countries .
 For India, signature and ratification of the CTBT presupposes that the United States and China do so first . The U.S. and China need to sign the agreement before it can be ratified .
 For an FMCT to be concluded, more will be required of the leading NWS, such as restrictions on ballistic-missile defence and militarisation of outer space . The FMCT will be concluded .
 This may win enough time for India and Pakistan to acquire the fissile material stocks they deem adequate . This may be enough time to acquire enough material stocks .
 India is unlikely to compromise on its ambition to build a minimum deterrent, and Pakistan will be no different . Pakistan will not compromise on the ambition of the Indian state to build the minimum deterrent .
 There is hardly any short-cut to nuclear arms control and disarmament in South Asia, says CNN's John Defterios .
 Israel has signed the CTBT and may have enough fissile materials to agree to a cut-off . Israel has enough material to meet the need for a cut off .
 It probably finds it harder to accept the necessary verification arrangements . It probably will find it harder than accepting the necessary arrangements .
 As long as it does not admit to being an NWS, there is no separation line to discuss and no recognition to consider . "There are no separation lines to discuss," says NWS spokesman .
 Its policy of opacity/ambiguity does not prevent it from making an “as if’ commitment. However, its declaratory policy of . opacity does not stop it from . making an . “As if” commitment. It is not an ‘as
 For Israel, such a commitment would entail no significant sacrifice and no significant gain . Israel's commitment to Israel would be no more significant sacrifice or significant gain, says Yossi .
 If they are to be involved in nuclear disarmament negotiations with a view to ambitious agreements affecting the arsenals of all NWS, de jure recognition of them is a sine qua non .
 The requirements for a new consensus on non-proliferation, disarmament and peaceful uses show that much more than Articles I, IIL2 and VI is involved . The new consensus is needed for the U.S. to reach a consensus .
 There are fundamental modes of behaviour to be respected (unit of account, negotiations, commitment to international law), a proper balance between the pillars to be re-established . A delicate co-existence between non-proliferation and counter-prosiferation to be managed; and a leadership
 Among the outliers, India is closest to the requirements for a new consensus, while Pakistan and Israel are at a great distance from it . India is the closest to meeting the requirements of a consensus, says the writer .
 When the US-India agreement entered into force, there was no similar agreement in the making . When the U.S. and India agreed, there were no similar agreements in the country's history .
 For India to comply with the demands of a criteria-based approach may take a long while as well, depending on where the bar is set . For India, it could take a lot of time as well as a long-term solution .
 For some time ahead, the best approach may be a pragmatic, incremental one, sensitising both parties and non-parties to the requirements for a new consensus .
 Others have kept a certain preparedness for going nuclear if changing circumstances so suggest . Others have been prepared to go nuclear if necessary .
 Others have rolled back and forth between different degrees of interest in the nuclear option and preparedness to exercise it . Others have said they are not prepared to exercise the option .
 Unauthorised weapon-related activities are not included in the definition . Private-sector research and development in weapon-based fields is not included .
 Authorities may not have given accurate guidance, leaving a grey area that experts felt they could legitimately explore . Inadvertently or deliberately, the authorities may have given incorrect guidance .
 Some such cases were discovered when the IAEA began to implement the Additional Protocol, among them South Korea . South Korea conducted enrichment experiments as late as 2000 .
 Protocol enables the Agency to undertake a more comprehensive examination of the nuclear history of member states, inducing stricter governmental guidance of nuclear activities .
 The definition includes cases where no explicit decision has been made to pursue the bomb, or where a governmental decision to acquire the bomb could not be ascertained .
 Such decisions are rarely made at early stages of a nuclear programme . Because the lead times are long, such decisions rarely made in early stages .
 It simply serves no purpose because, largely, preparations can be done under dual-use cover . "It simply serves . no purpose," he says .
 Similarly, rollback processes often begin slowly and hesitantly and proceed incrementally . Rollback processes begin slowly, hesitally and proceed slowly .
 At the core of this wide definition is the distinction between states that have “done something” in the direction of the weapons option and then abandoned it, and those that have shown no interest .
 Similar to the use of force in security communities, it is no longer being considered . Similar to force in the security community, it was no longer considered .
 Rejection may or may not be combined with dismantlement of relevant infrastructure . Rejection is rejection of any plan to dismantle relevant infrastructure. Rejection does not mean destruction of infrastructure .
 To roll North Korea back to stable non-nuclear status, dismantlement of most, if not all, of its nuclear facilities would be required . North Korea would need to dismantle most of the country's nuclear facilities, experts say .
 A credible rejectionist posture can only evolve over time, or full confidence can be obtained by a change of regime in North Korea or in the form of a reunified, non-nuclear Korean peninsula . Even so, given the deep distrust in the North Korean government, a credible rejectionism
 In highly industrialised states, dismantlement may not be a practical option because a variety of dual-use technologies already exist in civilian sectors . In highly industrialised states, it is not possible to dismantle the technology .
 The credibility of rejectionist postures rests on a national political consensus to disregard the nuclear option . There is a national consensus in the U.S. to disregard nuclear weapons .
 A hedging strategy may be more or less sensitive to changes in the factors that condition it . It may also be sensitive to the changes in how it reacts to the factors it is hedging .
 It may be actively adapted to changing circumstances or it may be linked to a certain capability that is passively maintained . The capability may be passively maintained irrespective of contextual changes . It may also be actively adaptable to changing situations .
 Hedging is a choice of strategic posture ranging from active to passive preparedness for nuclear-weapon production . Hedging may be an active or passive approach to nuclear-weapons production .
 For many years, India and Pakistan exercised various kinds of restraints . For many of the years, the two countries exercised various kind of restraints on each other . Pakistan and India have been at odds for decades .
 South Korea and Taiwan have also been persuaded by the United States to exercise restraint . U.S. persuaded South Korea, Taiwan and South Korea also persuaded by United States .
 Sweden concluded in 1960s that it would not be in Sweden’s interest to acquire nuclear weapons . Sweden built two plutonium production reactors in the 1960s, but decided not to pursue weapons .
 South Africa eliminated indigenously developed,® ready-made nuclear arsenal . South Africa is the only state to have eliminated an indigigenously-developed nuclear arsenal.
 When President de Klerk halted weapons production in 1989, seven gun-type uranium weapons had been built . Number eight was under construction .
 The dismantlement of the weapons began in July 1990 and was completed by June 1991 . All HEU had been removed from the weapons and transported to Pelindaba .
 South Africa signed the NPT on 10 July 1991; the safeguards agreement entered into force on 16 September . The IAEA began its inspections in November .
 South Africa provided full disclosure on a formula allowing the IAEA to go “anywhere, at any time, but for a reason” enabling the Agency to confirm beyond doubt its reversal to non-nuclear status . South Africa provides full disclosure of its reversal .
 Only activities unambiguously related to weapon acquisition such as work on warhead design, trigger mechanisms and other non-nuclear components of nuclear weapons are prohibited . Only activities aimed at acquiring nuclear arms are forbidden .
 Advanced industrial states can cut these obstacles short, for relevant know-how exists in civilian sectors, writes Andrew Hammond . Hammond: "Advanced industrial states must cut these . obstacles short"
 They may come within a few weeks of ready-made weapons without doing anything illegal . It's not illegal to make weapons, but it's possible to do so without doing so .
 In such cases, it is doubtful whether the safeguards system can provide any meaningful warning . The safeguards system will provide no meaningful warning, experts say .
 Despite its “three nuclear principles”* and the constitutional prohibition of nuclear weapons, Japanese officials have emphasised that the principles may be revisited and the constitution reinterpreted .
 Other European states, as well as Canada and Australia, are in a similar position . They have no intention to mobilise them for military ends .
 They are closer to Sweden than to Japan, and are considered rejectionist . They are usually considered rejectionists .
 Turkey often figures in discussions of proliferation risks in the Middle East, both in reference to Iran and to European reluctance to let Turkey into the EU . There is no evidence of specific moves in this direction .
 There have been assertions, but no publicly available evidence, of nuclear aspirations in Finland and Greece . There have also been assertions that there are no plans for nuclear power in Finland or Greece .
 Uki'aine had Russian nuclear weapons in its custody, although apparently not the codes to use them . These cases have not been listed for lack of documentation .
 Little is known about the degree and circumstance of Algerian interests in nuclear weapons . Chile had a significant nuclear research programme and did not accede to the NPT until Argentina did .
 North Korea tested a nuclear device in the autumn of 2006 and the spring of 2009 . Muller and Schmidt acknowledge a lack of conclusive evidence .
 Levite describes Spain as an uncertain case; Jo and Gartzke do not include it in their list of reversals . It is not known whether it has deliverable nuclear weapons .
 If there is a crack in the non-proliferation dam in East Asia, more states may reconsider their current status . The U.S. State Department says it is concerned about North Korea's influence in the region .
 In the Middle East, Egypt’s nuclear programme is rudimentary and in Saudi Arabia there is not much to build on . In the Mideast, Egypt's nuclear programme has been rudimentary and Saudi Arabia's nuclear programmes are rudimentary .
 Realist perspective on international affairs accounts for much of what proliferation and rollback is about . Theoretical approaches to proliferation, rollback are based on the realist perspective .
 In an international anarchy, states need to deter potential attackers, and the gold standard of deterrence is nuclear . The gold standard is nuclear, and states must use nuclear weapons to deter attackers, the author says .
 To turn states back from weapons pursuits, their security concerns have to be alleviated . Security concerns must be reduced by reducing the threat or by enhancing deterrence in one of its basic modes .
 During the Cold War, the superpowers threatened each other’s clients and responded by beefing up their extended deterrence postures . The clients were held under strict control and kept proliferation at bay in Europe and East Asia .
 The dominant motivation was not fear of proliferation, but fear of the other side and competition for influence worldwide . However, the dominant motivation for the government was fear of other side .
 All nuclearweapon programmes have been justified in reference to security concerns . But the realist perspective exaggerates their importance and overrates the propensity to proliferate .
 Realists were quick to predict proliferation to tens of states, but there are only nine NWS to date . Tens of states have the economic, technological and industrial potential to make weapons .
 In the history of nuclear proliferation, the French rationale for nuclear weapons is the arch-realist one . In the past, nuclear proliferation has been a key part of the history .
 De Gaulle stressed that the U.S. would not sacrifice Chicago for Paris . The United States would not have sacrificed Chicago to Paris .
 This logic fortunately not tested, but quite possibly valid invited proliferation . The logic has not been tested but it has invited proliferation.
 French doctrine was therefore tons azimut,e.e. The weapons were in principle turned in all directions . The French doctrine is therefore tons Azimut .
 During the Cold War, worst-case assumptions were notorious for their influence on security policies . The Cold War was notorious for its influence on national security decisions .
 In the 1990s the strongest physical manifestations of Cold War thinking were eliminated, yet worst-case assumptions remained important in the security policies of states . In the 90s, the strongest . manifestations of the Cold War were eliminated .
 This century, threat-based policies were brought to new heights in reference to state as well as non-state actors . This century's threats have been brought to a new heights, according to the U.S.
 The pros and cons of nuclear-weapon acquisition are numerous and states are weighing the arguments . Even so, states must weigh the arguments and weigh the merits of acquiring nuclear weapons .
 Iran is widely considered to be a rational actor susceptible to external incentives as well as domestic interests . For instance, Iran is thought to be the most rational actor in the world .
 Only when national existence is threatened or regime survival is at stake may it be attractive beyond doubt to possess the strongest of all weapons as an ultimate insurance premium . Only when . national existence . is threatened, regime survival may be at stake .
 Paul did not offer prudential realism as the key to understanding nuclear rollback, but emphasised that there is no single overarching explanation of this many-faceted phenomenon . Paul said that there was no one overarching explanation for this phenomenon .
 Realists defend their alarmism partly in reference to proliferation as a continuum, ranging from different degrees of preparedness to ready-made operative arsenals . Realists argue that proliferation is a continuum of different levels of readiness .
 Many more states have moved closer to nuclear-weapon status . Even if the number of NWS remains in the one-digit range, many more states still have nuclear-weapons .
 Realists defend themselves in reference to the NPT and supply-side measures that they see as the core virtue of the non-proliferation regime . Realists also defend themselves as realists .
 Supply-side polieies have been useful when they have been shown to be ineffeetive and inadequate . Realists and others have been heavily eritieised by realists for that for that .
 Realists are also responsible for the relative ignoranee of other parts of the regime, notably the disarmament eommitment of Artiele VI . The combination of technology denial and failure to disarm undermines the trade-off on which the NPT is built .
 The importance of ideas manifests itself in three levels: ideas, ideas, idealism and idealism . Idealist perspectives are three levels of thought . Idealism is a form of self-evolutionary thinking .
 At the international level, it is evident in the non-proliferation norm, says the diplomat . The non-nuclear weapons ban is a key part of the world's nuclear arsenal .
 After a while, the Treaty got more parties than any other arms-control agreement . The Treaty was signed by more than 100 countries, including Russia .
 Except for India, Pakistan, Israel and North Korea, it has become universal . Except for Pakistan, India and Israel, it's become universal.
 The NPT may have been more or less important in tilting states towards non-nuclear status, but once they have joined the Treaty they have taken a keen interest in ascertaining that other parties remain true to their Treaty obligations .
 A weaker NPT means a weaker non-proliferation norm, for the Treaty is the main standardsetter in the global nuclear realm .
 Even if enforcement mechanisms are weak, states proliferate at the risk of becoming international pariahs . Even if the enforcement mechanism is weak, it will be difficult to enforce, experts say .
 India was soon forgiven for what it did in 1998, but any future proliferator will be small in comparison . India was subject to sanctions at first, but is now much more vulnerable to international reactions .
 India never joined the Treaty and therefore broke no legal commitment . A future proliferator would also have to violate the NPT, or withdraw in orderly fashion . India did not violate the Treaty, but it did not break any legal commitment.
 At the national level, Etel Solingen finds a difference between proponents of openness towards the outside world and those who prefer to shut the world out . EtelSolingen finds the difference between those who want to shut out the world .
 Not surprisingly, the fonner is more likely to turn the nuclear option down, while the latter are more inclined to keep it open or even to exercise it . The nuclear option is the most likely to be turned down by both sides, according to experts .
 The focus on ‘national mythmakers’ does not disregard external influences and challenges, and so does not belittle the relevance of realist perspectives . It does not dismiss external influences or challenges, but it does acknowledge realist views .
 Transitions between civilian and military rule crystallise the difference between openness and isolation . Transitions to civilian rule are marked by the openness of civilian rule .
 The nationalistic orientation and dubious legitimacy of military rulers tend to turn them into outcasts . Military rulers are often seen as outcasts by the public .
 If economic, technological and industrial capacities enable them to conduct a significant nuclear programme, they may try to solidify their positions by going nuclear .
 Such rulers may be favourably disposed for the nuclear option from the outset, and the negative feedback they receive from the surroundings may tempt them to exercise it .
 The Swedish experience highlights the importance of military strategy in national debates . Sweden's military strategy is a key part of the country's debate on the issue .
 The leading opponents of nuclear weapons Alva Myrdal and Inga Thorson deemed it particularly important to do better than the military officers in strategy discussions . They said it was particularly important for the military to be involved in the discussions .
 They were keenly aware that while the listeners might not understand all of the arguments some of them were too complex to be grasped by non-professionals . They sensed very well who won the debates, and they sensed who won it .
 If they could beat the military on their home ground, the rest would be easier to manage . The rest of the World Cup will be easier for them to manage if they beat the army .
 They prepared particularly well for debates about military strategy, they say . They prepared well for debate about military strategies .
 Case studies of leaders from France, Australia, Argentina and India suggest that nuclear-weapon ambitions differ from the great majority of others in their conception of national identity .
 Opponents of nuclear weapons go for nuclear weapons not merely as a matter of calculation, but as matter of self-expression . Opponents are driven by fear and pride -e.e. a combination of security and status motives .
 For oppositional nationalists the choice of nuclear weapons is neither a close call nor a possible last resort, but a matter of necessity . Unlike most of their peers, who find it hard to make a rational assessment of the pros and cons of weapons acquisition, they find it difficult to assess the
 On the rollback list, de Klerk was the right man at the right time in South Africa . On the rolledback list: On the rollsback list of de Klersk's achievements, he says .
 The December 1988 agreement provided for the withdrawal of 50,000 Cuban troops from Southern Africa presented an opportunity to place South Africa’s identity anchor in the Western community of nations .
 Colonel Gaddafi of Libya made a similar choice, burying all efforts to acquire nuclear weapons . Colonel Gaddafi earned goodwill from the US, the UK and the rest of the Western world .
 In South Africa, scientists demonstrated the feasibility of building nuclear weapons . The country felt increasingly threatened by enemies both in the region and internationally . South Africa's nuclear weapons were demonstrated .
 Security concerns merged with the practical feasibility of a focused, cost-effective programme that produced half-a-dozen bombs . Security concerns combined with the cost of the programme .
 In North Korea, an indigenous programme developed with Soviet assistance reached the point where it could produce significant amounts of plutonium right at the time the Cold War came to the end and the Soviet Union had withdrawn .
 North Korea's nuclear programme became the lifeline of the communist regime in Pyongyang . First nuclear test in 2006 led to a first nuclear bomb in 2006 . From then on, it became the regime's lifeline .
 Colonel Gaddafi tried and failed to purchase nuclear weapons from China and bomb production materials from India, Pakistan, the Soviet Union, Argentina, Brazil and Belgium during the 1970s and 1980s . He gave up in favour of integration into the existing Western economic and political order .
 Muller and Schmidt examine existing propositions in the field, adding to our understanding of proliferation/de-proliferation dynamics . In a quantitative analysis of the 36 cases listed above, the researchers examine existing proposition .
 Researchers find no support for the hypothesis that proliferation is technology driven . Comparing the building of research reactors with the conduct of weaponrelated activities, they found no support . The study was published in the New York Review of Science .
 A growing number of states have such reactors, but a decreasing number are using them for nuclear-weapon activities . A decreasing number of nuclear-weapons activities are using such reactors .
 The hypothesis is further refuted by the fact that more states started nuclear-weapon activities before they acquired research reactors, and more finished them after they did so . More states started activities before acquiring research reactors .
 An alliance with an NWS does not prevent NNWS from embarking on weapon activities, the authors say . Neither do they find support for the hypothesis that an alliance with a NWS prevents an N.W. from launching a weapon .
 This is not to deny that, in single cases, alliances have played a key role in the renunciation of nuclear-weapon options . It is not the first time that alliances have been key to the renouncing nuclear weapons options .
 Realpolitik assumption that states do not dare to proliferate if the big powers are strong enough and flex their muscles is refuted . “High posture” hypothesis is refuted as well as the ‘high posture’ hypothesis as well .
 The emerging norm had a distinet impaet on the way the new states eoneeived of proper behaviour in the seeurity field .
 The signifieanee of the NPT is borne out by the following table showing initiation and termination of nuelear-weapon aetivity before and after the eonelusion of the Treaty . Democraeies are more sensitive to the non-proliferation norm
 Little support is found for the hypothesis that governments that open up to the outside world are less proliferation prone than those that shut out the world out . Little support also supports the theory that governments are less prone to proliferation .
 The liberalisation thesis is not refuted by Etel Solingen, but eaeh ease must be examined on its own merits, says the German government . The liberalising thesis was not refuted, but it was presented on merits .
 Iraqi nuelear-weapons programme of the 1980s had been aeeomplished . Shortly after the first Gulf War in 1991, elimination of the programme was a success . Iraq's nuke weapons programme was eliminated in 1991 .
 The UN disarmament mission in Iraq was very speeial . The mission was very difficult to control .
 The Security Council functioned more or less the way the authors of the UN Charter had hoped . Except for a brief period of time immediately after the Second World War, this was the first and only time in the history of UN that the Security Council had functioned .
 Big power cooperation was once again on the decline by the mid-1990s . The liberation of Kuwait and the constraints on Saddam happened in the cooperative spirit of that period . It did not last long .
 The IAEA had failed to discover the nuclear-weapon programme of the 1980s . This became the impetus to the Model Additional Protocol to the standard NPT safeguards agreement .
 In the years that followed, UNSCOM and UNMOVIC became rich sources of verification experience, inspiring new ideas of how effective verification could best be organised and implemented . In the past, verification experience has led to the development of new verification systems .
 After the second Gulf War in 2003, inspectors were proven successful . The inspectors were proved successful in Iraq and Afghanistan .
 U.S. and other national intelligence agencies had been wrong and wrong . They had been right and United States and others were woefully wrong. They were right and wrong.
 Big power disinformation campaigns had not disappeared with the Cold War, giving a major boost to the standing of international inspections . The Cold War gave a boost to international inspections of nuclear weapons .
 To the extent reliable information is important for the conduct of nonproliferation policies, international inspections are vital . International inspections of nuclear weapons are vital, says Peter Bergen .
 International institutions should be used and empowered, not bypassed by unilateral action . They must be allowed to run their course, however lengthy and tiresome the process must be, says David Cameron . International institutions must be used, says Cameron .
 Rollback did not occur by a major change in the Libyan political system, as was the case in South Africa, Brazil, Argentina, South Korea and Taiwan . Rollback didn't occur by major changes to Libya's political system .
 Belarus, Ukraine and Kazakhstan have not had diplomatic campaigns and economic assistance . Nor was it the result of public diplomatic campaigns or economic assistance, as was the case with Belarus and Ukraine .
 The turnaround came in a period when the peak of sanctions had already passed . Sanctions seem not to have done the trick either, as the turnaround came after the peak .
 It seems that the turnaround was part of a major reconsideration of the utility of military-based power politics . Rather, it seems that it's part of the reconsideration .
 Libya shifted from power to economic growth and welfare as the best way to keep the regime in power . Libya shifted its focus from economic growth to economic prosperity . Libya has been plagued by violence and violence since the fall of the Arab Spring .
 Colonel Gaddafi seems to have been under the influence of a younger generation of leaders, notably one of his own sons . Colonel Gaddafi has been under influence of younger generations of leaders in Libya .
 The end result was a complete, supervised dismantling of WMD stocks and facilities . WMD stock and facilities were dismantled in a supervised dismantling .
 Gaddafi gave priority to normalisation with the West, abandoning his nuclear programme and aligning himself with the existing international order . Like de Klerk, Gaddafi wanted normalisation of the West .
 Libya has opened its nuclear programme for international verification, full-scale . Also like South Africa, Libya has also opened its programme for inspection . Libya's nuclear programme is now being verified by international inspectors .
 North Korea skipped its weapons programme in return for normalisation with the U.S. and the rest of the world . North Korea says it would be willing to, on and off, without any change of government . It skipped its programme in exchange for normalising with the United States and
 Five years later, the Libyan political system remains much the same, while in North Korea it is commonly assumed that far-reaching normalisation will trigger major changes in the system of government .
 In the night of 6 September 2007, Israeli jets bombed a building complex at A1 Kibar, Syria, next to the Euphrates river . The building complex was bombed by Israeli jets in the night .
 Israeli and American intelligence concluded that the target was a camouflaged nuclear reactor under construction . The reactor was built in cooperation with North Korea, Israel and U.S. intelligence concluded .
 A photograph released by the intelligence agencies showed the head of the Syrian Atomic Energy Commission and a senior official of the North Korean nuclear programme standing together at the site .
 The IAEA confirmed thal the complex bore features resembling those of a nuclear reactor . The imagery of the site showed similarities with the graphite reactor building at Yongbyon . Syria had removed the debris from the bombed facility and covered the entire site with concrete .
 The Syrians say the complex was a conventional military factory . They say the uranium traces were of Israeli origin and that no foreigners had been involved .
 By the turn of 2009/2010, much remained to be understood regarding the relationship to other nuclear activities in and out of Syria and about the procurement activities and the financial aspects of it all . National intelligence seems to have had it right on this occasion .
 The agreemeni obliged il to notify the Agency as soon as construction of new nuclear facilities starts . The agreement was reached by the European Union in 2007 .
 Israel in effect reiterated that it does not tolerate other nuclear-weapon states in the Middle East, but in so doing violated international law . Israel said in effect it did not tolerate any nuclear-weapons states in Middle East .
 The IAEA emphasised thal as soon as the Israelis and the Americans had information about an illegal nuclear facility coming up, they should have notified the Agency . The Agency said .
 The IAEA learned about the bombing from the media, and was asked to search for evidence in the rubble . Instead, it was asked by the media to find out what happened . The bombing was the first of its kind in Syria .
 To maintain its nuclear monopoly in the Middle East, Israel seems determined to take preventive action . Israel seems to be determined to keep nuclear monopoly .
 This is the so-called Begin doctrine, named after Prime Minister Menachem Begin, who authorised the 1981 strike on the Frenchsupplied reactors in Iraq .
 The nonproliferation regime is weak when it comes to enforcement, Israel says . Israel has no confidence in the regime, and Israel has little confidence in it, he says .
 The following is a list of propositions for which there is some evidence that are all qualified in various ways . The list includes propositions that are qualified for evidence .
 The qualifications, discussed at some length above, are only hinted at here . The qualifications for the role in the role are only alluded to here .
 All proliferators have invoked security concerns to justify their weapons acquisitions . But other factors may have been as or more important . Alleviate security concerns can be as important as security concerns .
 Sometimes, threat perceptions have been alleviated through alliances, extended nuclear deterrence, other kinds of security assurances and improved conflict management . Sometimes, alliances have alleviated threat perceptions .
 South Africa traded its nuclear programme for normalisation with the West and bona fide status in international affairs . South Africa's nuclear programme was normalised in exchange for genuine international status .
 First, it tried to become a legitimate member of both the Arab and African community of nations, but felt rejected and sought a stronger platform for itself by embarking on a nuclear-weapon programme .
 North Korea dropped its nuclear programme in return for acceptance by the Western world . When that failed to pay off, it dropped the nuclear programme altogether . North Korea's nuclear programme was eventually abandoned in 2009 .
 In the case of Libya, state security was solidified without any change in the system of government . In the South African case, regime change was another condition for universal acceptance, whereas in Libya, it was not .
 Myanmar is doing something in the direction of a weapons option, these experiences may be useful in crafting policies to roll it back . Myanmar's experiences could be useful to crafting policies that roll back, writes Andrew Hammond .
 During the Cold War, the superpowers threatened each other’s clients and responded by tying them closer to their own camps, thereby suppressing inclinations to proliferate . The superpowers threaten each other's clients and tied them closer together .
 These non-proliferation gains were spin-offs of Cold War dynamics in essence, non-Proliferation for free . The gains are spin-off of Cold war dynamics, says author .
 The U.S. is willing to enhance the defences of South Korea and Taiwan over again if this is what it takes to prevent them from building nuclear weapons .
 Today it is unclear how much the big powers are able and willing to do to prevent proliferation . Iran and North Korea have shown how little they can do to stop proliferation .
 For small and medium-sized states, strong security concerns can make status considerations next to irrelevant . Security concerns can also make status irrelevant for small or medium-size states .
 The status gains have been quite important for the majority of NWS . However, for the most of the NWS, they have been very important .
 The best way to reduce the status value of nuclear weapons is to scale arsenals down and introduce doctrines that limit their functions, writes Andrew Hammond . Hammond: "The best way of reducing nuclear weapons' status value is to reduce their status value .
 Unqualified assurances not to use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against NNWS are significant steps in that direction . The U.S. government has pledged to refrain from using nuclear weapons in the region .
 In Iran, the national consensus on nuclear issues is built around an allegedly civilian high-technology prestige programme . Iran's nuclear programme is built on an allegedly high-tech prestige programme, says Iran's president .
 Playing status substitutes up applying imagination to such options across technological sectors, nuclear and non-nuclear, and in the structuring of international affairs is therefore another, complementary approach to playing the status value of nuclear weapons down . Playing status down is a complementary approach to the approach of playing the
 It may go on for years, waiting for external and/or internal constellations to offer special opportunities for diplomatic breakthroughs .
 China and others have played for time and still do, hoping for propitious moments to appear . In the case of North Korea, China and other countries have played time and hope for time . North Korea and China are hoping for time to come to terms .
 The first steps away from the nuclear brink tend to be slow and incremental and sometimes non-linear . The first step away from nuclear brink tends to be incremental and incremental .
 Diplomats need to watch the relative strength of different points of view and assess the direction in which national debates are moving is critically important in any diplomatic effort .
 By then, nuclear technologies would be too widely spread for supply restraints to have much effect . Nuclear technologies would then be too widespread spread to affect supply restraints .
 Even if proliferation cannot be stopped by technology denial, valuable time can still be bought this way . Even if technology denial can't be stopped, it can still buy valuable time with time .
 Over the years, technology transfers have been tightened and export controls enhanced . Technology transfers have also been tightened in recent years .
 Denials have been extended into broader sanctions regimes . In particular cases, denials have also been extended .
 Beyond winning time, however, the effectiveness of such measures is questionable . The effectiveness of these measures are questionable .
 They may as well isolate the state of concern and harden its will to carry the weapons ambition through . They may also harden their will to continue to carry out the weapons ambitions through .
 When the Cold War ended and the Cubans withdrew from Angola, de Klerk seized the opportunity to take South Africa back from nuclear to non-nuclear-weapon status .
 Pro-nuclear mythmakers tend to argue the case for nuclear-weapon acquisition irrespective of changes in their environment . Pro-nuke mythmakers often argue that nuclear weapons should be acquired regardless of the environment .
 Egypt's Nasser and South Africa's Vorster were carriers of strong beliefs . Egypt’s Nasser, South Africa’S Vorster also carriers of beliefs .
 Mythmakers cannot be expected to change their minds, so they can only be stopped by technical, economic and political obstacles, or by removing them from power . Mythmakers are not expected to be able to change minds .
 Multiple strategic myths may co-exist and compete with each other, widening the potential leverage of external actors . At any given time and in any given country, multiple strategic myths are competing, say experts .
 Countries that abandoned nuclear-weapon programmes in the past, but maintain some significant capability, are cases of continued concern .
 These countries remain sensitive to changes in the international security environment, and their policies may change with changes in their ruling elites . These countries may change their policies with the change of their ruling elite .
 In Argentina and Brazil, nationalist governments that claim a stronger role for themselves in international affairs may once again turn their countries towards nuclear option .
 When leaders fear for the security of their nation and/or their own regime while thinking at least as highly of themselves as of their opponents, the temptation to launch a nuclear-weapons programme is strong .
 Effective measures may be needed to alleviate security concerns and satisfy national and personal pride . Effective measures are needed both to alleviate the security concerns .
 Iran is under threat, first of all from Israel and the US . In the nuclear field, the rich Persian civilisation is inferior to the young and shaky Pakistani neighbour, which is an NWS .
 In Taiwan, Argentina and Brazil, the transition from military to civilian rule was crucial in steering their nuclear programmes away from weapons acquisition . The transition between military and civilian rule is crucial in the transition .
 Statistical support for the liberalisation thesis is meagre, but qualitative analyses of specific cases suggest that proponents of openness are less likely to seek nuclear weapons than governments wanting to shut out .
 Closed societies stand out as an aberration in a globalised environment where everything moves easily across borders . One explanation may be that closed societies are more isolated than normal societies .
 The governments of such countries risk being beleaguered and may turn to nuclear options in response to the threat of a nuclear attack .
 Knowing that the United States and its Western partners may be willing to buy wouldbe proliferators off, nuclear aspirants have sometimes played their ambitions up in order to maximise the compensation they might receive for pulling back .
 North Korea demands compensation for crises of its own making . North Korea is famous for this tactic, demanding compensation .
 Nuclear programmes are made up of hundreds of decisions, some of which may escape political control . Apply the Additional Protocol on nuclear programmes .
 Scientists and engineers may be tempted to take their research in new directions out of curiosity, without any long-term objective in mind .
 Additional Protocol covers wider set of fissile material-re/atec/ activities . Application of the Additional Protocol can help to institute a stricter non-nuclear-weapon culture .
 During the Cold War, there were indications that big power detente and arms control were conducive to non-proliferation . The Cold War was a period of tension between North Korea and Russia .
 Today, disarmament is high on the agenda along with arms control, but single steps towards disarmament may have little or no impact if there is nothing more on the cards . Arms control and disarmament are both on the agendas today .
 NWS are caving in and modernising their systems, and the Chinese, Indians and Pakistanis are expanding their arsenals . For instance, states of proliferation concern would hardly be impressed by further reductions in United States and Russian arsenals as long as three-digit numbers remain .
 The non-proliferation norm anchored in the NPT is essential for the cause of Non-Proliferation . The norm is anchored in NPT, and it is essential to the cause, writes Peter Bergen .
 Ensuring the viability of the NPT may be the single most important way to stem proliferation . Ensuring NPT's viability is key to stopping proliferation, experts say .
 Better and more balanced implementation of the Treaty is therefore of cardinal importance . The Treaty was signed by the U.S. in 1994 .
 The non-proliferation norm is upheld by the nuclear-weapon-free zones as well . The zones are part of the non-nuclear-weapons-free zone in South Korea .
 They may withdraw from the Treaty, protesting the imbalanced implementation of rights and obligations, and do so with relative impunity, for they would still be under an international legal obligation to stay non-nuclear and be subject to NPT-type safeguards .
 If a number of NWFZ members were to do that, others may follow suit and the NPT unravel . The NPT could unravel if it were to follow suit .
 The probability that this would happen may be low, but should US-Russian disarmament negotiations get stuck and the U.S. disarmament ambition falter it is worth watching .
 The U.S. has been effective in its rollback endeavours when it has been in a position to offset security threats facing potential proliferators . The crucial role of the United States has been crucial in the fight against proliferation .
 In Europe, alliance commitments contained and marginalised proliferation interests . In the U.S. alliance commitments contain and marginalise proliferation interests. In the UK, the alliance has been in the forefront of proliferation efforts.
 In East Asia, enhanced security assurances rolled South Korea and Taiwan back . South Korea, Taiwan and South Korea were rolled back .
 When the objective has been to overthrow another regime, that regime has had little incentive to negotiate . The objective of overthrowing another regime has been the overthrow of that regime, says the BBC .
 For an international regime to function properly, somebody has to exercise leadership. For the sake of the international regime, somebody must exercise leadership . For the first time, someone has been in charge of the U.S. military in the past .
 While the Bush administration took a selective view of the NPT, the Obama administration is mindful of the totality of the regime . Obama administration has assumed a high-profile leadership role .
 Israel is known to have a nuclear arsenal without any confinued testing . In addition, Israel also has a known nuclear arsenal . Israel has not tested any nuclear weapons .
 North Korea acceded to the NPT in 1985, but left the Treaty in 2003 as the only country to have done so . North Korea is only country not to sign the treaty since it was signed in 1985 .
 Non-nuclear-weapon states can build such weapons in a matter of weeks or a few months if they decide to do so . Some non-nuclear weapons can be built in just a few weeks or months .
 The number of states possessing ready-made weapons has increased only slowly . There is concern that ‘virtual arsenals’ may now be growing faster, nurtured and legitimised by nuclear power .
 The key to virtual capabilities is national fuel-cycle facilities and fissile materials on stock . The U.S. needs to be able to make a virtual presence in the region .
 Iranian leaders have indicated that they may seek such a status, similar to that of Japan . Iran has said it may seek a similar status similar to Japan's .
 While “creeping in” under the testing criterion may be legal under the NPT, it is not necessarily legitimate . However, while ‘creeping into’s’ under the test criterion may have been legal, it may not be legitimate . “Cre
 Rollback is a process in the opposite direction, reversing intentions and/or capabilities to acquire nuclear arms . Rollback reverses intentions and capabilities of acquiring nuclear arms, such as nuclear weapons . Rollbacks are a process of reversing intentions or capabilities to obtain nuclear arms.
 More than 20 states have “done something” in the direction of a weapons option and then abandoned it . Throughout the nuclear age, more than 20 countries have "done something"
 Virtual arsenals have a destabilising effect, especially in regions of conflict such as the Middle East, calling for transparency and constraints on such capabilities . The Middle East has called for transparency of such capabilities and constraints .
 Additional Protocol to the standard NPT safeguards agreement is implementation of the Additional Protocol . Verification is a measure of verification of the NPT's NPT agreement .
 The Agency can only verify the non-diversion of declared nuclear material and activities . Without it, the Agency can't verify the nuclear material .
 Application of the Protocol may deter states from developing weaponoriented capabilities in secret, and make others more confldent that they know what is going on . Application of this Protocol could deter states developing weapon oriented capabilities . The Protocol is designed to prevent the development of secret weapons .
 It limits the scope of uncertainty and the potential for suspicions and misunderstandings, it says . The government has been criticized for its lack of transparency in recent years .
 From November 2003 to February 2006, Iran allowed the IAEA to apply the Additional Protocol . Iran allowed Iran to use the Protocol from 2003 to 2006 .
 In Iran, there were more comprehensive inspections in Iran than in any other country in the world . Iran is one of the most secretive countries to inspect Iran's nuclear facilities .
 It no longer provides early design information of upcoming facilities . Also no longer publishes information about upcoming facilities.
 Recurrent demands that Iran agrees to the Additional Protocol are made with the knowledge that nobody can prove a negative and in the hope that incriminating evidence will be found .
 Ostensibly requested in order to enable Iran ‘to come clean’, they enhance suspicions as much as they build confidence . Ostensibly they are to help Iran “come clean” as well as to build confidence, they have been requested .
 Iran is widely suspected of having weapons intentions, and as long as it is under threat of military attack, there is not much hope of changing this predicament . As long as Iran is suspected of wanting weapons, it will not be able to change its situation .
 The closer Iran comes to a nuclear-weapon capability, the more important it is to place those capabilities under the best possible safeguards . The situation is increasingly untenable, writes CNN's Peter Bergen, who says it is untenable .
 Another possible restraint is multinationalisation of fuel-cycle facilities . Multinational fuel-cycles could be multinationalised .
 President Ahmadinejad mentioned the possibility of multinational fuel-cycle facilities in Iran . Iran's president has made a visit to the UN to discuss the issue .
 Such proposals raise complex technological, organisational, financial and political questions and may lead to long and arduous negotiations . However, such proposals raise . complex technological and organisational questions .
 Far from being any quick fix, they can be excellent vehicles for buying time . Far more than quick fixes, they are excellent vehicles to buy time .
 From a regime point of view, internationalisation of all fuel-cycle facilifies, existing ones included, would be better than occasional, multilateral ones . Internationalisation of the fuel cycle would be a better regime, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 Special treatment of special cases may be warranted, but equal treatment is the regime norm . Equal treatment is not warranted for special cases, but it's the norm .
 If backed by the big powers, which have such facilities themselves, other states would find it hard to resist . The U.S. could be hard-pressed to find a solution to the problem .
 This is another long-term proposition that may consolidate a solution to the Iranian problem, but hardly something that can't be implemented in time to help create it . However attractive, this is another attractive proposition, but not a solution .
 Supply assurances of fuel supply solid enough to convince states to forego national fuel-cycle facilities . Supply assurances could be enough to persuade states to skip national facilities .
 This is objectionable on political grounds, and for states that have big deposits of uranium on their territories, enrichment may also be an attractive business proposition . For states with big uranium deposits on their territory, enrichment could also be attractive business propositions .
 The Framework for a Long-term Agreement offered by the E3/EU on 5 August 2005 contained fuel assurances fo Iran in return for halting all fuel-cycle activities there .
 The Europeans committed themselves to assist in the establishment of a buffer store of fuel, sufficient to maintain supplies for a period of five years . The Europeans commit themselves to . establishing a . buffer store .
 International supply arrangements can never be as reliable as domestic sources of supply . The buffer store would be located outside Iran, but the credibility of these assurances were high .
 They were made by a group of states and communicated to all interested parties through an international organisation . So could not be withdrawn by any single government . They were communicated to the world through an organisation .
 A broader separation of civilian and military applications could be established by limiting the scale of fuel-cycle activities to a level below that required for weapons production . The U.S. could also establish a broader separation between civilian applications and military .
 A compromise would allow for research and development on enrichment and/or reprocessing . It would provide a mobilisation base for rapid construction of national industrial plants in case fuel supplies were interrupted .
 Western demand was always that Iran should give up any and all fuel-cycle activities . Believing that Iran would buckle under pressure, the Western demanded that Iran give up all its fuel-related activities .
 Iran insists on exercising its sovereign rights under the NPT . It has made mastery of the entire fuel-cycle a matter of national pride . Iran insists it has no obligation to stop Iran developing nuclear weapons .
 For Iran, the right to enrich on its own territory is a red line in any forthcoming negotiation . Iran has a long history of enriching its own country's own territory .
 Opinion poll shows that 89 per cent of the population believe that Iran should master the uranium-enrichment process .
 Rollback is a process reversing intentions and/or capabilities to acquire nuclear arms . The politics of rollback is the politics of rollingback . Rollback reverses intentions and capabilities of acquiring nuclear arms, experts say .
 From a longer list of lessons from rollback experiences,""" the following appear relevant to the Iranian case,"" the author says . The Iranian government is accused of trying to rollback Iran's oil wealth .
 All proliferators have invoked security concerns. Alleviation of security concerns is an improvement . Alleviated security concerns have been raised in the past .
 Security considerations have always been used to legitimise nuclear-weapons ambitions . Other factors may have been more important, but security considerations have been used as a legitimisation .
 Non-nuclear Iran is surrounded by NWS Israel, Pakistan, Russia and the United States . Iran is very conscious of the imbalances that this creates, says Iranian diplomat .
 At various points in their histories, the leaders of Israel and Pakistan became convinced that the possession of nuclear weapons would deter attacks on them . The leaders of both countries are convinced that such weapons will deter attacks against them .
 The Iranian programme was restarted in the midst of the Iran-lraq war, when the country suffered very high casualties and was attacked with chemical weapons .
 Whether Iran knew of Saddam’s secret nuclear-weapon programme is unclear, but if it did, this would have been another reason to bring the programme back up to speed .
 Ayatollah Khomeini turned his back on the Shah’s nuclear ambitions in favour of resuming the programme . There is little doubt that it was the security arguments that made him change his attitude .
 First Gulf War demonstrated that nobody could match U.S. high-tech conventional power . Gulf War reinforced arguments that the United States could match conventional power, author says .
 Iraq was believed to possess chemical and biological weapons but had no nuclear arms and was occupied . North Korea had nuclear weapons and was not attacked, while Iraq was occupied and not attacked . Iraq believed to have no nuclear weapons but was occupied, while North Korea was not .
 In recent years, the strong U.S. military presence on Iran’s doorstep and the cascade of security-related developments in the aftermath of 9/11 have accentuated the relevance of nuclear weapons . The strong United States military presence in Iran has accentuated .
 The United States Navy has extensive support and logistical facilities in Qatar, Bahrain, the UAE and Oman . The U.S. Navy has a major airbase in Qatar .
 There are a large number of well-supported United States troops in Iraq and Afghanistan . Israel, the only resident NWS in the Middle East, enjoys staunch United States support and cooperates with Turkey and India .
 Iranian perceptions of encirclement are based on stark realities . Iranian perceptions are therefore based upon stark realities, says Iranian diplomat .
 In periods of dire threat such as in the aftermath of the occupation of Iraq, when it was feared that Iran would be next, Iran was feared to be next . Security concerns cannot but strengthen the interest in nuclear weapons, the author says .
 There is no doubt that Iranian security concerns bring the nuclear-weapon option to mind . There is also a need to put it to rest, and alleviation of threats and assurances are important .
 Some analysts say Iran's nuclear ambitions are the primary motivation for its nuclear ambitions . Others argue status ambitions are more important than status ambitions .
 Karl Marx said that the most effective power is the structural one that functions without being used . Karl Marx: Most effective power in the world is to be used in structural structures . Resolve status concerns are key to resolving status concerns in the country .
 In international affairs, this is military force, nuclear weapons being the ultimate expression of destructive power . In international . affairs, the nuclear weapons are military force . In . international affairs .
 States tend to adjust, consciously or subconsciously, to the perceived distribution of power in their surroundings . States have a fine eye for who is more powerful and who is less powerful .
 In this way, nuclear weapons are important in order to gain political influence and higher infemational standing, says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Putin says nuclear weapons must be used to gain influence in the Middle East .
 Egypt is aware that Iran is undermining its traditional political leadership role in the region . In the Middle East, it has gained greatly from U.S. actions in Iraq and Afghanistan, and in Arab streets its opposition to Israel and the United States has paid off Egypt .
 Nuclear capabilities are signs of technological advancement and potential nuclear-weapon status . Nuclear capabilities may be used to this avail, but it is no simple way of projecting power .
 In response to Iran’s ascendancy, members of the Gulf Cooperation Council are launching their own nuclear programmes . They are seeking military partnerships with the U.S. and other Western countries .
 Saudi Arabia and others are trying to counter Iranian influence in Lebanon, Palestine and Syria . Saudi Arabia wants to counter Iran's influence in Syria, Lebanon and Palestine .
 Iran’s economic power base is unimpressive, but its oil and gas deposits make it attractive for rapidly expanding Asian economies . In the wider Asian context, Iran's economic power . Iran's oil wealth makes it attractive to rapidly expanding Asia economies, analysts say .
 Traditionally, Iran has been oriented at least as much to the North and East as to the West . Iran has developed its relations to a great many Asian states .
 Single reductions of U.S. and Russian nuclear arsenals to 1,000 deployed strategic weapons for each with no promise of further cuts will hardly impress Iran or any other potential proliferator .
 If disarmament becomes a trend, the costs of contravening it will be higher . It will be more difficult for the U.S. to comply with disarmament rules .
 Status gains accrue not only from military applications of nuclear energy . Status gains also accrue from military uses of nuclear power, says U.S. official .
 Civilian programmes can be powerful expressions of technological sophistication and yield significant status benefits, especially if they cover the entire fuel cycle . Civilian programmes can also be powerful expression of technological sophisticated sophistication .
 Iran's national consensus on nuclear issues is built around an allegedly civilian high-tech prestige programme . In Iran, the national consensus has been built around a 'civilian' nuclear programme . Iran's nuclear programme is built on a 'non-military' programme .
 The enrichment works in Natanz and the constmction of a big research reactor in Arak have reached such an advanced stage and enjoy so much support all across the political spectrum that it will be hard to reverse .
 The stability of such decision points, stopping just a little short of weaponisation, is doubtful . However, the stability of these decision points is doubtful, it's doubtful .
 To reassure others that the nuclear-weapon option is not being pursued, constraints are necessary . The U.S. should not be pursuing nuclear-weapons option, it is necessary to reassure others .
 When leaders fear for the security of their nation and/or their regime, there is an asymmetry that cries out for correction . Leaders fear for their nation, while thinking at least as highly of themselves as of their neighbours .
 Pakistan is a nuclear-weapon state while Iran is not, yet Pakistan is young and unstable state . Iran represents a distinguished age-old civilisation. Pakistan is not a nuclear weapon state .
 Teheran’s most oft-repeated demand is that the U.S. must change the way it sees and treats Iran, its regional role and aspirations . The United States needs to change its view of Iran, Iran's aspirations and its role in the region .
 Status asymmetries must be alleviated as a matter of priority, says Dr. Andrew Hammond . The status asymmetry must be eased, he says .
 "Over and over again, Iran has asked to be treated with fairness and respect," says President Obama . "Iran has asked for fair treatment," says Obama .
 For Iran that kind of dialogue symbolizes the unequal relationship the U.S. has sought to impose under cover of mutual respect, Iran says . For Iran, it symbolizes an unequal relationship with the United States .
 Iraq claims respect for its intrinsic religious, economic, cultural, political and historical presence and influence there .
 The fax offered to stop material support to Hamas, Islamic Jihad and Hezbollah and to help turn them into political organisations . This is a prerequisite for full normalisation of US-Iranian relations . The fax was sent to Washington in May 2003 .
 A high level of overall confidence would make tight constraints beyond international regime standards superfluous, says the U.S. State Department .
 Iranian aspirations to lead the Muslim world in its fight against Israel and in support of the Palestinians, make this a distant prospect . However, unwavering U.S. support for Israel and Iran's support for the Palestinians makes this unlikely prospect . The United States is likely to continue to support
 The West does not accept Iran becoming an NWS, and political reconciliation is unlikely to evolve fast enough to make it live comfortably with an advanced Iranian virtual arsenal . It is unlikely the West will be able to live comfortably in Iran's virtual arsenal, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Myths grow out of strong convictions and are therefore hard to change . Attend to the activities of nuclear mythmakers at the events of nuclear myths .
 In the public domain, there are few mythmakers of any significance no Iranian Ali Bhutto who said he would push for nuclear weapons even if the Pakistanis had to eat grass . In the past, there have been a number of mythmakers in the world .
 It is not far-fetched to assume that in the Iranian Revolutionary Guard Corps and among second-generation revolutionaries, pro-nuclear mythmakers do exist, but that they do not find it opportune to go public or are not allowed to do so . Still, it's not far
 The role of religion and of the religious mythmakers is debatable . Also, the role of the religion and the religious . mythmakers are debatable.
 One interpretation holds that it is no different from the role that religion has played in so many other countries in human history, i.e. that of legitimising political interests . One interpretation is that it has played a role in legitimising the country's interests .
 The United States National Intelligence Estimate of November 2007 also emphasised the rationality of the system . Iran is susceptible to foreign influence, according to the U.S. intelligence .
 The government of Iran was willing to and capable of adapting to changes in its environment and to be a partner in real negotiations . Iran is willing to adapt to changes to its environment, says the Iranian government .
 After the presidential elections in the summer of 2009, the leadership group got embroiled in internal conflicts and fell apart . The leadership group fell apart after the elections in 2009 .
 Big organisations try to maintain and expand their own status and influence, says organisation theory . Reduce the role of the military in the UK to reduce the need for the military .
 In Iran, the military organisation to be watched is primarily the IRGC/ Pasdaran . The IRGC is the main military organisation in Iran .
 The Army and the Iranian Atomic Energy Organisation were inherited from the shah . They play more modest roles in the country's military and nuclear programme .
 Ahmadinejad's election brought people from the Pasdaran into high government offices . To refer to the leadership in Teheran as ‘the priesthood is inaccurate is inaccurate,’ says Iranian journalist .
 The closer the nuclear programme comes to a weapon capability, the greater the influence of the Pasdaran will be. It is commonly assumed that the interests in military applications of nuclear energy reside first and foremost with the nuclear industry .
 To make Iran refrain from weapons pursuits, it is important to constrain the influence of this organisation and the second-generation revolutionaries who liaise with it . Iran must refrain from pursuing weapons pursuits .
 The ups and downs of Pasdaran are, however, first and foremost, a function of domestic political dynamics, say experts . The ups, downs are the result of domestic politics, they say, and the country's political stability is key .
 There is not much that external actors can do to change the situation, except indirectly . There are not much external actors that can do so much to change it, especially indirectly .
 The Iranian regime has had few problems living with U.S. sanctions . Iran has been hit hard by the Obama administration in recent years .
 Using U.S. hostility to legitimise and enhance its own position, it has even turned them into its own benefit . Using United States hostility . It has used the hostility of the United States as a means of legitimising and enhancing its position .
 UN sanctions have been harder to swallow, not because they have actually been modest . Iran seeks recognition as a regional power and legitimate partner in international affairs and that ambition does not square with international condemnation .
 Policies that allow it to become a bona fide partner in international cooperation provided that the non-proliferation norm is respected may therefore be instrumental in keeping it away from nuclear weapons . Policies could be instrumental to keep it from using nuclear weapons.
 Openness to the outside world is positively correlated with degree of democratic practice . Openness of democracy is correlated with openness to the world's outside world, study finds .
 Countries undergoing democratisation often find it particularly important to be seen as norm-abiding . Countries undergoing democraticisation find it important to see themselves as 'norms-abiding'
 Iran is in many ways more democratic than most other countries in the Middle East . The chaos following the 2009 elections significantly curtailed civil liberties .
 Factions compete for influence and their relative importance is changing back and forth . Factions are competing for influence in the United States, says CNN.com .
 There are no signs of a well-functioning democracy at the end of any tunnel. There is nothing unidirectional about it. There are nothing uni directional about the situation .
 Deeper involvement in international economic, cultural, scientific and political affairs needs to be stimulated in other ways . The UK has been in touch with the U.S. with many of the world's most powerful countries .
 Sanctions are standing in the way, whereas membership in the WTO and other organisations may turn it into a stakeholder in organised international cooperation . Sanctions stand in way, but membership in WTO could turn it to an important role in international cooperation, says David Cameron .
 A strong non-proliferation norm may be among the most important factors in stemming proliferation and inducing rollback . Better and more balanced implementation of the NPT is therefore fundamentally important .
 Implementation of Article VI of the Treaty the disarmament article is of vital importance in this connection . Implementation of the treaty's disarmament Article VI is vital to disarmament in the future .
 If a dynamic interplay evolves between the vision of an NWFW and specific measures towards that end, drawing all NWS into systematic and progressive reductions will be healthier . The original bargain between nonproliferation, disarmament and peaceful uses will be much healthier .
 Potential proliferators will find it harder to go ahead and be more easily targeted for countervailing action . If this were to happen, potential proliferators would find it .
 It is more costly to work against an established trend in the international system, especially if it is jointly developed by the big powers . It's more costly for big powers to go against established trend, especially in the world's most powerful countries .
 President Obama easily wins the war of words over big power hypocrisy and discrimination charges . Calling for an NWFW, Obama easily beats the charges of discrimination and hypocrisy .
 He acknowledges the protests of double standards and wants to eliminate all nuclear weapons . He acknowledges that he acknowledges that double standards .
 To make a real difference, however, declaratory policies must be followed by action, says David Cameron . "To make a difference, there must be action," he says .
 Diplomatic involvement to buy time has been an important element in many rollback campaigns . Buy time is an important part of the rollback campaign, says David Cameron .
 It may be applied for years, waiting for external and/or internal changes to offer special opportunities for breakthroughs . It may take years to apply for years to find a breakthrough .
 Talks with EU3/EU bought time in so far as Iran suspended its enrichment works between 2003 and 2005 . Talks with the EU3 and EU bought time for Iran to suspend its enrichment .
 The suspension was made as a condition for negotiations meant time lost . Beyond that, however, the suspension meant time was lost for negotiations .
 When Obama entered the White House he put it straight, offering negotiations without preconditions . Obama offered to negotiate with the president of the U.S. without making concessions .
 The timelines were critical, for the risk was that the nuclear programme would be racing ahead of progress in the negotiations . The risk is that the risk would be . be that the . nuclear programme . would be raced ahead of . progress in progress in negotiations .
 At that juncture, a formula for buying time was a double freeze, i.e. a halt to further enrichment and to further sanctions while new opportunities were explored . At that time, the formula was a halt . i.E. stopped to further enrichments and further sanctions .
 In the spring of 2009, the contours of the new U.S. strategy were coming into focus . Iran and the United States have been involved in the Middle East .
 The United States was ready to participate in multilateral nuclear talks in the P5+1 framework . The U.S. is ready to initiate a dialogue with Iran without preconditions, the president said .
 The sanctions would be maintained, and efforts were made to build broad coalitions with a view to increasing the pressure on Iran if negotiations were to fail . The U.N. Security Council said it would maintain the sanctions against Iran .
 No “artificial” deadlines for progress were set, but a review would be made by the turn of 2009/2010 . No ‘artificial deadlines’ were set .
 The coalition-building aimed at making Russia more cooperative and at mobilising Arab support for U.S. policies . The coalition aims to make Russia cooperate with the Arab world .
 The message to Russia was that if it joined the U.S. in a successful attempt to keep Iran non-nuclear, there might be no need for a missile shield on its borders in Eastern Europe . The message was that Russia might join the United States in a failed bid to keep
 Originally understood to be an exercise in linkage politics, this was later said to be a statement of fact . Originally thought to have been an exercise of link politics, it has now been revealed to be fact .
 Cancellation of the missile shield plans for Poland and the Czech Republic would in turn facilitate disarmament negotiations between the U.S. and Russia, possibly leading in due course to multilateral disarmament talks .
 If successful, it would put broader, concerted pressure on Iran not to rock the boat by acting in contravention to the joint US-Russian efforts . The move would put greater pressure on the Iranian regime not to act contrary to US-Russia efforts .
 The plans for Poland and the Czech Republic were subsequently abandoned, paving the way for another disarmament agreement to replace START I . But Russian cooperation on Iran remained open to doubt, with Russia's cooperation on the country still uncertain .
 Ten years ago when Russia had to swallow a series of humiliating political defeats at the hands of the United States and the West it became a litmus test of an independent Russian foreign policy .
 Russia was selling weapons to Iran; cooperated with Iran on peaceful uses of nuclear energy . Russia wanted to cooperate on issues of petroleum policy . Russia was also selling weapons and cooperating with Iran in the past .
 A closer Iranian alliance with the West could jeopardise Iran's role as the main gas supplier to Europe . Iran is currently the main supplier of natural gas to the continent . A closer Iran-West alliance would jeopardise its role as a key gas supplier .
 Russia does not want Iran to fall back into the Western sphere of interest . Russia wants Iran to avoid falling back into its sphere of interests . Iran is a key ally of the West .
 Asia’s rapid economic development and growing political influence provide an impetus in that direction . Asia's rapid economic . development and . growing political . influence provides an impetus for that .
 U.S. cooperation with Russia on Iran will not come easily, says CNN's John Sutter . Russia's cooperation with the United States on Iran is not easy, he says .
 To get the Arabs on board, the U.S. leaned on Israel to be more forthcoming towards the Palestinians . The United States was leaning on Israel for being more forthcoming .
 President Obama’s insistence that Israel stop building new settlements was another go at something previous presidents failed to achieve . President Obama's insistence on Israel stopping new settlements, natural expansion of existing settlements included included .
 The United States took care to brief moderate Arab states about its policies and diplomacy towards Iran . The U.S. extended a hand to Syria, Iran’s only ally in the Middle East, and extended a . hand .
 Israeli politics has moved distinctly to the right, and Obama failed to stop the expansion of settlements . Israeli politics had moved distinctly right to the left, Obama says .
 Iran’s vocal opposition to Israeli and U.S. policies and material support for Hamas, Islamic Jihad, Hezbollah and other groups fighting Israel had earned it much support on the Arab streets .
 The nearer one came to Iran, the more the Arab states feared the consequences of a war with it . The closer the closer Iran comes to the region, Arab states fear the consequences .
 Many Arab states were launching programmes for civilian applications of nuclear energy . However, Egyptian, Saudi and other Arab leaders were deeply worried about the bomb potential of the Iranian nuclear programme .
 U.S. efforts to gain Arab, Russian and other countries’ support for more severe sanctions in case engagement with Iran does not yield satisfactory results will therefore be hard-won . The United States will need to gain support for a more severe response to Iran’s engagement with
 President Obama is in a better position to rally support for his policies than George W Bush was . However, President Obama's policies are not as popular as his predecessor was .
 The single most biting sanction would be a cut-off of refined petroleum products, for which Iran still depended on import to almost 40 per cent of its total consumption .
 The U.S. might go far in the direction of accepting Iran's nuclear programme, some degree and form of enrichment on Iranian soil included, in return for full transparency . The United States might go further in the way of accepting the nuclear programme .
 There was a choice between a step-by-step approach and a comprehensive bargain, both with shortcomings and dangers . As for the negotiating procedure, there was a decision between step by-step and comprehensive bargain .
 Iranian leaders were not content with U.S. respect for Iran’s sovereignty and territorial integrity and for its Islamic regime . Iranian leaders did not want respect for United States respect for its sovereignty .
 Iran wants a negotiating framework that is conducive to recognition of its wider role in the Middle East . Iran wants to be recognized as part of a greater role in Middle East peace talks .
 Negotiation of the nuclear issues and parallel talks about Iraq, Afghanistan and other problems do not meet that desire . Negotiation is under a cloud of penalties if agreement is not reached within relatively tight time frames .
 The Iranians want to have an overarching strategic framework that enables them to discuss regional issues with the U.S. across the board . Iran wants to have a strategic framework for talks with the American superpower . The Iranian government wants to be able to reach out to the United States .
 Iran has learnt much about how to manage isolation and how to split big and small powers in their conduct of Iranian affairs, but it has little experience dealing with international openings . Iran has learned much from its experience of dealing with isolation, but has little international openings, says Iran's foreign minister
 While the demands are vague, they are nevertheless central to the management of the Iranian problem in general and the nuclear issue in particular . The demands are still vague, but they are still central to managing the Iranian issue in general .
 It has many functions beyond providing nuclear power and a nuclear-weapon option . Nuclear power is a nuclear weapon option, but it has many other functions beyond that .
 It symbolises what the Iranian civilisation can achieve; it can offset domestic discontent . It can always count on widespread nationalism in support of their defiance towards the West; and it is one of Iran’s main levers for being treated with respect and justice .
 Enrichment is first and foremost a national undertaking, although there is a crack in the door for multilateral/intemational organisation of fuel-cycle operations . There are also plans to expand the organisation into a multilateral organisation .
 Multinational and international solutions attractive, but timeconsuming to implement . Multinational solutions attractive but difficult to implement, say experts . International solutions are attractive and time-consuming, but expensive .
 A possible compromise may include comprehensive verification, solid supply assurances, constraints on the fuel-cycle programme, and exploration of multilateral/international options for the long term .
 In the face of military threats from the U.S. and Israel, it stands to reason that it has hidden materials, technology and equipment at many different locations .
 It is hard to imagine a solution in the narrow framework of nuclear issues, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 It probably takes a degree of normalisation of US-Iranian affairs and acknowledgement of Iran’s regional role to do it . The US and Iran have been at odds for decades .
 If Iran is serious about developing a weapon capability, it probably plans for enrichment somewhere other than Natanz . Iran probably plans to build a nuclear weapon out of reach of the safeguards system .
 To turn Natanz to the production of highly enriched uranium, or divert material from there for upgrading at another site, will make alarm bells ring everywhere .
 "That would mean publicity before consumption and more trouble than is, strictly speaking, necessary," says the author . "It would be more trouble for the government to get involved in that kind of thing."
 Later, this was changed to notification as soon as a decision to build a new facility had been made . Later, it was changed that notification would be made once a decision was made .
 State that is under threat of being bombed would distribute valuable equipment throughout its territory . Naturally, a state that is threatened would do so and distribute it . State of Syria would distribute the equipment throughout the territory .
 There is no proof that Iran is trying to build bombs, only plenty of suspicions . To date, there has been plenty of suspicion .
 In the run-up to the Geneva meeting, the United States made it clear that, at that juncture, there would be no talk of sanctions . The United States said in the run up to the meeting that there would not be any sanctions .
 More comprehensive sanctions would come later, if the negotiations did not bring satisfactory results . The sanctions would be imposed if the talks did not result in a satisfactory result .
 Nearly all the fuel that Argentina provided in the 1990s had been spent on fuel . Nearly all of the fuel provided in Argentina's 1990s was spent in the country .
 The United States and Iranian chief negotiators met in between the plenary sessions . It was the first such meeting in 30 years between the two countries .
 Even if Iran does not plan for production of nuclear weapons, it would obviously not like to provide information that may help Israel and the U.S. to update their target lists . The bar is high in this respect and the problems run deep, for Iran .
 The Israelis are well known to prefer bombing, and the Americans have not written that option off . In a comment, the Americans said they would consider bombing .
 The same standards should apply for all members of the international nonpro-proliferation regime . The UNNPT should not be allowed to develop nuclear arms .
 His vision of an NWFW, and the UN Security Council summit meeting on nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation that he convened in September 2009, enabled him to refute assertions of double standards . His vision was that an NWS would be able to prevent nuclear proliferation .
 Iranian leaders reacted differently to the proposal and openly criticised each other, in a reflection of the chaotic governance situation in Tehran . Iranian leaders react differently to each other's proposal .
 The common denominator was a concern that they would not receive fuel for the TRR after fulfilling their end of the deal . Iran put forward their own alternatives exporting the LEU in batches or arranging swaps of LEU and fresh fuel on Iranian soil .
 In effect, the TRR fuel issue was turned into a “take it or leave it” proposition . In effect it was turned to a ‘take it’s or leave’ proposition .
 The announcement of negotiations without preconditions and the promising first meeting between Iran and the 5+1 boiled down to stalemate over a modest measure to improve the atmosphere for substantive talks . Iran's first meeting with the 5-1 ended in stalemate .
 U.S., France and other Western countries geared up for another round of sanctions . Some Western countries believe domestic unrest has made Iran more vulnerable to external pressure .
 Congress ready for tougher application of U.S. secondary sanctions on European companies doing business with Iran . Administration seems to prefer UN route .
 Germany and other European countries warned against additional U.S. sanctions because it might simply let Chinese companies replace European ones . The United States has been criticized for imposing new sanctions on China .
 Israel demanded crippling sanctions as soon as possible . The emphasis was on targeted sanctions, primarily against the IRGC:^' Israel demanded targeting Iran's IRGC .
 In February 2010, Iran started enrichment tests to 20 per cent with a view to producing the TRR fuel itself . At that juncture, the headline was renewed focus on sanctions . Iran started enriching itself to produce the fuel .
 President Obama’s coalition building is a new twist to long-standing U.S. policies to contain Iran, running counter to Iranian efforts to correct status asymmetries . Assessment: President Obama's coalition building runs counter to Iran's efforts to change status asymmetricities .
 The US-Iranian dispute is not likely to be resolved by the United States . However, continued attempts to bring them on board did not augur well for settlement of the dispute .
 Hillary Clinton and Dennis Ross have advocated stronger pressures on the Islamic Republic . The immediate consequence will be conflict escalation, not conflict settlement, writes Peter Bergen .
 Obama’s conciliatory words do not translate into real prospects of being acknowledged as a regional actor in the wider Middle East . Iran is unlikely to yield very much on the nuclear issue, says Iran expert .
 A high-level Israeli-American working group was set up to identify more coercive options if Iran does not meet U.S. conditions . The group is set up by Israel and the United States .
 Hundreds of millions of dollars were invested to destabilise the Islamic Republic of Iran . Hundreds of thousands of dollars have been invested in destabilising Iran .
 Richard Nixon started triangle diplomacy with the Soviet Union and China . Nixon stopped the CIA’s covert operations in Tibet in Tibet .
 The new declaratory policy, substituting respect for the Islamic republic for regime change, suggests that covert programmes have been cancelled .
 Covert operations have, moreover, also been conducted by other states, and may still be . Covert ops have also been carried out by other countries, such as Russia .
 To the extent that Iran is aware of them, it may be hard to determine who is responsible . Iran may be aware of the threat, but it may not know who is behind it .
 President Obama reached out to the governments of the Middle East and competed for sympathy among ordinary citizens . President Obama has been criticized for his response to the crisis in the region .
 2009 Iranian presidential candidates were keen to present themselves as best suited to handle the new challenges and opportunities . In response to the 2009 election, Iranian presidential candidate candidates are keen to .
 U.S. offered unconditional negotiations both multilaterally and bilaterally, Iran was in no position to decline . The United States offered unconditional talks both multilateral and bilateral, Iran said .
 Obama tried to build and use leverage in case Iran was not forthcoming enough . The new opportunities were fraught with great risks for the government in Tehran . However, because of the leverage that Obama tried, the new opportunities are fraught with risks .
 Obama would be more effective than his predecessor in gaining support for severe sanctions . Democratic administrations have a stronger interventionist record than Republican ones, George W Bush aside .
 Israelis can be counted on to lean on the United States to take military action or to give a green light for Israeli bombing . All the time, the Israelis have leaned on the U.S. to take action or give the green light .
 "Since they do not believe in diplomacy, they will try to limit the diplomatic window of opportunity as much as possible," he says . "They do not think in diplomacy," he adds .
 Israel is convinced that Iran is going for the bomb; Iranian nuclear weapons are unacceptable both to Israel and to the US . Domestic United States pressure in support of Israel is known to be very strong; so, to avoid more severe sanctions or being bombed, Iran will have to go out of
 The 2007 NIE concluded with a high level of confidence that the Iranians stopped the military parts of the programme by the end of 2003 . It will be hard enough to convince the U.S. even if the 2007 NICE concluded .
 Restrictions on fuel-cycle capabilities would be necessary to lay the security concerns to rest . Even if Iran were to meet the transparency requirements of the IAEA, the concerns about a virtual Iranian arsenal are such that restrictions on the fuel cycle capabilities are necessary .
 Its officials are hardliners limiting the scope of conflict settlement . Its officials have been hardliners in the past . The U.S. government has been hard-liners in Syria .
 The more advanced the virtual arsenal becomes, the greater its influence is likely to be . However, the more advanced it becomes, it's likely to have a greater impact on the virtual world .
 Much hinges on whether discrepancies between Iranian self-perceptions and the way others see and treat them can be alleviated . Much depends on whether the discrepancies between the two can be eased .
 Iran’s security concerns should certainly not be underestimated either . Iran's security concerns shouldn’t be underestimated too .
 What is more important in its nuclear drive to negate the threats to its security or overcome the frustration over not being properly treated may be the wrong question to ask .
 Like apples and oranges, they are hard to compare, but they both translate into the nuclear programme as a favoured vehicle of change . The nuclear programme has been favoured by the Iranian government in the past .
 To be more forthcoming to Iran without jeopardising the interests of Arab states is in large measure a matter of exploiting the potential for win-win arrangements . Arab states should not jeopardise their interests of Iran .
 A third example is a Conference on Security and Cooperation in the Middle East, an idea that was discussed during the Madrid process of the early 1990s . Another example might be a free trade arrangement comprising all the countries around the Persian Gulf .
 In effect, Obama’s speech in Cairo on 4 June 2009 had important components in common with the Helsinki Final Act . The Helsinki Act was the first major speech by President Barack Obama in Cairo .
 Washington has not outlined its strategic goals, and Tehran is even less capable than before of explaining its overarching objectives in the Middle East . Tehran is now even less able than before to explain its goals in the region .
 By the beginning of 2010, another opportunity for a political solution seemed to be lost . By the end of 2010 it seemed to have been lost .
 Should Iran become an NWS, proliferation pressures would grow throughout the Middle East . Egypt, Saudi Arabia and Turkey first of all would be affected .
 Iranian virtual arsenal will be much the same, tempting others to go down the same road . If the development of a virtual arsenal is not corrected, it will tempt others to follow suit .
 The impact of a successful resolution of the conflict may also go much beyond Iran . A successful resolution will also go far beyond Iran, writes CNN's Peter Bergen .
 If a multilateral fuel-cycle venture is set up, it would be the first of its kind in a region of proliferation pressure . The venture would be first to be set up in the region .
 The Iranian problem highlights the untenable division of the world into haves and have-nots . The double standards that have been applied by the NWS can also be invoked in support of nuclear disarmament .
 The outcome of the Iran confiict is therefore rich on consequences for the non-proliferation regime for better or worse . Iran's nuclear programme could be a disaster for the U.S. and the West .
 North Korea had announced its intention to withdraw once before, on 12 March 1993, but went back on that notice on 11 June, one day before it would have taken effect . North Korea went back one day earlier, but withdrew once before .
 On 9 January 2003, it stated that it would leave the Treaty the next day in reference to the 89 days’ notice ten years earlier, which had merely been suspended . The Treaty was merely suspended, and the suspension was suspended .
 Pyongyang linked its withdrawal to the earlier notice, the legal basis for the final withdrawal arguably rested on the original grounds . North Korea's withdrawal from the Korean peninsula was linked to the original notice .
 UN Security Council failed to take any action because of disagreements among the P5, notably China and the U.S. The withdrawal was put before the Security Council, but failed to get action .
 In October 2006 it tested a nuclear explosive device, followed by another test in May 2009 . In May 2009, it tested another nuclear device .
 Some take the view that North Korea is determined to be a nuclear-weapon state . It will seek international acceptance of it, some say .
 Others believe limitations can be negotiated, but that elimination is out of reach or at least unlikely any time soon . Yet others believe limitations are possible, but elimination is unlikely .
 North Korea is a closed society more so than any other country in the world . The differences and uncertainties of interpretation stem from the fact that North Korea has a very closed society, says CNN's John Defterios .
 China and South Korea may have better intelligence on internal workings of the North Korean regime than other states . But they, too, seem to have very limited access to the regime .
 North Korea’s attitudes and intentions must be judged on the basis of its conduct of external affairs . North Korea must therefore be judged by the conduct of its external affairs, writes Kim Jong-won .
 Efforts to link them to domestic factors like leadership changes, the effects of economic sanctions, food shortages and changes of economic policy may be speculative .
 Leon Sigal has pointed out that those who believe North Korea was always headed for nuclear weapons fail to explain significant anomalies in its nuclear efforts over the past two decades . Sigal: Those who think North Korea is always headed to nuclear weapons failed to explain the anomalies .
 North Korea stopped reprocessing in 1991 and did not resume until 2003 . North Korea reprocessed in 1991, but resumed in 2003 .
 The U.S. fabricated a limited amount of fuel rods before 1994 and has yet to make more . The fuel rods were fabricated before 1994 .
 It has produced significantly less plutonium than it could have done so far so far . It has therefore produced much less plutonium .
 The U.S. has enough plutonium for four to eight weapons and is currently not producing more . Instead it has enough to produce enough plutonium to make four-to-eight nuclear weapons .
 Plutonium from the 5 MWe reactor in Yongbyon remains the only source of fissile material . The reactor was shut down for a while in 2009/2010, but by 2009/10 it had been shut down .
 To get Washington’s attention, to get negotiations going, missile and nuclear tests have been conducted and threats issued . North Korea has tested missiles and conducted nuclear tests to get Washington's attention .
 North Korea had no better choice, for absent dramatic actions the reclusive regime is off the radar screen . Its only means of alerting others to its needs and objectives are the nuclear and missile programmes .
 North Korea has taken action when implementation of agreements has been slow or absent . Iran may have seen negotiations as a way of buying time for the nuclear programme to materialise,'' North Korea says .
 It has accepted agreements that have brought significant nuclear activities to a halt . It has also angered when they have not been complied with .
 North Korea has practised tit-for-tat cooperation when Washington cooperates and retaliating when Washington reneges . North Korea practised cooperation when it cooperates with Washington when it's not .
 In game theory, such a strategy is known for its ability to turn conflict into cooperation . Such a strategy has been used in game theory for game theory purposes .
 Whether it applies all the way back to non-nuclear status is uncertain, however .
 It follows that the North Korean challenge is different from the three-state problem . North Korea challenges are different from that of the three state problem .
 Sinee in praetice they eannot beeome members of the NPT, they are long-term outliers, awaiting eomprehensive nuelear disarmament . The North Korean state of the peninsula is one of the most isolated in the world .
 North Korea is a separate ease that may be persuaded to limit its nuelear aetivities and even go back into the non-nuclear fold . North Korea, on the other hand, is a different ease that can be persuaded .
 There is always the possibility that Pyongyang has given up on that option in favour of nuclear-weapon status for the foreseeable future . With some delay this will be clear, and that with some delay, this will become clear .
 The foreign policies of the U.S. and others are not constant, and domestic politics of the DPRK may also be shifting . The foreign policy of the United States and others may not be constant .
 The Security Council issued a presidential statement condemning the long-range missile test in the spring of 2009 and imposing sanctions on three North Korean firms involved in missile trading . The DPRK Foreign Ministry stopped short of abandoning six-party talks forever .
 It called into question the commitment to “abandon all nuclear weapons and existing nuclear programs” in the September 2005 joint statement from the six-party talks in Beijing .
 A statement reconfirmed the validity of the denuclearisation agreement between the two Koreas of 1992 . That statement also reconfirms the validity .
 The only way to find out is to probe through systematic give and take, offering North Korea a peace treaty, security assurances, normalisation of relations and economic assistance in return for denuclearisation . North Korea is a state of state of war with North Korea .
 The Clinton administration did so only half-heartedly, dragging its feet in implementing the Agreed Framework of 1994 . Clinton administration was hampered by a recalcitrant Congress .
 The Bush administration closed the door at first, and when it opened it in Berlin in 2007, it was split on how to proceed . Bush administration had closed it in 2007 .
 In 2008 if moved the verification goalposts up in contravention to the 3 October 2007 agreement on “SecondPhase Actions for the Implementation of the Joint Statemenf’’,’ leaving the Obama administration with a process that had veered off course .
 It remains, therefore, to undertake a thorough and systematic probe, true to the letter and spirit of existing agreements . It remains a task for the government to find out what has happened .
 North Korea’s nuclear programme became increasingly self-sustained in line with Juche ideology . Soviet training of North Korean scientists and engineers kicked off nuclear programme .
 In 1957, the United States deployed nuclear weapons in South Korea . In the following years, the U.S. conducted military exercises there involving nuclear-capable artillery, fighterbombers and aircraft .
 In the early 1970s, enhanced North Korean nuclear efforts coincided with South Korean interests in nuclear weapons . North Korea's enhanced N. Korean nuclear effort coincided with S. Korea's interest in South Korean nuclear weapons in the 1970s .
 The United States intervened to stop deliveries of a reprocessing facility from France, a “Cirus line” reactor from Canada and a fuel fabrication plant from Belgium . The U.S. induced Seoul to ratify the NPT in 1975 .
 In 1977, the Soviet Union persuaded North Korea to join the NPT in order to be in a position to receive lightwater reactors . South Korea resumed its nuclear programme only to have South Korea resume its nuclear program .
 The U.S. persuaded the South to stop, but the North did not . Once again, the United States persuaded the Southerners to stop .
 In the early 1980s, North Korea began constructing a 5 MWe gas-graphite reactor in Yongbyon, well-suited for plutonium production, along with facilities for uranium fabrication and conversion . The reactor was built in the 1980s .
 At this time, the South was outpacing the North economically and militarily, and the North had growing doubts about the reliability of its allies, i.e. the USSR and China . The North was losing confidence in its allies and had doubts about their allies .
 Towards the end of the decade, the building of a reprocessing facility near the 5 MWe reactor became public knowledge . The facility is located near the reactor .
 In 1989 the reactor was shut down and the first load of fuel rods removed from the reactor . The reactor was closed in 1989 .
 When the safeguards agreement with the IAEA took effect in 1992, the Agency found that spent fuel had been reprocessed not only in 1990, but in 1989 and 1991 as well .
 Agency collects dust from remote control rods at the reprocessing plant and analysing the isotopic decay . North Korea seemed unaware that by collecting dust, the Agency could prove that .
 North Korea may have had enough plutonium for one or two nuclear-explosive devices, experts say . North Korea could have enough plutonium to carry out nuclear attacks, experts believe .
 When the Soviet Union fell apart and China improved relations with South Korea, the U.S. and Russia, North Korea was left on its own . North Korea is now isolated in the Korean Peninsula .
 China could be relied upon only if North Korea was attacked; Russia not even then . China could not rely on Russia even if it attacked North Korea . Russia would not be relied on as much as China did .
 In the 1980s, Kim-Il-Sung reached out to North Korea’s enemies the United States, Japan and South Korea in an effort to turn conflict into cooperation and reduce the dependence on China .
 International affairs in such a state of flux that hedging against further Chinese moves to Pyongyang’s detriment seemed appropriate . International affairs were in such an uncertain state, it was appropriate to hedge against further China moves .
 In 1991, the U.S. withdrawal of tactical nuclear weapons from South Korea encouraged the adoption of a broader security strategy that emphasised threat reduction .
 Declaration called for Joint Nuclear Control Commission to verify denuclearisation . Move similar to Argentina-Brazil Agency for Accounting and Control of Nuclear Materials .
 It is not unusual that negotiating parties beef up their bargaining positions in the run-up to negotiations . Negotiations are not unusual .
 South Korea announced that full North-South economic cooperation would not be possible without resolution of the North Korean nuclear issue . South Korea said full economic cooperation could not be achieved with resolution of North Korean nuke issue . On that score there was little movement .
 The South Korean demand concerning the sequence in which cooperative steps should be taken accentuated a point that was properly addressed only much later . South Korea's demand for cooperative steps was only later addressed .
 As the Cold War drew to an end, North Korea was quick to conduct the first reprocessing campaigns . North Korea conducted the first such campaigns in the 1950s .
 It is not known when the programme was weaponised if indeed it has been . It has not known how much plutonium has been used in the past .
 The international community had to entertain the possibility that North Korea was acquiring one or two nuclear devices . However, the international community said it had to be entertained .
 What North Korea may have said and done in the name of deterrence, surrounding states have often perceived as threats of aggression . North Korea's actions have often been perceived as a threat of aggression by surrounding states .
 Being shrouded in secrecy more than any other nation, the scope for misperceptions is exceptionally great . The scope of misperception is extremely great, especially in the United States .
 Under conditions of opacity, worst-case assumptions are well-known to be thriving . Worst-case assumption is thriving in the U.S. under the circumstances of opacity .
 North Korea has a pattern of tit-for-tat, cooperation when the U.S. cooperates and retaliation when it reneges, experts say . The debate remains unresolved over whether North Korea is determined to become an NWS .
 Deterrence has not reigned supreme in North Korea's security policy . However, deterrence has not reignited supreme in the North Korean state of the peninsula .
 Attempts to trade nuclear and missile capabilities for security assurances, nomialisation and economic assistance were made without any addition to the plutonium stock .
 It was not until the Bush administration terminated the Agreed Framework in reference to North Korea’s alleged enrichment programme that another load of spent fuel was reprocessed .
 North Korea’s refusal to allow special inspections and lack of progress on the implementation of the North-South denuclearisation accord, triggered actions on both sides that led North Korea to announce its withdrawal from the NPT on 12 March 1993 .
 The United States responded by inviting high-level talks, which led North Korea to call off the threat of withdrawal . The U.S. responded to the North's threat of withdrawing from the Korean Peninsula .
 Seoul resisted and Washington deferred to its ally, but talks were slow to materialise . Talks were slow in materialising as Seoul resisted, Washington deferred .
 North Korea shut down the plutonium-production reactor and removed the fuel . North Korea has removed all the fuel from the reactor .
 U.S. turned to the Security Council for sanctions, the parties came close to war . The United States sought to impose sanctions on Russia and Syria .
 His mission was a breakthrough that turned confrontation into cooperation . The mission was to help the U.S. become a U.N. ally .
 A skeleton agreement was outlined and fleshed out in the course of four months to become the October 1994 Agreed Framework . The agreement was agreed in the fall of 1994 and was signed in October 1994 .
 It would receive two 1,000 MWe light-water reactors and interim supply of 500,000 tons of heavy fuel oil per year . In return, it would also receive two reactors and a fuel supply .
 At the time, the LWR were estimated to cost about $4 billion, later revised to more than $5 billion . The LWR are estimated to have cost more than a billion dollars .
 Heavy fuel oil to be supplied while waiting for the LWR to become operational was of the order of $150 million per year . The value of the heavy fuel oil supplied while . waiting for . the . LWR became operational in July 2013 .
 Belarus, Kazakhstan and Ukraine received less than one-tenth of this offer for giving up nuclear weapons that were left on their soil when the Soviet Union fell apart . In comparison, Belarus and Kazakhstan were given less than a tenth of the offer .
 Economic compensation has been an important, integral part of the disarmament talks . Ever since, economic compensation is an important component of the talks . Economic compensation is a key part of disarmament negotiations .
 North Korea said it would never go back to the six-party talks in Beijing . It may have had the Agreed Framework in mind, preferring bilateral talks with the U.S. and an update of 1994 agreement .
 Implementation of the Framework Agreement quickly ran into South Korean criticism as well as opposition from the United States Congress after the Republican victory in 1994 elections .
 Congress interrupted fuel oil deliveries by holding back money for them . Congress also held back money to pay for fuel deliveries .
 The Clinton administration and other members of the Korean Energy Development Organisation were slow in implementing the LWR part of the deal . Also, the Clinton administration was slow to implement the agreement .
 The problems lay in U.S. domestic politics and alliance relations, U.N. diplomat says . The problems lie in the United States domestic politics, he says .
 Some officials may have waited for the North Korean regime to disappear . Some officials also waited for North Korea to disappear.
 In the wake of the Cold War, many regimes that had been in the Soviet sphere of influence collapsed or were expected to fall apart . In the aftermath of the Soviet-era era, many of these regimes collapsed or expected to collapse . The U.S. has never had a stable
 Historical experiences showing that full-fledged dictatorships can be managed for very long periods of time were ignored . Historical experiences of dictatorships being managed were ignored, as were ignored.
 Delays in implementation of the Agreed Framework were also caused by special North Korean demands such as its refusal to accept South Korean-designed LWR models’** and its salary demands for North Korean workers .
 Over and over again, it has tried to sell the bargaining cards at its disposal, i.e. the nuclear and missile programmes . The North Korean state has been trying to sell its bargaining cards over the years, including the nuclear, missile and nuclear programme .
 The prelude was the notification of withdrawal from the NPT in 1993, which led to the agreement on basic principles for continued dialogue and preliminary discussions of L WR for North Korea .
 The Agreed Framework promised ample remuneration for Pyongyang’s willingness to help defuse the crisis it had created by removing another batch of fuel rods . North Korea threatened to produce more plutonium and heightening military tension .
 North Korea tested a long-range Taepodong missile in 1998 in an effort to speed up delivery of goods that the Agreed Framework offered . In 2006, the Bush administration sat down with the North Koreans in Berlin to negotiate what became the sixparty agreements of 2007 .
 When North Korea resumed its plutonium programme in 2003, it made no effort to trade cancellation for compensation in the belief that the Bush administration was not available for deals of any sort .
 North Korea considered the Agreed Framework to be a big diplomatic success, much as the disarmament part of it was a big step ahead from the U.S. point of view . In all likelihood the North Koreans considered it a success .
 Russia has tried to use the assistance provisions of this agreement as standards for new deals . Later, they have used the assistance provision as standards of new deals, the Russian government says .
 The main part of the 1994 offer was the LWR, which North Korea kept asking for in the six-party talks . The 2005 South Korean offer of 2,000 MWe from the South Korean grid was tailored to the provision of two LWR LWR in the Agreed Framework
 North Korea pursued its nuclear and missile programmes in order to achieve remuneration of the magnitude envisaged by the Agreed Framework . North Korea's nuclear programme is in line with the 'agreed Framework' North Korea has a long-range missile programme .
 The nuclear and missile programmes have also been sources of much-needed hard currency . The nuclear programme is also a source of hard currency in the world .
 Missile technology has been sold to Pakistan, Myanmar and countries in the Middle East . Nuclear assistance has probably been rendered to Syria and possibly Libya and Myanmar .
 North Korea is selling only commodities of interest to China and South Korea . It is selling minerals and some other items that are only commodities to others .
 Efforts to obtain much-needed hard currency by selling nuclear and missile technologies to potential proliferators tap very well into the bargaining strategy, especially after 9/11 and the exposure of the Qadeer Khan network . The U.S. government has been criticized for selling nuclear, missile
 Benazir Bhutto also paid a visit to North Korea in what may have been a missile-for-nuclear-technology barter deal . The deal may be a missile for nuclear-technology technology barter .
 Other “liebhabers” of North Korean technology are Iran and possibly terrorist networks wanting to harm the U.S. The United States is also interested in North Korea, the White House says .
 A regime lighting for survival, with its back against the wall, hardly shies away from providing mass-destruction technologies to others if the price is right . The regime is lighting for its survival, and it's hardly shied away .
 Had the third stage functioned properly, it would have had intercontinental range . The third stage would have been able to reach intercontinental .
 North Korea has interesting technologies to offer potential proliferators, experts say . They were reminders of North Korea's potential for proliferators to proliferate .
 North Korea’s own capabilities are worrisome, but proliferation of nuclear and missile technologies to other states and non-state actors that may use them to attack U.S. assets is of even greater concern .
 Assessment None of these theses can be written off . To a smaller or larger extent, they may all help explain North Korean behaviour . Assessment: North Korea's behaviour may explain its behaviour .
 Nuclear weapons are deterrents as well as bargaining chips for normalisation and security assurances . Nuclear weapons can be used as a bargaining chip in normalisation of the world's borders .
 A related motive is bargaining leverage for elimination of sanctions and economic assistance, a source says . The motive is to eliminate sanctions and eliminate economic assistance from Russia and China .
 The nuclear and missile programmes are invoked across the board for economic and political goals as well as for security purposes . The nuclear programme is invoked for economic, political and security reasons .
 North Korea has no other instruments of significance in the conduct of its foreign policy . North Korea's foreign policy has been described as 'strategic' by South Korean media .
 Joint six-party statement of 2007 paved the way for disablement of Yongbyon facilities . Joint statement paved way for disablingment of facilities .
 North Korea reaffirmed its commitment not to transfer nuclear materials, technology and know-how, but went back on that and other commitments when the Security Council condemned the 5 April 2009 missile test . North Korea has since gone back on those commitments .
 In the first half of 2009, its moves had the character of diplomatic posturing with a view to forthcoming talks with President Obama . President Obama in principal terms had underlined his readiness to talk with United States adversaries .
 Compensation for crises of its own making is a controversial proposition . Compensation is controversial proposition for the U.S.
 When cycles of crises and cooperation evolve repeatedly over the years, it matters less and less when and how it all started . It matters less to how it started, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Confiict manifestations degenerate into incessant disputes about the distribution of responsibility and blame, like in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict . Conflicts like those in Israel-Palestine conflict are often resolved by blame-blaming disputes .
 North Korea creates crises in order to claim remuneration for helping to defuse them, author says . North Korean behaviour ousting inspectors, withdrawal from the NPT, nuclear explosives tests and missile tests are provocative North Korea behaviour, he says .
 The other side of the coin is that sometimes U.S. failure to live up to commitments, insertion of new demands, inaction where action has been promised, military exercises and military exercises are often ignored .
 It's all too easy to get away with partisan narratives because in the media world. It's not easy for partisan narratives to be written in media, it's easy for them to be partisan .
 Its foreign policy tends to be seen in the same perspective of repugnant behaviour, confirmed and highlighted by the special brand of provocative language that the regime uses .
 There is a distinct tendency to blame North Korea for each new crisis that occurs, also when it its opponents fail to comply with agreements that have been entered into . North Korea has a long history of being blamed for the rise in tensions .
 A comprehensive analysis of North Korean foreign policy from the early 1990s to today puts the “compensation for crisis” proposition into a different perspective . The North Korean policy of the 1990s and early 2000s puts it into a new perspective .
 The U.S. delayed delisting of the DPRK as a state sponsor of terrorism until there was agreement on an intrusive verification protocol . In the autumn of 2008, the United States announced that it had delayed delisted the DPRK .
 "Compensation for crisis" is not something North Korea has been initiating from scratch, but rather a spin it has given to retaliatory measures when the U.S. failed to cooperate . Seen in this perspective, “compensation for . crisis” is not . something North
 Its brinkmanship diplomacy seems based on the assumption that the more serious the crisis, the higher the price for defusing it . The more serious a crisis is, the more the price the government will pay, it seems .
 The sequence of cooperation and conflict that unfolded in 2008/2009 is as good an illustration as any . It was as good as any illustration of cooperation between the two countries .
 North Korea set out to disable its plutonium facilities in Yongbyon under international supervision . North Korea committed to disclose its uraniumenrichment and proliferation activities in 2007 .
 North Korea removed from list of states sponsoring terrorism, but with proviso that declaration would have to be verified . U.S. announced its intention to cut back on the sanctions and remove North Korea from the list of terror sponsors .
 President Bush yielded to hardliners in Japan, South Korea and Washington who wanted to have the commitment in writing . Bush yielded in favor of hardliners who wanted the commitment to writing .
 On 11 December 2008, they threatened to cut off energy aid unless North Korea accepted a formal six-party verification protocol . North Korea has been accused of violating the protocol .
 North Korea stopped disabling and began preparations for another Taepodong-2 missile test . North Korea is preparing to conduct another test of the missile . The test was the first of its kind in North Korea's history .
 The test was made in contravention of Security Council Resolution 1718, issued after the nuclear test in 2006, which prohibited further testing of long-range missiles . Security Council resolution 1718 banned further testing .
 The prohibition was tailor-made for North Korea, for there are no strong international norms in this field . Some 20 states have been launching long-range missiles, among them Japan and South Korea .
 From mid-2009, in a repeat of previous cycles of crisis and cooperation, North Korea once again signalled interest in resumption of negotiations . Obama administration reacted without any comprehensive policy review, stuck to the sanctions and played for time .
 On 14 April 2009, one day after the Security Council condemnation, the U.N. was forced to withdraw from its nuclear program . Current status of the nuclear program is classified as one of the world's most powerful nuclear facilities .
 North Korea expelled the United States technical experts and the IAEA inspectors . North Korea also expelled the U.S. technical experts from the United Nations .
 U.S. specialists had lived on the site in Yongbyon for 18 months to monitor the disablement . IAEA had had three inspectors on site full-time .
 North Korea said it would restore the facilities to their original state for normal operation . Spent fuel rods that had been removed from the reactor in the disablement process would be reprocessed .
 It said it would actively examine the construction of an LWR on its own . In addition, it said it will actively examine construction of a LWR .
 The North Koreans have told the Americans that they had a pilot uraniumenrichment programme in the 1990s, but that it was terminated . The U.S. says the programme was terminated in 1994 .
 It seems to have been brought back to life around 1998, drawing on the Qadeer Khan network .
 Some significant undeclared enrichment activities have obviously been going on and may still do, most likely outside Yongbyon . Some of these activities may still be going on, however .
 The alleged export of hexafluoride to Libya, and possibly also uranium products to Syria, points to the existence of a uranium programme . None has ever been located in North Korea, though .
 When inspectors left, past plutonium production had not been verified . North Korea had neither allowed sampling of the reactor’s graphite core nor of reprocessing facility and waste sites .
 There are significant discrepancies between Pyongyang’s declaration and U.S. estimates . North Korea has declared a nuclear arms deal with the United States . The North Korean government has been criticized for its actions in the past .
 North Korea declared in 2008 that it had separated and weaponised 26 kg. In 2008, North Korea claimed to have weaponised and separated 26 kg . North Korea has claimed it has weaponised some of the world's biggest weapons .
 U.S. estimates of the plutonium inventory were higher . Siegfried Hecker did not exclude that the declared amount could be correct .
 No progress had been made on the declaration of weaponisation facilities outside of Yongbyon . No progress has been made in the declaration on the nature of the uranium programme .
 Nearly all the actions specified by the disablement agreement were completed . Nearly all of the actions that were required by the disabledment agreement have been completed .
 The 5MWe reactor, the reprocessing facility and the fuelfabrication plant can all be restored and returned to plutonium production . However, the nuclear reactor, reprocessed facility and fuel fabrication plant cannot be restored .
 North Korea restarted its reprocessing facility in April 2009 . North Korea announced that it had restarted the facility .
 It would take at least three years before another load of reactor fuel would be ready for reprocessing once the reactor is refuelled and restarted . However, beyond the fuel rods that were removed during the disablement process and then reprocessed, it would take three years to
 Japan and South Korea are pressing for it, while China and Russia are opposed . Japan and S. Korea were pressing for the move, while Russia and China were opposed .
 China believed another round of condemnation and sanctions would prompt retaliation by Pyongyang . But it was not ready to block Security Council action . North Korea has threatened to halt talks with the West .
 Obama had stressed the need to repair America’s alliances in the election campaign . But he did not want to confront China .
 Presidential statement condemns launch in reference to Resolution 1718 . Sanctions on three North Korean firms involved in missile trading also imposed .
 North Korea backed out of the six-party talks and the agreements reached in that forum . North Korea has been criticized for its stance on the Korean Peninsula .
 The rejection may have been caused by the hardliners in Japan and South Korea . South Korea and Japan are the two countries that rejected the vote .
 They had been the ones to insist on a written verification protocol in phase two of the denuclearisation agreement, and they had been holding back on previous occasions as well .
 Japan was the only six-party participant not to provide fuel oil, pending a satisfactory conclusion of the abductions issue . Japan is the only member of the U.S. Six-party participants did not give fuel oil until a satisfactory resolution of abductions .
 Lingering dissatisfaction with the terms of the 2007 agreements may have led to the same conclusion . The agreement was reached in 2007, but it was not the same thing as the 2007 agreement .
 The South Korean equivalent of 2,000 MWe from the South Korean grid did not have the same attraction, because it would make the North dependent on the good will of the South . The North was not interested in the prospect of a similar grid from South .
 The Juche ideology deprives the United States and its allies of the leverage to press it to do what they want . The lessons from the crises in 1998, 2003 and 2006 corroborate it, the North says .
 Its economic interactions with other countries are so modest that there is little that others can do to punish it for its transgressions . The U.S. is unlikely to be punished for its actions in the region .
 North Korea asserted it would not agree to dismantle its nuclear-weapons programme unless the LWR project was re-established . At the fourth round of six-party talks in 2005, North Korea said it wouldn't agree to remove its nuclear weapons programme .
 In 2005 joint statement of principles, commitment to supply LWR is weaker than in the Agreed Framework . Clearly, in the 2005 joint . statement of . principles, the . commitment to supplying LWR has been weaker than the . Agreed . Framework .
 There is no way that DPRK-US negotiations can be segregated from the interests and influence of DPRK’s neighbours . However, it is not impossible to separate the talks from those of the North Korean neighbours . The North Korean state media say the talks will be held in Pyongyang .
 South Korea’s economic contribution is crucial in any deal with North Korea, experts say . South Korea's economic contribution to any North Korea deal is crucial to any deal, they say .
 Bill Clinton’s successful visit to Pyongyang, the North Korean visit to New Mexico to see Governor Richardson, the invitation to Obama’�s point man on North Korea Ambassador Stephen Bosworth to visit Pyongyang . The North Korea has made conciliatory gestures to South Korea signalled
 North Korean nuclear negotiator Kim Kye-gwan was dispatched to Beijing to discuss the resumption of talks . Kim Jong-Il was invited to China to meet with the North Korean leader .
 The six-party talks have always been a hybrid of bilateral and multilateral diplomacy . The next round is also likely to involve a combination of both, maybe in a different mix .
 As long as North Korean politics is so opaque, it is difficult to tell, says CNN's John Defterios . North Korea politics is opaque, he says, but it's not relevant to the case of North Korea .
 The role of nuclear mythmakers and nationalistic tendencies defy assessment . Individual mindsets, the role of the nuclear myth makers and nationalists defy assessment. individual mindsets .
 The relationship between the party and the military is hard to grasp in any detail . The military is known to be very influential, most probably also on nuclear and missile issues .
 There is always a status aspect to nuclear weapons and underdogs in the international system can improve their status by engaging top dogs, but in the case of North Korea the status motive pales in comparison with security concerns . North Korea is the world's most secretive state of state .
 A dictatorship fighting for its survival does not pay much attention to the norms and provisions of global regimes and global initiatives for nuclear disarmament except selectively for its own parochial purposes . A dictator fighting for his survival pays little attention to global disarmament norms, he says .
 The North Korean regime has quite enough figuring out how to cope with its existential problems . North Korea has enough of its own problems to deal with its own .
 What remains from the list of rollback experiences are alleviation of security concerns; economic inducements; engagement with a view to gain leverage and encourage openness . Diplomatic involvement to buy time; and the role of the United States and North Korea’s neighbours .
 It has been the object of nuclear threats several times over . Militarily, it fears attack by conventional forces, and it has been subject to nuclear threats .
 Economically, it is worried about the sanctions that are levelled at it, although the policy of self-sufficiency reduces its vulnerability to a minimum .
 Its insecurity relates to the U.S. and its Asian neighbours, Japan and South Korea, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Since the 1980s, North Korea has pursued a dual strategy of deterrence and threat reduction through reconciliation with its neighbours . Threat reduction by using the same weapons as bargaining chips for normalisation with the United States .
 North Korean leaders have indicated that U.S. forces could stay in Korea as part of a comprehensive peace agreement . North Korea leaders have even indicated that United States forces could remain in Korea if a peace deal is reached .
 Senior North Koreans have consistently said that they want, and there is no reason to disbelieve them . Yet this is what senior North Koreans say they want . North Korea has consistently said they want to see more of the world's most powerful and dangerous .
 During the Cold War, the U.S. developed special understandings with its major communist adversary . North Korean attempts to trade its rudimentary nuclear and missile capabilities for a special strategic relationship with the one and only military superpower .
 North Korea may be content with normalisation, but for the U.S. and others this is also hard to swallow . North Korea is happy to normalise its relations with the United States, but it is also difficult to swallow for others .
 Some segments of the U.S. political system have even been against talking to the North Koreans for fear that it would legitimise an outcast .
 Reconciliation means full diplomatic relations, no sanctions, security assurances and peace agreement on the Korean peninsula . It is a demanding proposition when, at the receiving end, there is a regime with almost no commitment to international norms of behaviour .
 In the disablement phase of the six-party denuclearisation agreement they were tiny in comparison . In the disabledment phase, the North Korean nuclear weapons were tiny compared to the smaller ones .
 In principle, the other parties to the Beijing talks held the door open for it . In principle it was open for the talks to take place .
 Still, economic inducements matter less than a peace treaty, normalisation and security assurances . Still, it seems that economic inducement matters less than peace treaty .
 The modest provisions of the Beijing agreement are probably among the reasons why North Korea left Beijing . But less important than progress on the politico-military dimension . Economic inducements are important .
 In relation to North Korea, engagement is the way to leverage . Engagement, leverage and openness are key to success . North Korea has minimum interaction with the outside world .
 There are few items of value that the U.S. and others can deny to North Korea, especially as long as China is holding back on sanctions . North Korea is not likely to be subject to sanctions, especially if China holds back on its own .
 The more the parties get involved in interactions of value to both sides, the greater the harm if they are terminated, especially for the weaker party, i.e. The more they get involved, the more the value of those interactions to both parties .
 They draw unfavourable reactions from others and risk being beleaguered . They risk being criticised for their actions, but they risk not being well-liked .
 Even if an isolationist regime has no nuclear weapon ambitions at the outset, international hostility may bring the idea to the fore . International hostility may also bring it to the forefront .
 North Korea is a pariah state, more isolated than any other country . It is also feeling more beleaguered than other state . North Korea has a history of being isolated and isolated .
 Instead of sanctions, which seldom function as intended against closed dictatorships, engagement is all the more important to break such vicious cycles . The U.S. should engage in engagement to break the vicious cycles of dictatorships . Instead, sanctions are often ineffective against dictatorships.
 Normalisation is bound to create some avenues into North Korean society . Normalisation of North Korea's society will be bound to be beneficial to the North . North Korea has a long history of 'normalisation'
 It brings to attention de Tocqueville’s classical observation that when a fully-fledged dictatorship begins to open up, it is difficult to control the processes that are set in motion .
 Pyongyang’s impatience with Washington and other negotiating partners indicates that it sees it that way itself . This is not the same as waiting for the communist regime to implode . Pyongyang's impatience is not just waiting for an implosion, it says .
 Six years of inaction under the Bush administration showed the futility of that . Six years later, inaction under that administration showed that . Obama administration's inaction under Bush administration was futile .
 The relevant lesson from other cases of reversal recommends sustained diplomatic involvement in order to be in the best possible position to exploit new opportunities .
 U.S. administrations have been split on how to deal with North Korea . North Korea has been a source of tension in the region for years .
 In the Clinton administration, there were advocates of immediate freeze and dismantlement supporting reassurance and cooperative engagement with the DPRK . North Korea's claim that the role of the IAEA was to verify compliance with the freeze provisions of the Agreed Framework .
 North Korea tried to use the safeguards issue to put pressure on the United States . North Korea emphasised implementation of IAEA safeguards would depend on the U.S. implementation of the Agreed Framework .
 Others wanted North Korea to go by the NPT book, accepting NPT safeguards . Others wanted the Agency to reconstruct North Korea’s nuclear history .
 Some held that North Korea was bent on getting nuclear weapons and that it would never abandon that objective . Others argued that the U.S. should carry a big stick and wait for the regime to collapse .
 Others believed it was possible to negotiate a reversal of Pyongyang’s nuclear programme at an acceptable cost, offering carrots while carrying a big stick . Others believe it is possible .
 The 2005 Declaration of Principles was signed in that spirit, but only to be followed immediately thereafter by new sanctions . New sanctions had been prepared by the proponents of confrontational policies .
 The Obama administration has been torn between its preference for negotiations and its desire to punish Pyongyang if it went ahead to test another long-range missile which it did . Japan, South Korea and Japan’s and South Korea want to punish North Korea .
 After the launch, the administration deferred to Japan and South Korea and went for punitive Security Council actions . The move triggered another full-blown crisis in relations with North Korea . The U.S. has not responded to the launch .
 It left a gap between declaratory policy and action policy, between principle and practice, between engagement with North Korea and allegiance to Japan and South Korea .
 The uncompromising Bush administration policy carrying a big stick while waiting for the dictatorship to collapse proved self-defeating . The president's policy was carried out by the U.S. government .
 Pyongyang used the time well to produce another half-adozen nuclear bombs . While Bush waited, Pyongyang produced the bombs . The bombs were produced by North Korea .
 Sustained engagement with a view to gradual change has a better chance of succeeding . It may be the only chance to get rid of North Korea’s nuclearweapon capabilities .
 Confrontational policies have proved counterproductive and nobody wants to go to war, says President Obama . Confrontation policies have proven counterproductive, says Obama .
 If the Obama administration can unite behind a consistent policy of ‘cooperation for cooperation’, sticking rigorously to the agreements that are made, it will do something that has not been done before . The Obama administration will be doing something that hasn't been done in the past .
 Abroad, it has to be compatible with the alliance bonds to Japan and South Korea, it says . Abroad: "The alliance bonds are important to the United States"
 Those bonds too important to be jeopardised by splits over North Korea . Those bonds are too important for the UK to leave the Middle East .
 Clearly, negotiating modalities have to be agreed anew . Negotiating strategies and objectives must be agreed again . The U.S. has been in talks with Russia since 2009 .
 The principles from 2005 and the experiences from the Agreed Framework and the six-party talks left much to build on, but similar to the Oslo agreements on the Middle East, time-consuming action-for-action strategies have proven vulnerable to misunderstandings .
 In the Middle East, the lesson drawn was that it would be better to go straight to a comprehensive, final settlement . The lesson was that the lesson would be that it was better to have a comprehensive settlement .
 A comprehensive package deal might also be better in the case of North Korea . The North Korean government has been criticized for its poor record .
 The parties may therefore want to move faster than before to reduce the time and opportunity for spoilers . The parties will need to move quickly to avoid spoilers .
 Both sides are seeking reassurances about the other side’s intentions, and that complete and verifiable disarmament cannot happen overnight, there would have to be gradualism . Nevertheless, given that both sides want reassurances, the gradualism would be necessary .
 The only way to find out is to engage them to see how far disarmament can go, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 If the answer is no, there may still be scope for significant partial agreements to limit North Korea’s nuclear activities . North Korea's nuclear activities could be limited to a range of limited limits .
 For the United States, horizontal proliferation out of North Korea is at least as dangerous as further vertical proliferation in North Korea . For the U.S. it's at least more dangerous than vertical proliferation . The United States is at risk of further proliferation in N. Korea, experts say .
 North Korea may still be dissuaded to bring all exports of nuclear and missile technologies to a halt . North Korea still may still want to keep exports of such technologies to halt .
 If the answer is yes, the price will no doubt be high, but may be worth paying . If the price is high, it may be a big mistake, but it could be worth it .
 Special attention is paid to the distinction between disarmament and disarmament as a state of affairs . The concept of rank disequilibrium appears to have great explanatory power in cases like Iran and India .
 Article VI of the NPT commits all parties to work for nuclear disarmament . Article VI commits parties to working for disarmament. Article VI states that all parties must work to disarmament, not nuclear weapons .
 The NWS can lean on the NWS to do more, in the name of international security and in reference to international norms . The U.N. can also lean on its own to act as a matter of national security .
 In the face of arms-racing during the Cold War and of modernisation and widening of the roles assigned to nuclear weapons in this century, this is what they have been doing .
 The NWS may facilitate disarmament by deepening their own commitments to stay non-nuclear . Beyond urging NWS to enhance their disarmament efforts, they may .
 The more convincingly non-nuclear they become, the easier it will be for the NWS to go to zero . The more convincing non-nuke-free zones become, they will be easier to get to zero, experts say .
 There has been bitter disagreement about the precise contents of the obligations and how well they have been fulfilled . All the time, there has been a bitter disagreement over the details .
 The focus is not on the legal-political issues of rights and obligations, but on the political and military dimensions of the disarmament non-proliferation relationship .
 From time to time, it has been argued that acquisition of nuclear weapons by more states is a regional matter, driven by regional conflicts and security concerns . General observations: Acquiring nuclear weapons is regional matter .
 The claim absolves the NWS of responsibility for nuclear proliferation . The claim was made by the National Weather Service .
 The policies of the NWS affect proliferation/non-proliferation in many ways . The NWS is responsible for proliferation and non-propliferation of nuclear weapons .
 Recently, the main antagonists of the Cold War have geared their military policies less to each other and more to regional settings, notably to the Middle East, Central Asia and East Asia . The Cold War is no longer focused on each other .
 This century, all P5 except China changed their doctrines to enhance the utility of nuclear weapons in regional contexts . All P5 nations except China have nuclear arms doctrine .
 Israel acquired nuclear weapons by the end of the 1960s in response to Arab threats . The focus has first been on the Middle East, where Israel acquired the weapons . Israel had acquired the nuclear weapons in the 60s .
 There, the nuclear proliferation issue has been embedded in regional-conflict dynamics ever since . It has become increasingly intertwined with big power politics .
 There is an international as well as a regional dimension to the proliferation problem . Also in other parts of Asia, there is also an international dimension to this problem .
 The NWS have it in their power to twist the proliferation problems for better or worse . The proliferation problems are in the hands of the NWS, the government .
 The same powers influence the political environment of potential proliferators by projecting the status value that they attach to nuclear weapons . The status value of nuclear weapons is a key issue in the world's nuclear arsenal .
 They have done so by maintaining and modernising big nuclear arsenals . They have also underlined the importance of nuclear weapons in their doctrines and statements .
 "This century, their policies endangered the entire non-proliferation regime," says N.J. A.R. Iran . The U.N. banned nuclear weapons in the 1990s, but it has since been banned .
 The thesis that proliferation is driven by regional conflicts and has little or nothing to do with nuclear policies of the big powers is wrong . Whatever happens to the call for a nuclear-weapon-ffee world, the thesis is wrong, writes Andrew Hammond .
 It was wrong in the past, and the growing focus on regional politics has made it even more so so in recent years . It has made regional politics even more difficult to deal with in the region, says David Cameron .
 Both governments and non-governmental actors are waiting to see what comes of Obama’s disarmament initiatives . Obama's disarmament initiative is a step toward making disarmament credible .
 There are concerns that it will boil down to a non-proliferation tool stopping well short of elimination of nuclear weapons . Concerns that to the extent that it succeeds and the NPT is strengthened, more restraints will follow .
 Modest single steps with no convincing promise of follow-on action may leave impression . But the broken expectations of the 1990s are close enough in time to be remembered .
 If this reading takes hold, the cooperation of many NNWS will be half-hearted at best . NWS cooperation will be limited at best, says NWS official .
 disarmament may also be viewed as a process where one step leads to the next, or it may be seen in a static perspective where measures are introduced without any particular promise or expectation of further steps . Similar to integration theory, integration theory distinguishes between integration as a state of affairs and integration
 Later studies questioned this, emphasising the importance of govermnental decisions for successive deepening of integration .
 The question is whether the governments will commit themselves from one step to the next, and whether a disarmament process can develop momentum of its own . Still, the question is if governments will be willing to commit themselves to disarmament .
 Single steps towards nuclear disarmament may have little or no impact on governments contemplating going nuclear . Single steps could have little impact on nations contemplating going nukes, experts say .
 The non-proliferation impact would be uncertain if U.S. and Russia were to reduce the number of deployed strategic nuclear weapons to 1,000 each with no commitments to further reductions .
 This would be different if expectations were created that more would follow . This is not the case of expectations that more people would follow, it's the case .
 Proliferation proliferators would be singled out as exceptions to a trend of improved compliance with Treaty obligations . Then, they would be listed as exceptions, according to the treaty .
 Article VI included, and it is always more difficult to act against an existing trend, especially if it enjoys broad support from both nuclearand non-nuclear-weapon states . Article VI includes Article VI of Article VI, and Article VI is included .
 Non-proliferation norm would be enhanced, states that have rolled back would find it harder to roll forward again . The international enviromuent for management of critical contemporary cases of proliferation concern would be more benign, the author says .
 In the UN Security Council, decision-making in support of the trend would be easier . The UN would be able to make a decision to support the trend .
 The opposite of single steps in a static perspective is a convention with a timeline for nuclear disarmament to zero . The opposite is a timeline that would go to zero.
 Big powers are less willing to tie their hands to international rules, norms and standards than smaller ones . Smaller nations are less likely to be bound to international norms than small ones, experts say .
 There is much to gain from being free to exercise the power of the powerful . Precisely because they are powerful, there is much more to gain than to lose power .
 Convention proposals have met consistent opposition from the P5 . So far, the convention proposals have been met with consistent opposition .
 There is something simplistic about reducing the complexities of nuclear disarmament to a timeline . There is, furthermore, something simplistic, about a timeline of disarmament .
 Reintroducing the declaratory policy of the 1990s commitments to systematic and progressive efforts is not enough . Reinstitration of the 90s commitments not enough. Reintroduceing the policy would not be enough, he says .
 It is widely assumed that a START follow-on agreement will be followed by negotiations for deep cuts . However, Obama and Medvedev have not been explicit about it .
 Commitments to follow up on one disarmament measure by negotiating another is a first step towards a dependable disarmament trend . Commitment to follow-up measures is a good first step to a more dependable trend .
 For almost 50 years ever since nuclear arms control was introduced in the early 1960s disarmament measures have been discussed back and forth in great detail . Nuclear arms control has been a source of tension for decades .
 Technically, virtually all stones may have been turned except perhaps for how to make disarmament a reliable prospect short of using the calendar . The U.S. has not been able to use the calendar to disarmament .
 The NPT is a framework for disarmament to zero, but if and when the world approaches that point, a detailed description of the final steps and of what kind of NWFW one should go for must be agreed .
 The parameters of that discussion will most certainly be different from the ones that apply at present, so the question of timelines may also look quite different . But the parameters of the discussion will be different .
 As long as some states possess nuclear weapons, others will seek them too . The bottom line is that as long . as long as they possess nuclear . weapons, the bottom line will be that they will seek .
 The best way to prevent proliferation is therefore to reduce existing arsenals to zero . "The best way of preventing proliferation is to reduce arsenals," says President Obama .
 The best, and quite possibly the only, way to avoid it is to do away with them all . The best way of avoiding it all is to remove them all, and that's not only .
 A credible movement in the direction of nuclear disarmament would facilitate the management of the non-proliferation regime . First, a credible movement would facilitate a non-nuclear disarmament .
 It would affect nuclear decision-making of states in a non-nuclear-weapon direction . Second, it would affect the nuclear decision making of states . It would also affect the decision to use nuclear weapons in non-military situations .
 Failure to implement Article VI of the NPT has been a chronic source of friction in the regime . Article VI is a chronic issue of friction between the two countries .
 The NPT review conferences have been blighted by disputes over the disarmament obligation . NNWS willingness to support and participate in NWS calls for stricter enforcement of the Treaty has been undermined as the NWS have been widely viewed as ignoring their own NPT obligations .
 Credible nuclear disarmament promotes the cause of non-proliferation because it is a key to improved regime management . Credible disarmament is key to improving regime management, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 A similar situation exists at the regional level in the Middle East, where armscontrol and disarmament policies are conditioned by deep-seated regional conflict formations . The Middle East has a similar situation at regional level .
 Egypt and other Arab states are generally unwilling to undertake more arms-control obligations . As long as the Israeli arsenal is untouched, Egypt and others are unwilling to do more .
 Arab states feel that their NPT commitments have been met by broken promises . As no progress has been made in implementing the Resolution, they feel that they have not met their promises . Arab states are concerned that the NPT has not met its promises .
 They are therefore holding back on additional arms-control commitments . The U.S. will not commit more than $1billion to arms control .
 The Iranian challenge reinforces this attitude and inspires hedging policies . Iran's challenge reinforces the attitude of the West, which is wary of it .
 If the NWS move to disarm and if Israel’s nuclear capabilities are effectively addressed and constrained, global and regional frictions within the regime will be reduced . The review process will be more constructive, and the opportunities to strengthen the regime and enforce its provisions will be improved .
 The nuclear war-fighting doctrines of the Cold War were also spins on deterrence . The Cold War doctrine of deterrence was also spun on deterrence in the 1950s .
 Nuclear history may be read as a political struggle over the utility of nuclear weapons for the security of states, and over the viability of nuclear deterrence, in particular .
 Vested interests and believers in the utility of nuclear arms have made efforts to stem that norm . On the other hand, vested interests have made attempts to stem the norm .
 New weapons were developed that would be more thinkable to use, and that would therefore also more likely to be used . New weapons would therefore more likely be used, the author says . Weapons were developed to make it more likely that they would be used in the future .
 Ships and other nuclear-weapon platforms were sent to hot spots around the world in shows of force instilling respect and awe . Ships and . other nuclear weapons platforms were . sent to . hot spots . around the . world in a show of respect and . awe .
 The doctrines were expanded to include a wider range of situations in which nuclear weapons might have a role . These options were curtailed by the moratoria on nuclearweapon tests, which made it hard to introduce new weapons .
 More than 20 times, the U.S. has issued nuclear threats in some shape or form . The importance of nuclear weapons has been emphasised in speech acts by state leaders .
 From a non-proliferation point of view, the problem with these efforts to sustain the credibility of nuclear deterrence is that they have kept telling others how important nuclear weapons are . The problem with this is that the U.S. has kept telling people how important it is, says
 In upholding the utility of nuclear weapons for themselves, the NWS have been teaching others the same lesson . The NWS are teaching others how to use nuclear weapons to protect themselves .
 The problem is also that, in trying to show what nuclear weapons can do, their utility has been much inflated . "Their utility has also been inflated," says David Cameron . "The problem is that they have not been able to do so much," he says .
 Realistic reviews of nuclear history in these respects, deleting the propagandistic arguments to uphold deterrence and justify investments in huge arsenals, therefore reduce the attractiveness of nuclear weapons and so contribute to non-proliferation .
 National survival is at stake in use of nuclear weapons where national survival at stake . One such situation concerns the use of such a weapon, the author says .
 The International Court of Justice was split on this issue in 1996 . In its Advisory Opinion of 1996, the IJ split on the issue .
 China’s no-first-use policy may not apply if its own territory, or territories that it claims as its own, are under threat . China‘s no first-use rule may not be applied if its territory, which is under threat, is under attack .
 The fear in these huge state conglomerations is that dismemberment, even on a small scale, might be the beginning of national breakdown . The fear is that dismembered will be the start of a national breakdown, even if it's small scale .
 The treaties prohibiting chemical and biological weapons were preceded by the Geneva Protocol of 1925 which prohibited the use of these weapons . The Geneva Protocol was established in 1925 .
 First, use of the weapons was delegitimised and outlawed, and then banned . First, the use of weapons was then banned, and again, they were banned .
 The Court found it hard to contemplate a use of nuclear weapons that would be compatible with international humanitarian law . The Court of Appeal said it was 'difficult to contemplate' a nuclear weapon use .
 "Nuclear weapons are no less inhumane than chemical and biological weapons," author says . Nuclear weapons are more inhumane, he says, than chemical weapons .
 In effect, the Geneva Protocol was a no-first-use agreement . An agreement banning the use of nuclear weapons would also allow for nuclear retaliation .
 Such doctrines adopted unilaterally or agreed bilaterally or multilateral with a view to codification in an international convention would go a long way to devalue nuclear arms . Such doctrines would send an important message to decision-makers of other countries that have not closed the nuclear-weapons option .
 Genuine disarmament will be rooted in the premise that nuclear weapons are unnecessary and undesirable . Genuine moves towards disarmament are rooted in a belief that they are unnecessary .
 To the extent that it happens, the international context of national decision-making will change and become more benign for non-proliferation . The international context will change, he says .
 India has not undertaken any Article VI obligation . Disarmament and the three-state problem is a major problem . India has no obligation to disarm itself .
 It has not acceded to the CTBT; its support for an FMCT is an act of cynicism . It is not formally recognised as an NWS, it is not a bona fide provider of security assurances to others .
 The commitment to disarm is contradicted by Indian rearmament, says CNN's John Sutter . The second part of it is the commitment to disarmament is to disarm, he says .
 In important respects, the impact of disarmament comes down to the timeline for US-Russian arms reductions versus the establishment of an Indian minimum-deterrence force . The timeline for disarmament depends on the US and Russia's arms reduction versus the timeline .
 Next round of US-Russian negotiations is supposed to take a long time a number of years . Subsequent to the START I follow-on agreement, the next round of U.S.-Russian negotiations will take place in years .
 If it is successfully completed before the Indian deterrent is ready, invitations for multilateral disarmament talks are issued, it is conceivable that the size of the Indian force will be affected .
 The build-up might stop at a lower level than would otherwise have been the case . Then, the build up might stop, perhaps even more slowly, perhaps .
 India is unlikely to be ready for cessation of its arms build-up and for nuclear disarmament talks until a minimum deterrent force has been established . However, the basic assumption is that India will not be ready .
 The impression is also that US-Russian negotiations will be very demanding and time-consuming. More and more, the impression is that U.S. and Russia will be negotiating very hard .
 Indian security assurances could be extended to NWFZ . Indian participation in any multilateral arms-control and disarmament undertaking, he says .
 Pakistan and Israel have a longer way to go in order to meet such criteria . Pakistan has a long way ahead of Israel and Israel to meet criteria .
 India wants to become a big power on the global scene, and its nuclearweapon programme has global ramifications . India's nuclear weapon programme is a key part of its ambitions .
 If it comes to multilateral talks, it wants to be in a position to take part, says the EU . The EU wants to join in multilateral negotiations with the United States .
 Iran's nuclear arsenal is part of the conflict fomiations of the Middle East . Its nuclear arsenal has been used in many of the region's most violent conflicts .
 The more threatened an NWS feels, the more difficult it is to make it disarm . The more intractable the conflict formations that gave rise to the nuclear weapons are, the harder it's to eliminate them .
 On both counts, Israel stands out as a formidable obstacle to the worldwide elimination of nuclear weapons . Israel is one of the most powerful nations in the world to achieve nuclear disarmament .
 It would take revolutionary world-order changes and a radically enhanced role for nuclear weapons in international affairs to reconsider this stance . For them, it would take . revolutionary world order changes and an enhanced role .
 Australia, Canada, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, Norway, Spain, Sweden and Switzerland are in this category . Australia and Canada are in the same category .
 Non-nuclear status rests on a solid national political consensus . Being highly industrialised states, they have much of the knowledge and technical-industrial capacity to build nuclear weapons .
 These states are therefore insensitive to questions of disarmament/rearmament, for they already decided to disconnect themselves from what the NWS are doing . These states have already decided not to engage in disarmament or rearmament .
 Four states that possessed nuclear weapons but gave them up Belarus, Kazakhstan, South Africa and Ukraine . Romania and Serbia, which are technologically less advanced, also had nuclear weapons .
 Some of the countries listed above are politically less stable than the other countries listed . However, some of them are less stable .
 Disarmament arguably begins to matter in relation to states that are passively hedging, such as Argentina and Brazil . Argentina is one of the most heavily armed states in the world .
 Disarmament may confirm and reinforce their decisions to stay non-nuclear and broaden support for that stance . Disarmment may confirm or reinforce their decision to stay nuclear .
 No progress in disarmament affairs may work the other way around, reminding them of the utility that others continue to assign to nuclear weapons .
 The US has extended security guarantees and provided weapons to the region . The US continues to provide security guarantees to keep them nonnuclear .
 In both countries, transitions from military to civilian rule, democratisation and growing sensitivity to international norms were helpful in rolling them back . In both cases, transitions between military and civilian rule were helped in rolling back .
 South Korea's and Taiwan’s policies remain sensitive to changes in the regional security environment and in their ruling elites . They are not directly affected by the disarmament policies of the leading nuclear powers . South Korea and Taiwan's policies are sensitive to regional security .
 The question is whether the U.S. and Russia can encourage regional powers to go for arms control and disarmament by taking the lead and setting good examples . The United States and Russia should set good examples, writes Peter Bergen .
 For North Korea, nuclear weapons are the primary means of regime survival . North Korea's leaders say they are committed to the regime's survival . Kim Jong Jong-Il Jong-Un: The North Korean leader is committed to his regime .
 The price for giving them up is not written in terms of global disarmament, says David Cameron . The price of giving up the weapons is not the same as giving up them, he says .
 China’s nuclear posture depends on the size of the U.S. nuclear forces, the future of the United States ballistic missile defence programme, and the conclusions it draws from the . United States global conventional strike programme . China's overall assessment of United States policies for the long term
 If at some stage it is seen to be the first, the impact will be significant . The impact will likely be significant, according to the author .
 If the second is judged more likely, China has the resources to take precautionary measures . China is a rapidly growing country with the resources of the world's resources .
 Some significant probability not necessarily a high one may be enough to make it act defensively and keep the guard up . "Some significant probability" may make the team act defensively . "It's not always a high probability"
 It will not be possible to convince all others that what is good for the existing NWS does not serve the interests of anybody else . "What will not serve anybody else?" asks the British government .
 A third view centres on the non-proliferation norm as an intermediate variable . A view is that the norm should be considered as a factor in nuclear disarmament .
 By complying with the norm, states can build an image of being a nonthreatening member of the international community . This is a good image of a nation in good standing, according to the UN .
 By breaking the norm, proliferators risk being sanctioned against and turned into pariahs in international affairs . The world's biggest threat to proliferators: proliferators are being sanctioned and turned .
 North Korea says it aims at reconciliation and normalisation with the United States and other countries . If a stronger non-proliferation norm evolves, it would be all the more important to make it happen . North Korea has said it aims to normalise relations with the U.S.
 A strong non-proliferation norm therefore matters, and nuclear disarmament is crucial to achieve it . The U.S. should not be allowed to use nuclear weapons in nuclear weapons, the author says .
 The NPT has more members than any other multilateral arms control treaty, but this is not to say that it was the Treaty that shaped the non-nuclear policies of its prospective members .
 In many cases, the nuclear-weapon option may have played little or no role in foreclosing the option .
 New members have taken a distinct interest in other members’ compliance with the Treaty . But once new members came on board, they have taken an interest in compliance .
 The viability of the NPT and the strength of the nonproliferation norm have suffered from the NWS failure to honour their disarmament obligations . However, a record number of members notwithstanding, the NPS has failed to honour its disarmament obligation .
 The end of the Cold War raised expectations that the numbers and roles of nuclear weapons would be radically reduced and limited . While arsenals were cut, the NWS did not abandon their long-term intention to retain nuclear weapons .
 It was not until 2009, when the United States revived the vision of an NWFW, US-Russian disarmament talks started again, that trends began to turn .
 Iran is on negotiating terms with the P5+1 to find a solution to the nuclear issue and associated economic, political and security problems . But new sanctions loomed high and new sanctions were underway .
 The government in Tehran was, moreover, hampered by internal conflicts . Iran's government in Iran was, however, plagued by internal conflict and internal instability .
 It was not alien to questions of global disarmament, but faced more urgent problems in relation to the Western powers and its immediate surroundings . It faced more pressing problems than disarmament .
 There is no prospect for US-Russian disarmament negotiations to have any direct impact on it . US-Russia disarmament talks will not have any impact on disarmament, experts say .
 Even if, in principle, deep cuts and subsequent invitations for multilateral talks would have mattered, the timelines do not match . The timeline does not match, even if, for instance, the cuts and invitations would not have mattered . Even if deep cuts were made, they would have been
 Deep cuts can hardly be achieved in time to affect the outcome of the Iranian nuclear problem . Deep cuts cannot be achieved by the time of the next few days .
 Underlying political problems between the U.S. and Russia may also bring the parties closer together on matters pertaining to Iran . Resolution of underlying political problems could also bring closer together, CNN's Peter Bergen says .
 An indirect impact via the NPT could not be ruled out either, especially if Treaty implementation is seen to become more just and withdrawal becomes more difficult . Treaty implementation implementation will be seen as seen as becoming more just .
 Non-proliferation as a prerequisite for disarmament is a prerequisite . Reagan and Gorbachev hardly occurred to Reagan that nuclear disarmament was more than a two-state problem .
 As bipolar world became history and the unipolar moment receded, no single state or dyad of states can trump the others . The bipolar world is history and as it recedes, no one state can trump any other .
 In the multi-centric world of this century, many states will weigh in on the politics of disarmament .
 The four states that are not members of the NPT are all NWS, so another proliferator would come from the ranks of NPT members . NWS is a non-member state of India, but the four states not members are NWS .
 It was in the aftermath of the Indian, Pakistani and North Korean nuclear tests, and of enhanced worries about nuclear terrorism after 9/11, that the vision of an NWFW was revived .
 It is virtually inconceivable that a process of nuclear disarmament will prosper in a world where nuclear weapons are spreading, says David Cameron . It is impossible to believe that a disarmament process will prosper if nuclear weapons spread .
 The existing nuclear powers are very unlikely to push for nuclear disarmament under those circumstances . Existing nuclear powers will not push for disarmament in those circumstances, experts say .
 A more robust, reliable and effective non-proliferation regime is indispensable for the cause of disarmament . Hence, a more robust and reliable regime is essential for disarmament, he says .
 If each NWS is left, say, with some tens of weapons, the break-out risks could be too big for comfort . The risk is too high for the U.S.
 Bickering and nervousness over small numbers may increase the risk of surprise attack and inadvertent escalation when decision-makers begin to believe that war can no longer be avoided .
 The closer disarmament comes to zero, the more important nonproliferation becomes . Therefore, the closer . disarmament . comes to . zero, therefore, the greater importance of non-prol proliferation becomes .
 The distinction between civilian and military applications of nuclear energy inscribed in the NPT and the current safeguard agreements will certainly not be good enough . The distinction is not good enough.
 This is a world where a mobilisation base for rapid reintroduction of nuclear weapons is maintained . This is the world where nuclear weapons are kept in place .
 In such a world, the possibility of nuclear war might still be entertained . The possibility of a nuclear war is still entertained .
 Many states may think that hedging is prudent, leading to hedging races to be able to turn capabilities faster and faster from virtual to real .
 Virtual arsenals also need arsenal keepers, and they are never neutral experts, but socio-economic actors with a vested interest in what they are doing . The world's virtual arsenals need arsenals keepers and keepers are not neutral experts .
 They would quite possibly push for stronger capabilities and even the reintroduction of weapons . The U.S. government would be pushing to reintroduce weapons to the U.K.
 In break-oul scenarios, firsl-strike capabilities are more likely to emerge than in current nuclear constellations . The U.S. has not been able to use nuclear weapons in the past .
 Minimum deterrence levels in the low hundreds may have been chosen for good reason . It follows that minimum deterrence levels were chosen for low-risk levels .
 They provide a greater degree of stability than arsenals in the low tens, experts say . They say they provide a better stability than low tens .
 In Chapler 10, il is argued that it would be wise to stay at such levels until nuclear-weapons infrastructure and weapons-grade materials have been eliminated . Then go straight to a world below zero .
 The path dependency of nuclear disarmament must always be kept in mind, says David Cameron . Nuclear disarmament is dependent on nuclear weapons, he says .
 It may be assumed that when disarmament approaches zero, the weapons have been devalued to such an extent that issues that appear important by today’s standards have become of little significance .
 A robust non-proliferation regime would probably have to be in place . Still, it may take only one state to rock the boat, so a robust regime would be needed . The U.S. should be careful to avoid a repeat of its nuclear arms deal .
 Regional proliferation as a threat to global disarmament . The consequences of break-outs are not uniform . Regional proliferation is a global threat to disarmament, experts say .
 They depend on who the proliferator is and on the circumstances in which it happens, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 A vulnerable regime fighting with its back against the wall, acquiring nuclear weapons in the belief that this would improve their chances of survival, does not necessarily trigger proliferation . A vulnerable regime acquisition of nuclear weapons is not necessarily triggering proliferation, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Some political factions stressed that in response to North Korea’s acquisitions, the policies of extended deterrence and first-use would have to be maintained . The question of Japanese nuclear weapons was brought into the public domain for discussion .
 Hatoyama government has been working with the United States to reduce the role of nuclear weapons in the defence of Japan . Recently, however, Japan's government has worked with the U.S.
 If Iran were to break oul of the non-proliferation regime and establish itself as an NWS, the consequences would be far more far-reaching . Iran is currently the world's most secretive state of origin .
 If it had not been going for nuclear weapons before being bombed, it would be most likely to do so afterwards . If it wasn't going for nukes before the bombing, it could have bombed after it was bombed .
 In terms of size, the next in line are Japan, Brazil, Nigeria and other regional big powers followed by smaller states that are almost certain to be confined to regional politics .
 Further proliferation, if it happens, will therefore be embedded in regional-conflict formations . Further proliferation will be embedded into regional conflict formations, say experts .
 For some time, leading NWS have oriented their foreign policies and military preparations more and more towards regional affairs, including nuclear .
 The introduction of more NWS would interact with regional and global affairs in new and complex ways that defy prediction . More NWS will therefore interact in new ways, experts say .
 In East Asia, the wars of the twentieth century still cast long shadows on international relations . The Taiwan problem has not been solved; and in the South China Sea there are many unresolved territorial issues .
 The negative impact of further proliferation must therefore be seen through regional lenses, says Dr. Andrew Hammond . He says the negative impact on further proliferation should be seen in regional lenses .
 If Iran weaponises its programme, more states will invest more in nuclear technologies . Ballisticmissile defence will get another boost, generating its own problems for disarmament .
 Regional-conflict dynamics in the Middle East would pose formidable obstacles in the way of nuclear disarmament . Then, regional conflicts in the region would pose obstacles to disarmament, says Peter Bergen .
 The Iranian problem has come to drive a wide range of policies and debates about the non-proliferation regime . For good reason, the Iranian problem is important for the U.S.
 Status ambitions are difficult to pin down because, for obvious reasons, governments are loath to talk about them . Status ambitions in the U.S. are hard to define because they are often difficult to define .
 There is something illegitimate and even bizarre about seeking prestige through acquisition of the most destructive of weapons . The U.S. should not seek prestige, it should seek it for its own good reputation, he says .
 For scarcity of empirical references to capture the importance of it, some theoretical reflections may be in order . For scarce empirical references, there may be a theoretical reflection .
 All NWS have justified their nuclear-weapon acquisitions in reference to national security . The NWS has justified its nuclear-weapons acquisitions in terms of national security. The U.S. has a history of acquiring nuclear weapons .
 States need to deter potential attackers, and the gold standard of deterrence is nuclear weapons . States must use nuclear weapons to deter attackers, says President Obama .
 In France and India, status considerations were important, and such ambitions played a role in Britain, too . Status considerations were also important in India and France, as well as Britain .
 For France, the nuclear-weapon programme was instrumental in raising its international status and reviving an independent French foreign policy . France's nuclear-weapons programme helped raise its status and revive its independent foreign policy.
 Iran's nuclear programme is a status item that can be invoked to become recognised as an important power in the Middle East . For Iran, the nuclear programme can be used to become recognisable as a major power .
 Its influence in the region has increased after the invasions of Iraq and Afghanistan . Far from recognising it as a legitimate regional player, the U.S. and other countries are trying to contain it .
 Rank disequilibrium is an untenable state to be in, calling for corrective action . The situation is untenable, and it's time for the government to take action to fix it .
 The answer is to try to raise one’s rank on dimensions where it is low . Invariably, the answer to this is to raise your rank, but it is not easy .
 The preferred solution is never to equilibrate by moving in the opposite direction, from high to low across the dimensions that matter . The preferred . solution is to move in the direction of the . opposite direction from high or low .
 High rank being in the upper echelons of international hierarchies is an important source of power . High rank is a powerful position in the world, according to experts .
 Karl Marx noted that the most effective power is the structural one that functions without being actively used . Karl Marx said that the best power is that it functions without actively using . The power is a structural power, not a power that is actively used, Marx said .
 States have a fine eye for who is more and who is less powerful and accommodate them . States accommodate consciously or not to the strongest ones . States have an eye on who are more powerful and accommodating them .
 By instilling respect and awe, military force can have an impact just by being there and being seen . The U.S. military can have a huge impact on the lives of Americans .
 "Of course, the possibility that the weapons may be used must always be there," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 If not, there would have been nothing to fear and nothing to gain for the possessors . If not they would have had to be afraid, they would be better .
 The impression that nuclear weapons may be used can, however, be maintained in a variety of ways short of war . The impression of nuclear weapons being used can be maintained by a number of ways .
 The measures that have been taken throughout the nuclear age to stem the creeping norm of non-use amply illustrate this .
 For a long while, India was in a state of disequilibrium ranking high on many dimensions, but without enjoying nuclear-weapon status . India's nuclear-weapons status has been a problem for a long time, but not nuclear weapons .
 It took steps to become a more generalised top dog in 1998, when it conducted a series of weapon tests . It took another step in that direction in 2008 when the US-India agreement confirmed its de facto possession of nuclear weapons .
 Compared with neighbouring Pakistan, it is in a domestic disequilibrium, a bit like India . Compared with Pakistan, the country is in an 'domestic disequilibilibilibity'
 Pakistan is poorer than Iran and a young and fragile state, while Iran is an old power with a glorious past . Pakistan is poor and fragile, but Iran is a powerful old power, while Pakistan is a fragile state .
 Iran may remedy the imbalance through its nuclear programme, be it a civilian prestige programme or a military one . Yet Pakistan has nuclear weapons, an imbalance that Iran might remedy through its programme .
 Iran may be overcome by giving Iran a regional role in the Middle East that comes closer to the role it feels entitled to . Iran may need to be given a more powerful role in regional affairs .
 This is a delicate matter, however, for it takes nothing less than a new political equilibrium in the region at the cost of some Arab states . This is the case for Arab states in the Middle East, however .
 To avert the most imminent break-out threat must therefore be a shared responsibility . A new equilibrium can only be worked out in cooperation between the P5+1 and regional states .
 Iran may try to do what India did, only on a smaller scale tailored to its capabilities . If not, Iran may attempt to do the same, it will try to replicate the success of India .
 If the first approach is blocked, it is more likely that the second will be tried . The first approach will be blocked, but the second is likely to be tried, says the BBC .
 In theory, disarmament eliminating the very dimension on which it scored low was a way to achieve rank equilibrium . The U.S. should disarmament eliminate the dimension on that dimension, such as the dimension that scored low, in theory .
 The U.S. tested a nuclear device in 1974, but waited another 24 years before testing weapons . It tested nuclear devices in 1974 but waited 24 years to test weapons .
 It argued for example for a nuclear-weapon convention with a timeline to zero . In the meantime, it argued for a nuke-weapons convention .
 In this and other ways, the Indians exercised moral leadership, but the realism and sincerity of their disarmament efforts were open to doubt . The realism of the disarmament effort was open to doubts in their own minds and the eyes of others .
 In the mid-1990s, when the period of opportunity after the Cold War was closing, there could no longer be any illusion that this approach would succeed . In the 1990s, there was no illusion that it would succeed. In the 1980s, it was hoped the approach would
 Diplomatic efforts were useful in building legitimacy for exercising the nuclear-weapon option . Still, the diplomatic efforts are useful for exercising nuclear-weapons option, experts say .
 By 1998 India was, moreover, set on a path of solid economic growth, so it was in a better position to invest in the nuclear-weapon programme . By 1998, India was set on the path of growth, and it was also set on an economic growth .
 The self-righteousness was there as well, meaning that it was determined to equilibrate upwards . It was determined that it would be a good thing to say .
 Compensation in the form of a bonus in some other field for staying non-nuclear was out of the question . Compensation was also not possible in other fields .
 If Iran’s status aspirations can be met and its security concerns alleviated, the incentives for going nuclear would be much reduced . Iran's status aspirations are met and security concerns are alleviated .
 Full transparency and growing confidence in a nonnuclear future are keys to it . Full transparency is key to a non-nuclear future, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 Iran may turn to nuclear weapons as a means of rank equilibration like India did . If the road to regional status is blocked, Iran may use nuclear weapons . Iran may also turn to weapons if it is blocked .
 What the Treaty actually says in this respect has been under-communicated, if not completely ignored . The usual way of describing the grand bargain from the second half of the 1960s has been to emphasise what the two categories of states nuclear and non-nuclear are obliged to do,
 The fuel-cycle issues are of immediate as well as long-term concern . Preventing the spread of the spread offuel-cycle facilities is a key priority .
 Unless new arrangements to forego national fuel-cycle facilities are introduced, they will become a vexing problem as nuclear power spreads . Today, they are at the heart of the Iranian issue, and unless new arrangements .
 The NNWS should see it as part of their disarmament obligations to promote multinational and/or international arrangements that draw a clearer distinction between civilian and military applications of nuclear energy .
 Military confidence-building measures first introduced in the framework of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe in the 1970s . This is, in a nutshell, the philosophy behind military confidence building measures .
 In view of the importance of nuclear weapons and the modest degrees of trust in inter-state affairs, transparency is particularly important in this field . Transparency is especially important in the field .
 Both nuclear and non-nuclear-weapon states have a responsibility to promote transparency on behalf of nuclear disarmament . The U.S. should promote transparency, says U.K. President Obama .
 Non-nuclear states for accepting upgraded safeguards on all of their civilian activities . The non-nuclear countries for accepting upgrades to the nuclear ones for accepting such safeguards .
 At the end of the disarmament road, the NWS would also become NNWS, so safeguards on all civilian activities can be seen as a step on the way to a world without nuclear arms .
 NNWS acceptance of upgraded safeguards the Additional Protocol and further improvements to come is another way of enhancing the credibility of their non-nuclear status . The international fuel-cycle regime can do to facilitate disarmament, experts say .
 In the beginning, acceptance of safeguards was not linked to implementation of other Treaty obligations . Acceptance of safeguards has been linked to other treaty obligations . In the past, it was linked to the implementation of the Treaty .
 What was agreed when the NPT was negotiated was the need to reassure the parties that the non-proliferation obligations were kept . The NPT is a non-nuclear weapons treaty that was signed in 1994 .
 There was agreement, in principle, on the need for adequate safeguards . There was also agreement on need to be adequate safeguards, the government said .
 The safeguards system was adopted in the early 1970s was an advanced one for its time . To be taken seriously, arms-control agreements must be verified, he says .
 The linkage politics of a number of NNWS is a political fact that has to be attended to . However, while linkage arguments are not justified in the light of history, it is not justified .
 They are holding back on their arms-control commitments as long as the implementation of rights and obligations under the NPT is deemed to be imbalanced . The U.S. will not commit to arms control commitments if it is found to be 'imbalanced' in the process .
 In the Middle East, many states are doing so as long as Israel's arsenal is unrestrained . In the Mideast, Israel has been accused of using its arsenal to protect itself .
 Extended deterrence postures that are supposed to deter conventional as well chemical, biological and nuclear attack still exist . In Europe and East Asia, extended postures still exist.
 Many NATO allies do not want nuclear weapons on their soil any longer . First-use doctrine is questioned both in Japan and Europe .
 To pretend to be willing to defend Europe by inviting an act of mutual suicide was never credible, says David Cameron .
 The best that could be said in support of it is that the doctrine has been consistently repeated over the years by all alliance partners . The adversaries may have assessed the likelihood of its implementation to be a figure above zero, he says .
 During the Cold War, non-nuclear allies often worked with the U.S. to reinforce extended deterrence postures based on first-use doctrines . During the 1950s and '60s, allies worked to reinforce their postures .
 Practitioners of threat-based policies fed on each other, cooperating to beef up threat perceptions and justify requests for more weapons . The U.S. government has requested more weapons from the U.N. State Department .
 Referring to each other as “the Europeans’ and ‘the Americans’, they often monopolised the debates . The two countries often used to refer to themselves as ‘Europeans’
 US-Japan relations have also been at work in U.S.-Japan relations recently .
 The 2009 report of the United States Congressional Commission on the Strategic Posture refers to private discussions with unnamed Japanese officials urging the U.S. to maintain its nuclear presence in the Pacific . The nuclear-tipped Tomahawk missile included .
 In a letter to Hillary Clinton, Foreign Minister Okada wrote that neither the former government nor his own had expressed any views concerning weapon systems such as the TLAM/N or a robust nuclear earth penetrator . Okada noted that neither he nor his government had expressed views on the TL
 He reiterated his interest in discussing ‘suggestions that the role of nuclear weapons be restricted to deterrence of the use of nuclear arms’, i.e. transition to a no-first-use doctrine .
 NATO is conventionally superior the U.S. accounts for 45 per cent of world military expenditure and Russia for 3 per cent . Russia accounts for three per cent and the United States accounts for the third of the world's military expenditure . NATO has no military need to maintain the first-
 There is no need to keep U.S. nuclear weapons in Europe either . There is also no need for keeping nuclear arms in Europe, says President Obama .
 They serve no purpose, and if NATO functions democratically, they will soon be removed . They will be removed from NATO if it functions democratically . They are no longer useful to NATO, and they will be soon removed .
 If so, all the world’s nuclear weapons will be back with their possessors . The world's nuclear weapons would be back in possession of their owners .
 The governments of NNWS can now cooperate with the U.S. government to move the nuclear postures in this direction . Some of them are actively doing so . Both in Europe and East Asia, the governments are now cooperating with the United States .
 No nuclear weapons in the territories of others may be turned into a new universal principle . To prevent a fail-back to forward stationing, no nuclear weapons should be allowed to be used in the future .
 The principles have been important in reassuring other countries, as well as the Japanese public, that Japan will stay non-nuclear . Nevertheless, the principles have remained important to reassure other countries .
 Brazil wrote a non-nuclear-weapon commitment into the constitution in 1988 . In 1988, in a prelude to its accession to the Treaty of Tlatelolco and to the NPT, Brazil signed the treaty . Brazil also signed the N.NPT treaty in 1988,
 Other NNWS may consider doing the same not non-proliferation stalwarts like Sweden and New Zealand, where it would be superfluous, and not countries like Egypt and Turkey . And it untimely under the current circumstances in the Middle East, it would also be unt
 Indonesia and South Africa are less geared towards trading stronger non-proliferation commitments for something else . Countries like South Africa and Indonesia may consider some version of it .
 In the rollback terminology of Chapter 6, it may be of interest first of all for countries in a state of passive hedging . The rollback may be especially important for the countries in the country in a passive hedged state .
 NNWS may facilitate disarmament by tying themselves more strongly to the non-proliferation pole . This way, they may help the U.S. become more likely to disarm .
 The idea gives citizens the right and obligation to inform authorities if they discover activities that are at odds with international commitments undertaken by their governments . Citizens have the right to inform appropriate international authorities .
 Those who sound the alann must be assured that they can do so without being punished . To work, those who sound alann should be assured they can't be punished .
 The international agreements to be verified should therefore contain a clause requiring that the parties adopt national laws that guarantee the right and require the duty to inform . The agreement should also include a clause that requires national laws to be adopted .
 In practice, the effectiveness of such legal assurances would be a matter of degree . The effectiveness of the legal assurances is a question of degree, experts say .
 The stronger the legal protection, the more legitimate the reporting and the more likely it is that it would make a difference . However, the stronger the protection the stronger it is, the better it is to report .
 Societal verification has not been instituted so far, but is worth pursuing in pragmatic fashion as disarmament proceeds and national conditions become ripe for it . The U.S. has not implemented it so far .
 At low levels of arms, it may be much needed as a supplement to international means of verification . The technology could be used to verify the authenticity of arms .
 The bottom line is that, in order to be broadly accepted, the NWS must be willing to disarm . The NWS has a history of refusing to disarm, including the use of firearms .
 One cannot have disarmament without verification and societal verification without disarmament . It is also obvious one cannot have societal verification with disarmament, as well as disarmament itself .
 Article X provides a nearly unconditional legal option to withdraw from the NPT . Reserving the benefits of NPT membership provides the option of withdrawing from the organisation . Article X gives the right to withdraw as part of the membership .
 All that is required is three months’ notification and an explanation of the reasons for withdrawal . The withdrawal is required for three months and three months' notification .
 There is no body with authority to pronounce on withdrawal decisions by member states . Nothing in the Treaty and its negotiating history to indicate that exercising exercising the legal right to withdraw gives ground for sanctions or reprisals .
 When the NPT was negotiated, the typical case of withdrawal was seen to be a response by a Treaty member in good standing to a security threat coming from some other state . The typical case was seen as a response to a threat coming out of the Treaty .
 From the beginning, it was clear that a withdrawing state should not expect to enjoy the benefits of membership . From the start, it is also clear that withdrawing state would not be able to benefit from membership, the government says .
 Article IV reserves access to nuclear material, equipment and technology for NPT members . In 2008 the NSG made an exemption for India, which is exempt from nuclear material .
 Withdrawal could also mean restrictions on the right to use or keep sensitive technologies that have been acquired under Treaty regime .
 It has been emphasised that such items must be restricted to peaceful uses and remain under safeguards . Supplier suppliers should have the right to request an immediate ‘return to sender”
 Flowever, the problem with most of these proposals is how to enforce them, Flowever says . Flowever: "Flowever, it's not the only solution to the problem: How do we enforce them?"
 In accordance with international law, a withdrawing state remains responsible for violations committed while it was a party to the Treaty . The IAEA and the Security Council continues to be subject to decisions made by the IAEa and the IAFA .
 The IAEA is entitled to apply sanctions in response to non-compliance with safeguards agreements . The sanctions will be imposed if Russia fails to comply with the safeguards agreements, the U.N. says .
 Measures that may be taken include suspension of assistance provided by the Agency or member states . Return of materials and equipment that have been made available to the withdrawing state . Suspension of IAEA membership could also be imposed .
 Suspension of IAEA membership puts a pariah stamp on the state, which may hurt but, apart from the modest measures just mentioned, it is of no automatic material consequence . Suspension puts a 'pariah stamp' on state, but it's of no immediate material consequence
 The Council may pass decisions on sanctions and mandate the use of force, but sanctions usually do not work as intended . Use of force is even less likely to prove instrumental, says the Council . The Council is unlikely to be able to impose sanctions on Russia in Syria .
 Diplomatic approaches seem indispensable, and for that purpose bilateral talks and small-size negotiating frameworks are needed . Diplomatic approach is indispensable, says David Cameron . The UK is seeking to reach an agreement to reach a deal with the U.S.
 Seven-power talks are conducted in the case of Iran and North Korea, involving the P5 plus Germany and the big neighbouring states . North Korea is the focus of talks between the two countries .
 The role of the Council will usually be to back negotiations and provide incentives to stay non-nuclear . The Council is usually to back the negotiations .
 Many NNWS members of the non-aligned movement are generally opposed to referring withdrawal matters to the Security Council . Many of the NNWWS members are opposed to sending withdrawal matters .
 The Security Council has become less and less representative of the international community of states . Another reason is that the veto institute adds to its bias in favour of the West and the veto powers .
 If the NWS irreversibly disarm with a view to freeing the world of nuclear arms, it will be easier for the NNWS to agree to restrict the withdrawal option . On the one hand, if the N.NWS . agrees to limit withdrawal option, it would be
 The NWS will find it easier to take the final steps towards zero if withdrawal becomes less likely . On the other hand, the NWS is likely to take it further down the list .
 Other measures such as foregoing fuel-cycle facilifies and insfifuting more effecfive safeguards may be more reassuring . clarification of the right to withdraw from the NPT may also help .
 North Korea violated its commitments, but the Security Council failed to act . The 2005 NPT Review Conference did not even record that one party had left the Treaty . North Korea had violated its commitment to the NPT .
 The options may be limited to voluntarily giving up the right to withdraw, and establishing better procedures for assessing the reasons for withdrawal .
 The Tlatelolco Treaty had strict requirements for entry into force, but gave the signatories the option to waive them, bringing the Treaty into force in gradual fashion . The Treaty is expected to bring it into force gradually .
 The NPT has a significant waiver potential too -e.e. for waiving the right to withdraw first of all among those who followed the so-called Swedish example .
 Sweden concluded in the 1960s that it would not be in Sweden’s interest to acquire nuclear weapons . Sweden concluded that regardless of what the NWS were doing, it wouldn’t be in the interest of acquiring nuclear weapons. The decision was made in the 1970s .
 States that wish to exercise leadership in building a stronger regime might consider this possibility . States that have a strong commitment to the NPT might consider it . The NPT is a key part of the U.N. Security Council .
 Three months is too short a time to seriously address the questions raised by a notification to withdraw. As for the second option, three months is a short time to address the issues raised by the notification .
 The statement of “the extraordinary events” that the withdrawing state “regards as having jeopardized its supreme interests” should be detailed and unambiguous . In view of the serious consequences that withdrawal might have for regional and international security, the statement of the extraordinary events should
 Vienna Convention is helpful in determining what may reasonably be invoked . Vienna Convention helps determine what may be reasonably invoked in the U.S. State Department .
 It says that changing circumstances cannot be used as a ground for withdrawal, unless the existence of those circumstances constituted an essential basis of the consent of the parties to be bound by the treaty . The effect of the change is radically to transform the extent of the obligations still to be performed under the
 North Korean reference to US-South Korean military exercises, IAEA request for special inspections, clearly did not constitute a bona fide reason for withdrawal . By this criterion, the North Korea reference to U.S. and South Korea military exercises had been conducted routinely for years, the I
 A list of criteria might be developed, explaining what the “extraordinary event, related to the subject matter of the Treaty” might be about .
 Much of this is controversial, with little chance of being agreed in the near future . Much of it is not likely to be agreed in any form of agreement with the government .
 NAM members stress that the right to withdraw is a sovereign right to be upheld . NAM member: "Right to withdraw should be upheld by the NAM"
 This does not mean that NAM states turn all proposals to improve the operationalisation of Article X down . This doesn't mean that all proposals are turned down, says NAM .
 There is a body of agreement among NPT members on the need for a consultation mechanism, in the Treaty framework, when faced with a notification to withdraw .
 Agreement on more substantial measures to tighten the right of withdrawal will have to wait for better implementation of the NPT, of Article VI in particular .
 Having made a series of strong proposals in the immediate aftermath of the North Korean withdrawal, Mr. Kim Jong Jong-Il made a number of proposals . Mr. Jong-Un Jong-un: 'I'm not going to give up on the North Korea'
 Western states are now going more carefully and realistically about the issue . Western states seem to have realised this and are now more carefully .
 The term is used in a variety of ways, some of which appear more stable and satisfactory than others . Some of the most stable uses of the term include the term "stable and satisfactory"
 Certain principles, prerequisites and transitional issues, as well as political order requirements, must be considered on the way to such a world . Certain principles and prerequisites are needed to be considered in the way of such a future world .
 For nuclear disarmament to succeed, interdependence must be turned into cooperative security practices between the big powers, says Peter Bergen . Bergen: Interdependence is helpful, but for disarmament, cooperation must be shared .
 To achieve a dynamic, interactive relationship between vision and measures, one has to be serious about both . To achieve an interactive relationship, one must be serious, says the CEO .
 To be serious about the vision means that a convincing rationale for a NWFW has to be spelt out . The broadest possible agreement must be sought; and that the advantages of such a world should weigh in the assessment of specific steps to be taken .
 The weapons themselves may be in solid custody in nearly all NWS, but there is no guarantee that treacherous elements in a weak state like Pakistan would not be willing and able to leak a weapon or two to al Qaeda or Lashkar-e-Tayyiba, the group behind
 After the Cold War, measures have been instituted to reduce the amount of weapon-grade materials and secure what remains . But as more states pursue weapons programmes, new potential sources emerge .
 Sooner or later, catastrophic terrorism may be a reality unless weapons and fissile maferials are eliminated and subject to stricter controls . The U.S. government has been forced to crack down on weapons and mafesels .
 Nuclear weapons are likely to interact with inter-state conflicts in more regions and in new ways . In an increasingly mulfi-centric world with more NWS, nuclear weapons will interact with each other in more ways .
 New NWS do not have the benefit of warning, control and communications arrangements of the kind that were developed, step-by-step, during the Cold War . Cold War cold warriors are widely recognised to have benefited from good luck .
 Control mechanisms to prevent war by human error, accident or technical malfunction will be more difficult to institute and practise in a multi-polar world than in a static, bi-Polar configuration of the Cold War .
 There is a growing sentiment that nuclear weapons are too dangerous in an international system which is partly anarchic, partly chaotic . There is also a growing concern that the international system is too chaotic .
 The overriding objective is to prevent nuclear weapons from being used . This is not among the major factors in the case for such a world . But for proponents of nuclear power it is another attraction .
 If and when a NWFW comes into being, the energy situation will certainly be a lot different from what it is today, but this is what full implementation of the Treaty implies .
 "Rationales that are phrased in international security and world-order terms will not be sufficient," he says . "World-order rationales are not sufficient, however," he adds .
 To avoid these pitfalls, the frame of discourse must be broadened to include normative, moral and legal considerations . To avoid the pitfalls, we need to include Normals, Moral and Legal considerations .
 In addition to their inherent merit, the normative arguments have the benefit of being universally relevant and applicable both to governments and civil society . The normative arguments should be universally relevant to governments, the author says .
 They widen an elitist process conducted in power terms to encompass popular movements as well . The process is conducted by power and security terms to include popular movements .
 Zia Mian wants them to be at the centre of the debate, not at the margins . Zia says they are at the heart of the conversation, not in the margins.
 No yardstick can determine which line of argument is more important a rationale based on security gains or one that sees nuclear weapons as a crime against humanity . The argument should be heard in the U.S. for security reasons, not for humanity .
 The NWS would, for obvious reasons, concentrate on the security gains and reject the view that nuclear weapons are immoral and illegal . It would be a good example for the NWS to focus on security gains .
 Many NNWS argue both ways, as do popular campaigns to rid the world of nuclear arms . Many campaigns have been successful, but some argue both sides of the debate .
 Without raising the legality or illegality of nuclear-weapon possession and use, NWS may also call for abolition .
 In the years that followed, some NWS returned to guarded, conditional statements . Some NWS now return to guarded statements . NWS has a history of withholding information .
 The four horsemen and the leaders of other countries who followed suit broke that silence . "The four horseman and the . leaders of . other countries" followed suit .
 Rajiv Gandhi’s speech on nuclear disarmament before the UN General Assembly in 1988 . Indian officials also reiterated the call for abolition of nuclear weapons .
 In other regions, nuclearand non-nuclear-weapon states are waiting to see what comes of it . In other parts of the world, nuclear and non-nuke-usable states are watching the situation .
 For a while, disarmament opponents have been on the defensive . But they may hit back with greater political clout both in the United States and elsewhere . The U.S. may be able to push for greater political power .
 The legacy of threat-based security policies remains a formidable obstacle in the way of a NWFW . Arms control and disarmament are still seen by many as part of an ongoing quest for unilateral advantage, not as a global good .
 SC Resolution 1887 of 24 September 2009 is mostly about non-proliferation . Sceptics noted that both the title and the measures advocated in the second WSJ article of 15 January 2008 by the same horsemen seemed more modest than those of the first .
 Abolition has been proposed three times before before the Baruch plan in 1946, the McCloy-Zorin proposal of 1961 and the Reagan-Gorbachev attempt in 1986 . Abolition was first proposed in 1946 and was shortlived .
 They are concerned that the call is part of a double agenda, the real purpose of which is to sustain and enhance Western unilateral advantage, they say .
 The synergies of disarmament and non-proliferation may stop smaller and weaker states from acquiring ‘the great equaliser” nuclear weapons thus minimising those states’ ability to counter the vast U.S. conventional superiority . Smaller states may not be able to
 The United States withdrew from the ABM Treaty to be free to pursue ballistic-missile defence . The U.S. withdrew from ABM treaty to focus on missile defence .
 The United States is unrivalled in this field . Starting with Ronald Reagan’s Strategic Defense Initiative , the U.S. has a long history of defense technology .
 Outer space is a related arena where the U.S. is the leading nation and so objects to arms control . The United States is leading nation in the arms control arena . Outer space will be a different arena .
 The U.S. will ratify the CTBT, critics say, when it can do without testing . Critics say NWS will be restrained by it, while less-sophisticated NWS is restrained .
 A CTBT could help maintain and enhance its unilateral advantage in weapons design . Having conducted 1,000 tests and having a sophisticated nuclear-stewardship programme, a CTBT would help .
 Proponents of U.S. ratification have actually argued that way . Proponents have argued that the ratification of the Constitution is necessary .
 The advanced powers see no similar need for arms control in that sector . Production of sophisticated aircraft is beyond the capabilities of smaller and less-industrialised countries .
 Big powers have twisted the implementation of rights and obligations under the NPT so much in their own favour that by the time George W Bush left, the Treaty may have been on the verge of crumbling .
 Since the first Gulf War of 1991, it has been argued that nuclear disarmament would make the United States even more superior because nobody can match its conventional forces . Nobody can match the U.S. conventional forces, experts say .
 The U.S. is preparing for some functions to be exercised with long-range high-precision conventional weapons that others do not have . The United States is about to reduce its reliance on nuclear weapons by preparing for their functions .
 In the NWS, there are various objections to the elimination of nuclear weapons . In the U.S. there are many objections to eliminating nuclear weapons.
 During the Cold War, superpower concerns about upper edges turned into sterile obsessions with parity in order to block perceived attempts by the other side to gain unilateral advantages . parity became part of the problem making agreements more difficult .
 In the most fundamental of senses, this was a common interest because their own survival and that of human civilisation was at stake . This was the most important of their own interest, says the author .
 Reagan and Gorbachev said that a nuclear war cannot be won and must therefore never be fought . Reagan said it was impossible to win nuclear war and therefore never fight it .
 In a mulfi-centric world, it is critically important to convince states nuclear and non-nuclear that disarmament will be pursued neither as a matter of unilateral advantage nor of national sacrifice . Nuclear disarmament should be pursued as a common, public good .
 If key players cannot be convinced that the initiative is no ploy for unilateral advantage, it will go nowhere . The key players must be convinced they are not trying to use the initiative to gain unilateral advantage .
 The call for abolition must be phrased both in terms of international peace and security and in terms moral leadership . Also for this reason, the call for abolishment must be asked for international peace, security and moral leadership, she says .
 Universal moral considerations preventing mass slaughter must be turned into realpolitik . preserving human civilisation must turn into real-politik. Human civilisation must be preserved .
 National interests will not be abandoned, but elimination must be seen as being in the best interest of states . Elimination is not an option, but it is seen as a good option for the nation . National interests won't be abandoned .
 All parties to the NPT are legally obliged to work for nuclear disarmament, but the NWS have a special responsibility . The NWS are responsible for nuclear weapons, but have a responsibility to disarm .
 Declaratory policies putting the rationale in universal terms while eschewing all talk about unilateral advantage are of the essence . Declaracy policies are needed to put the rationale into universal terms, rather than unilateral advantage .
 The crux of the matter will be to reduce security concerns of states that currently rely on nuclear weapons by alleviating conflicts and adjusting conventional force constellations so that their national security affairs can be managed without nuclear arms .
 This applies to states that are under the United States nuclear umbrella . States that are conventionally inferior in relation to neighbours that may use military might for political gains . States under the U.S. nuclear umbrella; states that see nuclear weapons as insurance premiums last resort .
 To get going, United States leadership is a must and Russian cooperation is vitally important . U.S. leadership is needed in order to get going with Russia, says President Obama .
 If Russia is not ready for major cuts, the disarmament ambition will not go far . If Russia does not want to disarm, it will not be able to go far, says CNN's Peter Bergen .
 Next in the line of importance is China, because of its geopolitical significance . China is the most important country in the world, according to CNN.com .
 These are the states that most affect the security dynamics in regions of proliferation concern, i.e. in Northeast Asia, South Asia and the Middle East .
 The international non-proliferation regime will be on shaky ground, writes Andrew Hammond . If they cannot stabilise their strategic relationships and put the nuclear order on the path of disarmament, the world's nuclear order will be at risk .
 As the international distribution of power shifts towards the East and South, more attention must be paid to the priorities of the emerging powers, writes Andrew Hammond .
 If the process seems designed to contain and subdue their rise to prominence, they will not cooperate . The process is designed to subdue the rise of some of the world's most prominent figures .
 There has to be a significant element of equity in the disarmament strategy as well as in single steps . The sooner the sooner they are drawn into strategic dialogues on how to proceed, the better .
 A strategy of co-option starting with the United States and U.S. allies, continuing with NNWS that always made a case for abolition, would be to ask for trouble . The United States, allies and the U.N. would be building pressure on recalcitrant
 The goal is not just to disarm the armed but to create a world order free of nuclear weapons comprising all . The goal of disarmament is to create an all-nuclear world order, the author says .
 NNWS always played an important role in keeping the big powers honest, and in reaching out for an NWFW, they will be needed in that role .
 Words like “zero”, “elimination” and “abolition” all have in common the idea of no nuclear weapons . The idea of eliminating nuclear weapons is the same as abolishing them .
 “zero” can be conceived of in a variety of ways, and not everyone means it . Not everyone means the same when referring to it . “Zero” is a term that can be used in many ways .
 The vision of an NWFW also comes in several other forms, one imagines a world where all ready-made weapons have been eliminated, but many states maintain a mobilisation base for the rapid reintroduction of them .
 It might include fissile materials in stock, able nuclear-weapon engineers and manufacturing equipiuent on hand, and delivery vehicles ready to use . The U.S. might also have a stockpile of nuclear-grade materials .
 For the NWS, this would be a forni of deep de-alerting, approaching the status of Japan today . The NWS has been in the state of Japan since April 1 .
 The purpose of such a base is to deter others from breaking out of the agreement . The purpose is to confront violators if deterrence breaks down . The base is intended to deter other violators of such an agreement .
 First, because they sustain the mentality that nuclear war is possible at any time, they say . Second, they sustain a mentality that it is possible to have a nuclear war . Third, they argue, because nuclear war could be possible at anytime .
 Second, virtual arsenals need arsenalkeepers, and they are never disinterested experts, they say . socio-political actors legitimising their activities in terms of threats to be met and demanding more resources to counter them .
 In effect, the arsenal-keepers are likely to push for a hedging race, and would quite possibly prefer a return from virtual arsenals to real ones . The arsenal-keeping race is likely to be a push for hedging .
 Such an end state would contain the seeds of its own destruction, says the author of the book . Such a state of such a state would be destroyed by its destruction, he says .
 Firststrike capabilities are more likely to emerge than in current nuclear constellations . Third, it is a particularly bad idea because in the break-out scenarios, firststrike capabilities would emerge . It is a very bad idea for the U.S. to use nuclear weapons to defend itself
 It would be better to go “below zero” to eliminate fissile materials dedicated to nuclear-explosive uses . The nuclear-weapons infrastructure would be dismantled and the workforce redirected to other sectors, he says .
 Nuclear materials that can be used to build weapons should be banned from civilian use as well . Even more, nuclear materials can't be used in civilian use . Nuclear materials should also be banned as well as weapons materials .
 HEU is not the big issue here there is little HEU left in the civilian sector . What remains is being phased out but plutonium continues to pose a problem .
 Dual-capable production facilities for civilian use would remain, possibly based on proliferation-resistant technologies . The facilities would be subject to international control .
 This would be a more stable NWFW, building trust in a non-nuclear future . This would build trust in the future of the U.S.
 Going below zero is a matter of more or less, so this image of a NWFW comes in several variations . However, going below zero can be more or more, so it's not always the same thing .
 A third version relies on joint capabilities to intercept a nuclear attack before the weapons reach their targets . Reagan presented the idea to Gorbachev in Reykjavik in 1986 .
 Reagan offered to share his SDI technologies with the Soviet Union in order to erect a common shield against break-out attempts . Reagan's SDI technology was developed in the early 1980s .
 It takes a much more cooperative world to overcome the formidable political problems involved . Furthermore, to convert the programme into a global asset to the benefit of all may not be possible .
 In Reykjavik, it was a matter of course for Reagan and Gorbachev that what they agreed to do would set the rules for all others . The two world leaders agreed to a treaty in 1986 that would be signed by the Soviet Union in 1987 .
 In the multicentric world taking shape today, the technology would have to be shared by a consortium of big powers, not just two of them . Implementation of the technology is much more complex, making implementation of it more complex .
 The missile defence is likely to be seen through other lenses, however . Still, in a world that has come close to elimination, missile defence has come to a near-identical end .
 The pathdependence of the disarmament process must always be kept in mind, so the option should not be ruled out . The path to disarmament is always always considered in the balance .
 A world that allows the disarmament process to proceed to the point where the end station is in sight defies description . A world of disarmament can't be described as a world that would allow it to proceed without end station in sight .
 It would therefore be premature and presumptuous to select some version of the end state and discard others . Today, it would be premature to select a new state of the future, says David Cameron .
 In classical nuclear terminology, this would be a world of many threshold states, and the risk is great that it would be unstable . The risk would be great that the world of nuclear power could be unstable, says the author .
 A version that does away with fissile maferial stocks and dedicated nuclear infrastructure, with or without a shield against ballistic missiles and other means of delivery, appears preferable . A version of the North Korean state's nuclear infrastructure is preferable .
 Removing remnants of weapons programmes is a matter of degree it can be more or less complete so such a version can take many different forms . However, removing the remnants of programmes such as weapons programmes can be difficult to do .
 If a global shield becomes part of the overall arrangement, the requirements of build down “below zero” might be less stringent . A global shield could be part of an overall arrangement .
 It is hard to imagine a NWFW with different ground rules for different categories of states . The principle of equity is key to the success of the federal government .
 Some 40 years of discontent with the NPT’s division of the world into nuclearand non-nuclear-weapon states, have led many NNWS to insist on equal mles for all .
 In general terms, Obama’s Prague and Cairo speeches alluded to the same . Obama‘s Prague speech alluded to same themes .
 New measures must therefore be equitable and capability differences reduced, more and more as the process unfolds . New measures need to be equitable, and more, to reduce capability differences, experts say . But new measures must be equitable .
 If it is compromised by moves for unilateral advantage, the emerging powers of Asia, particularly, are unlikely to be cooperative . If it's compromised, it is likely to be compromised by the moves of emerging powers .
 The NPT was meant to be a regulatory mechanism for non-proliferation, disarmament, and peaceful uses all the way to zero . It is meant to prevent proliferation of nuclear weapons and arms proliferation .
 The parties may wish to reinterpret some of its provisions, but they will probably see fit to keep it until it has been implemented, i.e. until all weapons have been eliminated . iReport: Parties may want to re-interpret it, but it is likely they will see
 The NPT goes to zero, but says nothing about the precise meaning of zero . NPT says "zero" means "zero," but it doesn't say exactly what it means .
 A new convention outlining the ground rules of an NWFW has to be written before reaching that point . Therefore, a new convention must be established before reaching the point .
 The NPT is, moreover, no more than a skeleton agreement, so new rules will be needed . New rules guiding the final approaches to an NWFW will need to be needed in any case . The new rules governing the final approach to an NPT will also be needed, says
 To be agreeable, those rules must be informed by the principle of equity and lead to a NWFW where the rules are the same for all . The NWFW must be an egalitarian club, not just a club with the majority of players .
 The importance of fissile material controls was universally recognised during the NPT negotiations in the 1960s . It became the central element of NPT safeguards in the early 1970s . Fissile materials controls were universally recognised .
 The main hurdle on the way to a nuclear bomb is acquisition of weapons-grade materials, experts say . The main obstacle on the path to a bomb is the acquisition of weapon-grade material .
 The first requirement in going “below zero” would be to eliminate all stocks of fissile materials dedicated to military use . The first step would be eliminating all stocks .
 Given the vast amounts of fissile materials that exist, more steps in this direction had better be taken right away . More steps in the direction of this direction should be taken immediately .
 Such a treaty should be conceived not only as an arms-control measure banning all activities at dedicated military production facilities which would freeze the advantages of the big and advanced nuclear powers . It would also be a measure limiting the size of existing stocks .
 The equity principle means that single steps should be designed to incrementally reduce capability differences on the way to a NWFW setting the same rules for all . Single steps are designed to gradually reduce the capability differences .
 The safeguards reassuring the international community that all military production facilities are effectively shut down would also have to be equitable . The safeguards would also need to be fair and equitable .
 NNWS are unlikely to accept another differential deal such as limited safeguards limited to declared, dedicated facilities . The deal means selective safeguards for NWS and full-scope safeguards for all the others .
 In France, the UK and India, the civilian sectors are safeguarded by EURATOM/IAEA and in India by the IAEA pursuant to the US-India agreement . The other NWS civilian activities are not fully covered . In the UK, France and France by EUR
 Under an FMCT, NWS may want to mothball their production facilities at first, leaving dismantlement for consideration later on . NWS production facilities may also be mothballed under the FMCT .
 So far, limitations and reductions of existing stocks has been a NNWS demand . So far it has been limited and reduced .
 The NWS have been more or less unwilling to include them in FMCT negotiations . The FMCT talks are expected to take place in the next two years .
 Both categories of states should take an interest in the vertical as well as the horizontal dimension of the issue . Logically, both states should be interested in both the vertical and horizontal dimensions of the issues, says the author .
 This way, the vision could impact on the negotiability of an FMCT, illustrating what a dynamic interactive relationship between vision and measures might be about . The vision could be used to test the negotiationability of a new FMCT .
 In a world where virtual arsenals remain, nuclear infrastructure would be kept . Nuclear infrastructure would also be kept in place in a virtual world .
 The theoretical end point of that argument is zero operative weapons in return for a comprehensive capability to bring them swiftly back to operative status . Maybe in a time span not much different from the time it takes to ready de-mated systems for use .
 From other versions, dismantlement of nuclear weapon infrastructure follows . Nuclear weapon infrastructure is dismantled by dismantling of nuclear weapons .
 Of course, the nuclear-weapon infrastructure has many more components than fissile materials and their production facilities . Nuclear-weapons infrastructure has a long list of components, such as nuclear material .
 If it became known that a state was testing triggering mechanisms for nuclear devices, or was engaged in studies of weapons designs, the message would be unnerving .
 Under the NPT, such activities are already banned among the non-nuclear parties to the Treaty, for they constitute unambiguous signs of weapons intent . The NPT already bans such activities among those who are not nuclear .
 A NWFW allowing current NWS to stay engaged in weapon-oriented activities while prohibiting them for all others would be inequitable and therefore unacceptable . The NWFW would not allow weapons-related activities to be allowed for all other activities .
 The main bottleneck in weapons acquisition is access to fissile materials . Elimination of other components might be a lower priority, experts say .
 Effective safeguards are, moreover, a bigger challenge than safeguarding nuclear materials . For some of them, effective safeguards are a big challenge . For others, it's a big problem for them to find out how to protect nuclear materials.
 Non-nuclear components of nuclear weapons are beyond the reach of IAEA safeguards . Given constraints on transparency in some NWS, more intrusive means must be pushed gradually as new opportunities emerge .
 Overambitious attempts may backlash and do more harm than good, especially in states in the East and South that go by the principles of state sovereignty and non-interference .
 For instance, universal acceptance of societal verification will be out of the question for some more time, even on the most optimistic of assumptions . For example, accepting societal verification is still a long way away from the future .
 China's secrecy remains, moreover, a significant part of its nuclear posture . For China, secrecy remains part of the nation's nuclear posture, especially its secrecy .
 This leaves a big set of issues of how to make peaceful uses of nuclear energy more proliferation-resistant . Nuclear energy can be used to make nuclear weapons more secure, experts say .
 Today, the promoters of proliferation resistance are mostly suppliers . With some exceptions, the recipients tend to be naysayers .
 NNWS objecting to any limitation of Article IV rights as long as stricter Article III safeguards . NWS do not do more to meet their disarmament obligations, says the NWS .
 In this respect, declaratory policies conveying big power seriousness about a NWFW are helpful . The great majority of NPT parties consider this to have been a legal obligation under the NPT .
 While welcoming recent statements in support of the NWFW, NNWS hesitate to take anything for granted until the words are supported by facts . N.NWS is concerned that the words of support are not supported by the facts .
 Deep cuts and measures blocking qualitative developments of nuclear arsenals would create a benign context for radical approaches to proliferation resistance . The U.S. should consider a radical approach to nuclear proliferation resistance, writes Andrew Hammond .
 In turn, enhanced proliferation resistance would make the NWFW more sustainable . The NWFW would also make it more sustainable, say officials .
 In any scenario-writing tracing the implications of a NWFW back to the present, proliferation-resistant modes of nuclear energy appear desirable, regardless of which version one chooses .
 The incentives to acquire nuclear capabilities and nuclear weapons are strong in some cases . The mechanisms to enforce non-nuclear commitments of the NPT and of NWFZ are generally recognised to be weak .
 The further below zero one goes, the stronger the assurances against re-militarisation and the less concerns there are about the shape of the civilian sector . In a NWFW, on the other hand, the greater the assurances there are not concerns about re-militaryisation .
 The vision is not a particularly powerful guide to action . Therefore, when it comes to the proliferation resistance of peaceful uses, the vision isn't particularly powerful . The world's most powerful weapon of choice should be a weapon of peace .
 If the U.S. and Russia can agree on radical overall reductions of their nuclear forces, more is likely to follow . The United States and Russia are likely to agree on reducing nuclear forces .
 A breakthrough presupposes resolution of at least some of the controversial political issues mentioned above, and of what to do about the tactical nuclear weapons . A breakthrough requires resolution of some of these issues, such as the nuclear arms issue .
 Russia always dragged its feet when that question was raised . There is a strong case for including them, but Russia has always dragged it feet .
 Other matters of contention are the United States missile-defence programme and the emerging U.S conventional Prompt Global Strike capabilities .
 Russia would certainly like to bring both Russia and the U.S. into the next round of negotiations . Russia would like to include both the two countries in the negotiations .
 A deep cut succeeding New Start and including all categories of nuclear weapons tactical as well as strategic weapons would obviously be a major achievement .
 The build-down should be guided by the principles of transparency, implemented step-by-step, and verification of agreed limitations on weapon holdings; and irreversibility .
 It is conceivable that such an agreement would lead to multilateral talks involving all the P5 as well as other nuclear and non-nuclear weapon states . Such a deal could lead to a multilateral agreement involving nuclear and nuclear weapons states .
 The three used to say that the superpowers would have to come down to their level, i.e. to the low hundreds, but recently, the UK has shown flexibility in this respect .
 The United States and Russia need not come down to the same level as the smaller P5 powers before multilateral negotiations can begin . Maybe, maybe, the U.S. and Russia should not come at the same levels as the P5 .
 If they agree to cut their forces to three-digit figures, this may suffice . The UK, France and China may also agree to go for common P5 ceilings at about the current level .
 The U.S. and Russia would retain significantly larger arsenals than the others in the three-digit range . But if they were to invite the others with proportional reductions in mind, it might go nowhere .
 Russia says tactical nuclear weapons also play a role in how best to defend Siberia . Russia says it is considering a range of options to defend the region .
 The lower the level of strategic arms, the higher the stock of unregulated tactical weapons would loom . However, inclusion of them would be an increasingly legitimate U.S. demand, for the lower .
 Agreed reductions of operationally deployed strategic weapons to the level of 1,000 or below are virtually impossible to imagine . Leaving 2,000 Russian sub-strategic weapons aside is virtually impossible, he says .
 Freedom to mix strategic and tactical weapons under common ceilings might also facilitate inclusion of them . Freedom of mix of weapons could also help include them, experts say .
 The main approach to inclusion and reduction of threats is alleviation of threat perceptions . However, the main approach is to include inclusion and reduce them, says the author .
 The United States holds about 2,500 weapons in reserve for strategic and tactical use . The U.S. holds about 3,000 weapons, including some in reserve .
 All reserve warheads should be included in the calculations at some stage, especially if there were to be few or no limits on the capabilities for delivery . Not to leave the U.S. and Russia with much larger break-out potentials than the others .
 The bipartisan McGovem-Lungren resolution would limit U.S. and Russian arsenals to no more than 3,000 weapons in all . The resolution includes reserves and reserves, with a freedom to mix .
 During the Cold War, arms-control limitations centred on delivery vehicles . Armies-control restrictions centred around delivery vehicles, not vehicles .
 The U.S. government was quick to underline that “New START protects the United States ability to develop and deploy a CPGS capability”
 Such systems may be physically separated from strategic nuclear weapons to facilitate verification . Such systems could be physically separate from strategic weapons to verify .
 New methods to count nuclear weapons without revealing sensitive information may also help . New methods will be needed to take stock of tactical nuclear weapons and reserves .
 For tactical applications of nuclear weapons, a variety of dual-use vehicles may be used, and reserves may not be specifically assigned to particular delivery systems .
 Nuclear deterrence of pin-point conventional attacks where the objective is not to conquer another nation but to destroy specific objects may not be credible . Protective measures may be very costly or unfeasible .
 The Russians and the Chinese are concerned about it, and the concerns are by no means confined to them . The Russian and Chinese are particularly concerned about the situation .
 Reductions of total numbers, reserves included, mean that more weapons will be slated for dismantlement . Reductions in total numbers include reserve weapons and reserve weapons .
 Stronger dismantlement capabilities, codification of the principle of irreversibility, become all the more important in order .
 SORT is of the essence to build trust between the U.S. and Russia and convince others about the seriousness of the disarmament ambition . SORT aims to sustain the impression that there is no way back to arms racing .
 Plans were only a small part of the overall U.S. ballistic-missile defence programme . However, these plans were only part of U.K.'s overall ballistic missile programme .
 For deep cuts to be agreed, some clarification and modification of the missiledefence programme will undoubtedly be needed . The UK government has been criticised for its lack of clarity on the missing-defence programme .
 Russia cannot but be concerned about the viability of its nuclear deterrent if the programme is unrestrained in the face of far-reaching nuclear disarmament . Russia's nuclear programme is continuous unrestrained, says Russian President Vladimir Putin .
 If offensive systems are built down and defensive systems built up, there comes a point where the owner of the defensive systems might deny the other NWS a second-strike capability . In other words, if offensive systems build down, defensive systems build up .
 The U.S. BMD deployments in Alaska and California may be expanded and directed against China as well . The deployments may also be directed at China .
 Mutually assured destruction is far from being an ideal basis for international security, says U.S. President Barack Obama . U.N. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton has called for the end of mutually assured destruction .
 It is counterintuitive at that, because it says that we are best protected when we are naked . It says that the best protection is best when we're naked .
 Ballisticmissile defence makes an untenable situation even worse, writes Peter Bergen . It stands in the way of nuclear disarmament, he says .
 His idea was theoretically attractive, but in practice hard to implement . His idea is theoretically attractive but hard to carry out, he says .
 Like the Baruch-Lilienthal plans for global control of nuclear weapons after the Second World War, the technology developer could be left with an advantage .
 This was the way the Soviets saw it in 1946, and 40 years later, in Reykjavik . This is the way they looked at it in Iceland 40 years after the Soviet Union took over .
 The Stockholm conference on confidence and securitybuilding measures and the Reykjavik summit were the first signs of different times to come. That year, that year, the successful conclusion of the Stockholm conference was the beginning of the .
 What appeared practically impossible then may tell little or nothing about the cooperative ventures that may be possible if and when the world approaches zero nuclear weapons . What appeared to be practically impossible now may therefore tell little of what's possible .
 The trust that will still be missing during another round of deep US-Russian cuts, and the suspicions that would continue to burden disarmament negotiations well into the multilateral phase, may no longer be there or be there, but in a much different way .
 It is conceivable that research and development of defensive technologies could continue if deployment limitations are agreed upon .
 China and other states are worried that someday there may be a technological breakthrough in another related area that may leave them at a disadvantage . China is concerned about the specific missile-defence applications of the United States programme .
 The trust-consuming effect of such an R&D programme should not be underestimated . The trust of such a programme should be not underestimated .
 Scaling down missile defence is another way to reduce the overall concerns surrounding it . The U.S. has been criticized for increasing missile defence in recent years .
 Missile defence was always more of a Republican programme than a Democratic one . In the years ahead, the U.S. is likely to do so, as missile defence is always a Republican .
 Such a joint venture could be seen as a pilot project illuminating technical problems and cooperative requirements that have to be solved and met on the way to a global shield . The project could be a pilot program illuminating technical and cooperative problems and requirements .
 It may facilitate negotiations towards deep cuts, but would send a dubious signal not only to countries in the Middle East, but also to China as well .
 Combined with the sword of overwhelming offensive weapons, it puts them on the spot . Combined with an overwhelming offensive weapon, it also puts them under the spotlight . The U.S. military has a reputation for being aggressive and aggressive .
 This builds up to an argument for deployment limitations on a slimmer U.S. missile-defence programme .
 Deployment limitations mean reinstating the AntiBallistic Missile Treaty or negotiating an updated version of it . A slimmer programme is the likely outcome of United States politics anyhow .
 Whether the stability of a NWFW would best be enhanced by erecting a shield will be a matter for consideration in a world much different than ours now now .
 Doctrines Article VI was always about hardware and software both about the weapons and the roles assigned to them . Doctrine Article VI is always about weapons and software .
 For half a century, calls have been made to reduce the role of nuclear weapons in international affairs . For 50 years, there have been calls for reducing the role in nuclear weapons .
 Since the NPT was negotiated, assurances not to use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear parties are sought .
 The United States keeps roughly 1,000 nuclear warheads on alert atop ICBMs and SLBMs . The U.S. keeps roughly a third of its nuclear warheads ready to be fired after a presidential order has been issued .
 Russia retains about 1,200 warheads at top readiness, nearly all of them on ICBMs . Russia retains approximately 1.200 warheads, most of which are on ICBM missiles .
 De-alerting and de-mating are therefore primarily for the U.S. and Russia to do . The United States and Russia will not be able to de-alert or de-mate .
 New START and the new U.S. Nuclear Posture Review introduce no change in existing alert postures . Flowever, neither New START nor the new . U.K. nuclear posture Review introduces any change to existing alert . postures. Flowever .
 Except for the Chinese assurances, they are all qualified in ways fhat limif their value . The Chinese assurances have been made by the Chinese government .
 The NPT review conferences have therefore urged the NWS to be more forthcoming . The NWS has been criticised for not providing adequate information to the public .
 It does not go as far as no-first-use, but promises to work in that direction . It doesn't work as far away as no first-use .
 In deep cuts and eliiuination scenarios, this proposition is more relevant than extension of non-use assurances to NNWS, which are primarily part of the non-proliferation bargain . The proposition is therefore more relevant .
 Geneva Protocol of 1925 prohibited use of chemical and biological weapons . Geneva Protocol prohibited the use of biological and chemical weapons . The Geneva Protocol was established in 1925 .
 The CWC set a timeline for destruction of the arsenals, and agreement was reached on a comprehensive verification system . Agreement also reached on the destruction of arsenals .
 In the 1990s, a verification protocol was negotiated for the BWC as well, but the Bush administration turned it down . In the 90s, it was also negotiated for BWC but was turned down .
 ICJ Advisory Opinion of 1996 came close to a non-use position also for these weapons . Stressing that any use of nuclear weapons must be compatible with international humanitarian law, ICJ advisory opinion of 1996 also came close .
 The effects of nuclear arms are such that it is hard to imagine circumstances in which they could be used without colliding with humanitarian law . It is impossible to imagine a nuclear weapon being used without the need to comply with the law .
 The Court did not rule out the use of nuclear weapons in such circumstances . The Court also ruled out the possibility of using nuclear weapons .
 An international legal instrument declaring their use to be a crime against humanity would send an even stronger message and be a better deterrent against use .
 An agreement banning the use of nuclear weapons would siiuilarly allow for nuclear retaliation . It would be a no-first-use agreement, which may include provisions branding nuclear weapons a crime against huanity .
 The Security Council could be invited to issue such a declaration . Alternatively, it could be asked to issue a declaration by the Security Council .
 Given its conventional preponderance, the United States could more easily convert to no-first-use than could Russia . Russia could be more easily converted to no first use than the U.S.
 If the U.S. seizes the initiative and progress is made in reassuring Russia to the point where it would be willing to generalise the bilateral Russia-China no-first-use commitment, the P5 would end up with such a doctrine .
 The U.S. alliance commitments and nuclear umbrellas would have to be changed accordingly . The United States would need to be reassuring its allies in other ways, the author says .
 Two disarmament scenarios both of them outlined above illustrate how differently the break-out concerns can be addressed . Dealing with the break out potentials can be tackled with disarmament .
 The more advanced the nuclear infrastructure, the further down one may go, one says . One says that the more advanced a nuclear plant, the more likely it may go .
 The logical end point would be zero weapons in return for a capability to reintroduce them on short notice . It would be the first time the U.S. government has reintroduced weapons to the military .
 The other says such a world would be dangerously unstable because of its trust-consuming break-out potentials . The other recommends moving “below zero” to eliminate the mobilisation bases and the nuclear-weapon mentalities that they sustain .
 These very different worlds have very different implications for the structure of the disarmament processes to be pursued . The world of disarmament is very different and very different from the world of nuclear weapons .
 The weight of the argument is in favour of a disarmament process that builds up to a world significantly below zero . It would be a world of zero in a world that would have to be replaced by zero .
 In both cases, the starting point is a world of limited confidence between the big powers . Fail-back positions will be maintained in case disarmament agreements break down or new demands emerge .
 Weapons held in reserve; surplus stocks of weapon-grade materials; and a scientific-technical mobilisation base . Production facilities in a state of preparedness to be switched on again .
 In both cases, the reserves must be eliminated along with the operational weapons . The philosophy behind the hedging scenario means greater caution in doing away with weapons than that leading below zero .
 More than others, hedging proponents read international affairs in terms of threats and confiicts, partly as a continuation of Cold War mentality and partly reinvigorated by 9/11 . So it takes more to convince them that the time is ripe for elimination, writes Andrew Hammond .
 At best, hedging proponents may want to move more slowly and cautiously . At best they should be cautious and cautious .
 Two measures from the classical arms-control agenda aim to prevent renewed arms build-up .
 The more universal these and other armscontrol measures become, and the more effectively they can be verified and enforced, the more difficult it will be to break out and return to arms racing . The more effective these measures will be, it is hoped they will prevent arms racing from returning .
 The United States and China have not ratified the CTBT while the other members of the P5 have done so . The U.S. and China are the only two countries to ratify the treaty .
 The United States has conducted 1,000 tests and Russia 700; the others, far fewer . Russia has conducted 700 tests, the U.S. has conducted more than 1,500 .
 There is concern that simulation techniques will allow the U.S. to make new types of weapons without live testing . There is also concern, moreover, that sooner or later, simulation techniques could allow the United States to . make new kinds of weapons .
 The P5 should be asked to join the CTBT and undertake not to develop and deploy qualitatively new types of weapons .
 This is primarily up to the most advanced NWS,e.e. the United States and Russia . This is also up to Russia and the U.S.
 China appears ready to ratify the CTBT, provided the United States goes first . The CTBT would be a trade-free trade deal between the U.S. and China . The U.N. has not ratified the deal .
 The simplest would be to go for a ban on further production, leaving the stocks aside . But on the way to an NWFW, much if not all weapon-grade materials have to be eliminated, step-by-step .
 Trilateral Initiative concerning removal and verification of nuclear materials from military stockpiles should be set in motion as a supplementary measure . At least, implementation of the Trilateral initiative concerning removal of nuclear material should be implemented . The initiative should also be implemented as a precautionary measure, experts say .
 If and when it comes to multilateral negotiations, the participants would have very different fissile material stocks at hand . Still, if and when the talks are going to take place, the material stocks would be very different .
 Those differences cannot be erased overnight, but reductions can be carried out in such a way that, gradually, the differences will be reduced . The differences can be reduced gradually, but there are still differences to be overcome .
 China seems to have stopped production of fissile materials for weapons, but unlike the other P5 countries it has made no statement or formal commitment in this respect .
 The U.S. is not confident that it has enough fissile materials in stock, it says . It does not believe that the United States has enough in stock of the materials .
 India and Pakistan, which are building up their forces, are far from being ready for a cut-off . India is building up its forces, but Pakistan is still not ready to be ready for an end-of-war .
 A CTBT and an FMCT are also important because nuclear infrastructures would be shut down or dismantled . Nuclear test sites and fissile material production facilities would be dismantled or shut down .
 The treaties would signal that there will be less of a future for nuclear-weapon works . Experts say they may lead experts in other directions, unless they are absorbed by expanding stewardship programmes .
 In the United States, the stewardship programme has been a middle ground between weapon supporters and disarmers . The administration has increased the funding of it in order to build support for CTBT ratification .
 For status and security reasons, respectively, groups and will find it hard to abandon their weapons . Groups and groups of . groups will . find it .
 China’s nuclear weapons were not acquired to make up for conventional weakness . China's nuclear weapons are not acquired in response to conventional weakness, experts say . They say .
 North Korea does not need nuclear weapons to bolster its international status . Neither does it need a nuclear weapon to bolster international status. It does not have nuclear weapons in order to boost its status .
 China's international leverage rests primarily on its size, economic performance and ability to concentrate and exercise political power . The weapons also have a status value for China, but their status value rests on size and economic performance .
 The status tag attached to its modest nuclear arsenal matters less and less . "The status tag" attached to the nation's nuclear arsenal is now less important .
 China is not ready to say what would be required of the U.S. and Russia for it to join multilateral disarmament negotiations . However, China does not say what is needed for multilateral talks to begin .
 If the principle of enhanced security at lower levels of armaments is applied, it should be less difficult for China than for the UK and France to join the U.S. and Russia in multilateral talks .
 The closer one comes to a NWFW, the more the configuration would resemble a relationship between equals . Parity may not be attained until all the weapons have been eliminated and not necessarily then, either .
 Russia would be left somewhere in-between the US/China and the UK/France . It would be bigger in terms of population and enormous territory, but modest in economic strength .
 To cut the P5 short by taking China out would therefore seem artificial, it would seem artificial . To take China out of the group would seem to be artificial .
 The UK and France would not be able to embark on multilateral negotiations without each other . Neither would it make sense to embark upon multilateral talks without the UK or France .
 Loss of status is a real concern for both of them, but it is not a legitimate concern in the view of others . The pair's loss of status isn't a concern in others' view .
 All parties to the NPT have committed themselves to work for nuclear disarmament, but to hold the five and only de jure NWS accountable, is straightforward common sense .
 The multilateral phase should be limited to the P5 at first and widened to include the outliers thereafter, or include all NWS right away, is open to question . Whether the multilateral phases should be expanded to include NWS, or whether it should be widened to all N
 The NPT defines a NWS as a state that had tested a nuclear explosive device before 1 January 1967 . The NWS defines a country that tested nuclear explosive devices before 1967 . NWS is a N.W. state that tested such a device before 1967.
 North Korea may or may not be disarmed regardless of what the other nuclear powers are willing to do about their arsenals . North Korea's nuclear arsenal may be in danger of being disarmed .
 Pyongyang could trade its nuclear programme for economic assistance and normalisation with the U.S. There remains the possibility that Pyongyang will trade its nuke programme for normalisation .
 In 1992 the two Korean states signed a ‘Joint Declaration on the Denuclearisation of the Korean Peninsula” which ruled out fuel-cycle facilities as well . In 1992, the two countries signed a joint declaration on the Korean peninsula .
 In 2008, a denuclearisation agreement was reached in the framework of the six-power talks . The agreement did not explicitly provide for elimination of the weapons that have been produced .
 The Obama administration will probably be in a better position to deal with North Korea than the Bush administration . The Bush administration was split on what to do to North Korea .
 India, Pakistan and Israel, sometimes referred to as ‘the outliers’ have come to stay . The other three are Pakistan, Israel and India . Israel, India and Pakistan are considered the outliers in the world .
 There is nothing to suggest that they will give up their nuclear weapons any sooner than any of the P5 nuclear weapons . There is no suggestion that the U.S. would give up its nuclear weapons sooner .
 "From this point of view, it seems appropriate to include them from the beginning, together with the P5," says P5. "It seems appropriate that they should be included in the list of P5."
 Israel's arsenal may be of a size not much different from those of the UK, France and China . For all we know, Israel’s arsenal may not be as big as the UK and France . Israel has a history of its own weapons arsenal, including tanks and missiles .
 India and Pakistan are at lower levels, but seem to be on their way to similar numbers of weapons . Pakistan and India are expected to reach similar levels of weapons in the coming years .
 An agreement limiting the arsenals to the low hundreds would allow the South Asians to meet their minimum deterrence objectives . By the time a multilateral negotiation gets started, they may be there, they could be there .
 In principle, acceptance of such a deal should therefore be no problem for them . In principle it should not be a problem for the British government, it says .
 At the moment, accession to the CTBT is a problem for India and Pakistan . The two countries are at odds over access to the world's largest network .
 U.S. and Russia may no longer be in a position to resist, even if it would leave Pakistan and India without fusion weapons . However, if the United States and Russia continue to cut their arsenals and all P5 ratify the CTBT, they may not be in
 A fissile material cut-off will hardly be agreeable until they have produced enough material to meet their minimum deterrence-force targets . The U.S. has not been able to produce enough material for a nuclear bomb .
 An international agreement is unlikely to let an international agreement compromise that objective . It would be the first time the U.S. government has considered a solution to the problem .
 In the expectation that disarmament will continue and all nuclear weapons be eliminated, the differences may not matter much .
 The parties may accept them in anticipation of equal rales at the end of the process . The parties will be able to choose their own terms .
 In a static perspective, where the continuation is open to question, different break-out potentials are likely to be more controversial . The parties may choose to stay where they are, according to the writer .
 The South Asians are less sensitive to the U.S. missile-defence programme than China . China is less sensitive than the United States to its missile defence .
 To the extent that India cooperates with the U.S. on missile defence, it is actually a beneficiary of the programme . India is the beneficiary of U.K. missile defence programme .
 "Everybody has to assume that the weapons exist, so the deterrent effect is there," he says . "On the one hand, there is no formal basis on which to address its arsenal"
 Unless Israel goes public with its nuclear weapon possession, it cannot be drawn into multilateral disarmament talks . Israel is not ready to participate in such talks as long as there is no regional peace arrangement in sight, Israel says . It is all the harder because unless Israel goes .
 Israel argues that regional affairs have to be normalised and a just and comprehensive peace established . Israel says it wants to normalise regional affairs and establish a just peace .
 Only then can a zone free of nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction be implemented, shoring up what has been achieved . Only then will a zone be implemented .
 India’s foreign-policy reach goes beyond the subcontinent . South Asia comes closest, but India has its own foreign policy reach .
 India has global ambitions and no doubt considers it natural to take part in multilateral disarmament talks, time and circumstances permitting . India has a long history of taking part in disarmament discussions .
 Pakistan is a function of India in this respect and can hardly hold back if India enters the ring . Pakistan is hardly holding back as India enters a ring . India is a major factor in Pakistan's relationship with the West .
 Israel is therefore left to be treated separately, in the regional Middle Eastern context . Israel is left out of the context of the Israeli-Arab conflict .
 The name of that game is a zone free of weapons of mass destruction or, specifically, a nuclear-weapon-free zone . "The name of the game is that a zone of nuclear weapon-free zones"
 The proposal for a Middle Eastern zone was first made in 1974 . Calls for the establishment of it have been made repeatedly over the years but often for purposes other than progress .
 Two of the four outliers Israel and North Korea ean best be addressed separately . Israel and N. Korea are the two outliers in the Middle East . North Korea is one of the world's most dangerous countries .
 For the other two India and Pakistan, the ambition must be to draw them into global negotiations together with the P5 . The ambition is to draw the two countries into global talks .
 If a eriteria-based approach is adopted in relation to the outliers, ask all three to abide by the commitments that India has undertaken and raise the bar for de jure recognition by demanding, say, accession to the CTBT and a moratorium on fissile material
 NNWS should also be invited to the table, e.g. states with advanced civilian nuclear programmes, and with a view to regional representation . N.NWS also should be invited into the table .
 One or more NWS may find that they can go no further unless security concerns have been alleviated and the military and political role of nuclear weapons has been diminished . The NWS could find themselves unable to go further if security concerns are alleviated .
 China to follow up on its no-first-use posture; India to push its long-standing proposal for a nuclearweapon convention . NNWS to press their case for a NWFW whether they are brought into the negotiations or not . China to push their own no first-use
 Most importantly, the U.S. may remain committed to the course initiated by President Obama . The United States may stay committed to Obama's course of action .
 Ceilings in the low hundreds will presumably be drawn on the basis of some notion of minimum deterrence . Ceilings will presumably come from a notion of a minimum deterrence.
 Minimum deterrence is a function of the vulnerability of the weapons, their ability to penetrate enemy defences, and the possibility that some of them will malfunction and fail to arrive on target for that reason . In terms of hardware, minimum deterrence is the result of the risk of malfunctioning weapons .
 In terms of software, it is a function of the efficiency of the C3I system and the perceived political will to follow through on the deterrence doctrines . The software is expected to be used by the U.S. in the near future .
 India and Pakistan may be going for forces in about the same range, and Israel may already be there . Israel may be already there .
 It may be assumed that multilateral negotiations will be heading for ceilings in the lower end of this range . This is compatible with notions of minimum deterrence, but not allowing significant increases in any of the forces .
 Substantial additions would run against the declared aim of the exercise, which will be framed in disarmament terms . The exercise is being framed in terms of disarmament .
 This is the point at which the continuation is hard to foresee, for the world will look much different . This is not the end of the world, but the future will be much different, says President Obama .
 Some force constellations are known to be more unstable and dangerous than others . However, political-order issues aside, some force constells have been more unstable than others.
 A few parameters may therefore be laid down to steer the process away from the greatest risks in the final approach to the goal . The parameters may be set down, steer the way towards the best risk-taking .
 This pertains, in particular, to the worlds immediately above and immediately below zero . This pertain to the world above and below zero.
 At the level of, say, 30 nuclear weapons, the retaliatory capabilities may be in doubt . The U.S. has 30 nukes, but not 30 nuke weapons .
 Some weapons may be destroyed by an attacker, others may be intercepted, and yet others may not function as planned . Weapons may not work as planned, but some weapons may never function properly .
 It may lead to surprise attack, hitting an enemy when its guard is down, or inadvertent escalation when decision-makers begin to think that war can no longer be avoided .
 Force levels in the low hundreds may have been chosen for good reason . However flexible the notion of minimum deterrence is, minimum deterrence may not have been possible .
 It may therefore be wise to skip those transitional phases immediately above and immediately below zero and go from the low hundreds to significantly below zero .
 The U.S. should eliminate weapon-grade materials, dismantle dedicated nuclear infrastructure and redirect nuclear-weapon expertise before eliminating the remaining weapons . That can be done by dismantling dedicated nuclear facilities and redirecting nuclear-weapons expertise, experts say .
 The stability of minimum-deterrence postures would be maintained until the stability of an NWFW has been ensured . In other words, the stability will be maintained .
 Then, and only then, would it be time to move from the one state to the other . "Then, only then," would be time for the two statesmen to move .
 Still, their capabilities will remain different in many respects, especially qualitative ones . Still, they will be different from each other in many ways, especially in the future .
 If commitments to an NWFW are firm and the expectations that it will be achieved are strong, equal or unequal terms some steps earlier will not necessarily matter very much . If the commitments are firm, it will not matter much if some steps are taken earlier .
 In a process perspective, there would be more leeway in the negotiation of transitional steps than in a static perspective where each stage stands on its own and the future is open-ended .
 If a multilateral deal is struck in a static perspective this far, but no promise of going further the NWS are likely to be more sensitive to competitive edges and seek unilateral advantages .
 More than in a process perspective pursued in the name of global public goods, the name would be old-fashioned power politics . The name of the game would be power politics, says David Cameron .
 In the European Union, integration theory has inspired integration theory more than any other empirical setting . The question is whether integration can stop and stay at some point without unravelling . The European Union is the most complex place in the world where integration theory works .
 The NWS is more likely in a static context, where the NWS continue to demonstrate the significance that they attach to nuclear arms, than in a process perspective where proliferators would confront a big majority of states set on the course of continued disarmament .
 Stagnation may lead to proliferation, which in turn may lead NWS to rearm . NWS may therefore lead to the rearmament of NWS, which may lead it to be more aggressive .
 Obama administration will rely on overwhelming U.S. power, nuclear weapons included, while making rhetorical and substantial commitments to disarmament, however vaguely defined, experts say .
 It means retention of slimmer arsenals, bringing disarmament to a halt at a level compatible with U.S. national interest in continued military superiority . The U.N. says disarmament is compatible with United States' national interest .
 President has declared higher aims for nuclear disarmament and so have many of his collaborators . But in the face of domestic and international opposition, he may have to strike a compromise of this kind .
 Like the disarmament agreements by the end of the Cold War, stagnation may be the beginning of reversal, writes Peter Bergen .
 In SC Resolution 1887, the P5 declared themselves in favour of a world without nuclear weapons . The P5 have declared themselves against nuclear weapons in a resolution .
 Still, when it comes to specific measures, they tend to take one step at a time without making any further promises . Still, it's not clear what specific measures will be implemented .
 To reduce the complexities of nuclear disarmament to a timeline is arguably reductionism beyond reason . The complexities of disarmament are arguably reductionist beyond reason, says CNN.com .
 At some stage of the process it will be necessary to supplement the NPT, which is but a skeleton agreement to zero, and to define what kind of NWFW to aim for. However, at some stage the process will be needed to supplement it .
 A convention defining the rules of the road towards nuclear-weapon freedom can also reduce the action space for spoilers and for unforeseen developments to take the process off-track .
 The lessons from the Oslo process on the Middle East and from negotiations with North Korea point in the same direction . North Korea talks will be held in a similar way to the talks in Oslo, Oslo and Pyongyang .
 If at all possible, a compressed, comprehensive approach to the final objective has distinct advantages . A compressed approach to a final objective can have distinct advantages, such as a compressed approach .
 Two arguments in support of the process perspective carry particular weight . The process perspective is key to supporting the process process .
 60 years of no use does not guarantee another 60 years without the use of nuclear arms . 60 years in no use is not guaranteed for 60 years to use nuclear arms, experts say . The U.S. has not used nuclear arms in more than 60 years .
 Second, the threat of mass destruction is morally unacceptable and should be made unambiguously illegal . Third, it should be morally unacceptable to use mass destruction, the author says .
 The effects of nuclear weapons are stronger, more indiscriminate and longer lasting than those of any other weapon, says author . Nuclear weapons are all the more reason to ban them, he says .
 From both angles, MAD is an appropriate acronym for continued reliance on nuclear deterrence . MAD is a good acronym for the U.S. from both sides of the debate .
 The first stages of the disarmament process do not presuppose any change of world order, but imply a shift from antagonistic to cooperative behaviour . US-Russian cuts leading to multilateral talks do not imply a change in world order .
 The current security system based on nuclear deterrence is based on cooperation and mutual restraint . Subsequent stages require more of the same, gradually transforming the current system into a system of cooperation .
 Arms control and disarmament can assume the role of catalyst and amplifier of such a change . Arms control can be a catalyst for a change in the world, says Dr. David Cameron .
 Confidence must be built, confiicts must be alleviated and solved, conventional force relationships must be adjusted and international politics must be better institutionalised as the process unfolds .
 The first test of disarmament as an organising principle was Obama’s use of the re-set button . Obama invited Russia to follow-up on START 1. START 1 .
 Controversial nuclear weapons, missile defence and new long-range conventional weapons must be solved . For deeper cuts to be achieved, controversial military problems regarding tactical nuclear weapons and missile defence must be addressed .
 NATO's role and reach and other sensitive issues along Russia’s southern borders and towards Iran are better managed to the satisfaction of all concerned . This in turn presupposes that contentious political questions like NATO’�s role and . reach and . other sensitive . issues along . Russia
 When multilateral reductions to the low hundreds have been agreed, further steps will depend on fundamental world order changes . From then on, the question of how to live without nuclear deterrence becomes pressing, writes Andrew Hammond .
 References have been made to the socalled ‘European concert’ after the Napoleonic wars, when the European powers undertook to respect each other’s vital interests and exercise restraint in a system .
 Power emerges from a sense of community and is exercised by an allocation of responsibilities related to a country’s resources, says the author of the book .
 It is a kind of world order either without a dominating power or in which the potentially dominating power leads through selfrestraint . The world order is either a world order without a dominant power or a potentially dominant power leading through restraint .
 A big power concert may be predicated on equilibrium between the participating states or it may be based on consensus . It may also be based upon consensus, such as equilibrium between states or equilibrium .
 Generally, the former has been considered less demanding than the latter . There are few examples of sustained operation of any version of power concerts .
 Today, when power is shifting so rapidly, a lasting equilibrium is dead on arrival . Today, however, it is not a long-term equilibrium is likely to last long .
 Better to focus on norms norms of mutual respect and self-restraint embedded in a growing body of international law,a.a. with a view to building a platform for effective enforcement action .
 The NPT suffers very much from lack of well-functioning enforcement mechanisms, says NPT chief executive . "The NPT has a very poor record of not being able to enforce its rules," he says .
 The Security Council is increasingly out of tune with the distribution of power in the international system . Not only is it difficult to forge consensus between the P5, but the Security Council itself is out of touch with the world's power distribution .
 Progress towards a NWFW requires cooperative security between the big powers with a view to more effective collective security mechanisms in the hands of a reformed world organisation . The United States, Russia and China are the only two major powers in the world to join the group .
 Interdependence is growing by the day and necessitates broad-based international cooperation on regulatory measures . International cooperation is needed to prevent further dependence on Russia and China becoming more dependent .
 Globalisation is far from portraying a golden age for international norms in general . However, globalisation is not portraying a 'golden age' for global norms, it says .
 Liberal internationalism pitted against state sovereignty, territorial integrity and nonintervention in internal affairs . Protectionism is back on stage, and liberal internationalism is pitted against the state sovereignty .
 In East Asia, rapidly growing economic interdependence is a brake on conflict dynamics in the region . The region's growing interdependency is key to its stability and stability, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Economic cooperation and security policies are conducted along different trajectories, say experts . However, economic cooperation is conducted along separate trajectories . Security cooperation and economic cooperation are conducted on different trajectors, experts say .
 Integration has been going on for more than 50 years . Starting from the interdependence of the Coal and Steel Union, integration is going on .
 When the Cold War ended, the European Union and Russia named each other as strategic partners . The EU and Russia are now a strategic partners in the world .
 Russia and the European nuclear powers threaten to be the first to use nuclear weapons against each other . Still, Russia and Europe threaten the first use of nuclear weapons in a nuclear war .
 There is no reasonable connection between the political sphere and existing nuclear doctrines . There are no reasonable connections between political and nuclear doctrines, he says .
 Extended deterrence in the form of forward basing of nuclear weapons and first-use doctrines are deemed increasingly dysfunctional in Europe and East Asia . In particular, extended deterrence is deemed 'deteriorating' in Europe .
 EU is based on international rules, norms and standards, and committed to follow up on them in its external affairs . EU is committed to following up on international norms, and follows them in the EU's external affairs, it says .
 The United States is less predictable in this respect because of the likely fluctuations of unilateralism . The U.S. is likely to be more unpredictable in the future because of its unilateralism, CNN's John Sutter says .
 The United States emphasises military strength and application of military means in international affairs . Europeans emphasise non-military solutions to problems out of conviction as well as necessity .
 There is more to suggest that Russia will be better integrated into European affairs than that it will be kept out . As for relations with Russia, there are different cultures at work in Eastern Europe, Western Europe, the United States and in Russia itself .
 The danger of nuclear-weapon-use may be highest in South Asia and the Middle East . The danger is highest in the region, according to experts .
 These are volatile areas that call for combinations of regional measures and global initiatives . The volatile areas call for regional measures to be combined with international initiatives .
 In the Middle East, the name of the game is a zone free of nuclear weapons or of chemical and biological weapons as well . In the region, it is also free of chemical, biological and nuclear weapons as also .
 These proposals are inextricably linked to the management of the conflict formations in the region . The proposals are linked to management of conflict formations, the author says .
 1995 review conference adopted resolution on the matter, but no progress has been made in implementing it . 1995 review and extension conference adopted a resolution .
 Egypt has not acceded to the CBC, the BWC, the CTBT, the Additional Protocol on safeguards and the Pelindaba Treaty on Africa as a nuclear-weapon-free zone . Egypt is not a member of the CBC and BWC .
 The emergence of the Iranian nuclear programme reinforces this attitude and inspires hedging . Iran's nuclear programme is the reason for hedging in the Middle East .
 The path-dependence of nuclear disarmament blurs the picture . Thinking beyond multilateral talks and nuclear arsenals in the low hundreds, the path of disarmament is blurred .
 The nature of world politics defies prediction. That far ahead in political time, the nature of political time defies predictions .
 For political leaders to act on complex realities, the realities have to be simplified . The realities must be simplified for politicians to take action on complex issues .
 Heuristic assumptions to that effect may be flawed, but by making the move towards a NWFW more thinkable, realisation of it becomes more likely . Realisation of the NWFW become more likely.
 The term “security dilemma’s” was coined by John H Herz in Political Realism and Political Idealism . Power shifts and nuclear weapons are key issues in nuclear disarmament .
 The British historian Herbert Butterfield described the situation in History and Human Relations in a similar way .
 China has begun to exert a reverse pull, investing more in R&D and playing on patriotism . Recently, China has started to exert more in its own image of patriotism .
 Asians welcomed the U.S. presence and role as their region’s security and prosperity guarantor not because they loved America the most but because they feared America the least . II “Asians. welcomed the United States presence. Not because they . loved America, but
 A total of 24 IRBM warheads of half-a-megaton yield, slated to be deployed on the IRBMs that never arrived, remained aboard the Alexandrovsk in the port of La Isabella and were not available to Pliyev . The warheads were intended to be
 "The perceived existence of such a force would constrain and deter the enemy," says President Obama . "Such a force could constrain, deter and constrain the enemy"
 "We have the right to consider it as a response even without being under actual missile attack," says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Putin: "We're not going to be surprised if we're under attack"
 In Europe, reductions brought the number of U.S. nuclear weapons down to the low hundreds . In the United States, fewer than 1,000 nuclear weapons have been used in Europe .
 Iraq and Iran were viewed as revisionist states wanting to control much of the Middle East . The region was viewed as having potentially severe effects on the flow of petroleum to the West .
 The original ambition of the Bush administration was to push all anti-status-quo states in the Middle East into obedience by regime change and use of military force if need be . While it had been U.S. policy to contain and deter these states, it seems that the original
 The B-61-11 bunker-buster bomb was further developed without nuclear testing during the 1990s . The bomb was developed in the 1980s without nuclear tests .
 It also lowered the bar for nuclear-weapon use by replacing “war” with “conflict’s” The Strategic Command proposed the change . The change was proposed by Strategic Command .
 The emphasis was moved from war between the major powers to regional contingencies . Nuclear planners anticipated that nuclear weapons might be used in lessintense conflicts than previously envisioned .
 The United States reaffirms that it will not use nuclear weapons against nonnuclear-weapon state-parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons . The U.S. reaffirms its commitment to non-nuclear-weapons states to the treaty .
 "We have the right to consider it a response even without being under actual missile attack," says President Obama . "We're not going to be under attack. We're going to have a response," says Obama .
 The number of nuclear-capable land-based aircraft will be reduced from 60 to 40 . The number will be cut from 60 aircraft to 40 aircraft .
 The Obama administration has requested $239.6 million for prompt global-strike research and development across the military services in fiscal year 2011 . The request is part of a broader effort to combat global strike threats .
 Budget documents indicate that by the end of fiscal year 2015, $2 billion may have been spent on the PGS programme . Budget documents show that by 2015, PGS may have spent more than $2billion .
 PNEs have been found to be of little or no utility, so the article is commonly considered to be a “dead” one . The article is considered a ‘dead’ one .
 The meeting might be held in the autumn of 2009 midway between the inauguration of a new U.S. president and the 2010 review conference of the NPT . The reasoning was that the meeting would be convened in the hope that policies of exceptionalism, unilateralism and coalitions of the
 Israel and the U.S. have strategic understandings between them for years, says President Obama . Israeli Prime Minister Yossi Obeidallah: "I want to remind you that in my first meeting with President Obama in Washington I received from him, an itemised list of
 Terns like “about to attack” and “seeing the attack coming” leave much to interpretation, however, however .
 The downside is that pre-emption may trigger inadvertent escalation leading to war . The downside of pre-empting is that it may lead to war, says John Defterios .
 During the Cold War, the offensive capabilities along the dividing line in Central Europe were commonly recognised to outweigh the defensive capabilities on the other side . The temptation to pre-empt would have been strong had one or other side believed that an attack was coming .
 It legitimises certain actions that would otherwise be unlawful, in response to an illegal act by or under the aegis of another state, it says . It legitimates certain actions .
 Reprisals, too, are subject to the general requirements of necessity and proportionality, says the U.S. Supreme Court . The U.N. government has been criticized for its actions in the past .
 Non-coercive means should be considered before a reprisal is carried out, says the author of the book .
 There is a substantial body of legal opinion holding that pennissible reprisals are limited to measures other than armed force . There is also a body of opinion that reprisibles are limited only to measures not armed forces .
 Had a natural uranium blanket put around the core, some plutonium could have been produced . But without major reconstruction of the reactor, it would not have been enough for weapon production .
 The HEU that had been stored at the reactor site was not hit by the bombs . It stayed there until shortly before the 1991 war, when Saddam Hussein ordered it removed in a futile, last-minute effort to get a bomb .
 Had the Iraqis begun to adapt the reactor to make it a better source of plutonium, or removed the HEU it was designed to use, the alarm bell would have rung immediately . The reactor complex was under IAEA safeguards .
 Mohamed ElBaradei proposed a sequence of measures that formed a constructive agenda for further inquiry and action . In a much-noted article published in the autumn of 2003, he proposed a series of measures .
 The High Level Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change of the U.N. supported many of these measures . The panel also supported many other measures .
 As noted below, the negotiating history sheds light on a number of other measures .
 Unqualified non-use assurances to non-nuclear parties to the NPT cover such contingencies, while no-first-use doctrines do not . No-first use doctrines are not covered by NPT .
 If somebody breaks the doctrine, the other NWS would be freed from their obligations . If someone breaks the rule, the NWS will be freed of their obligations, the others would also be freed .
 The prime objective, however, is to prevent a nuclear war from breaking out, the prime objective of the government .
 Self-imposed restraints to spare NNWS of the horrors of nuclear warfare can realistically not be expected in any case, regardless of what kind of assurances given in time of peace .
 Paragraph 17 of S/Res/1887 notes ongoing discussions on how the NPT parties could collectively respond to notifications of withdrawal . It affirms that a state remains responsible under international law for violations committed prior to its withdrawal .
 First, we must stop the spread of nuclear weapons, and seek the goal of a world without them . We must also seek the end of nuclear arms, the author says .
 Richard Lugar said the agreement was one of the most important strategic diplomatic initiatives undertaken in the last decade . Lugar: The agreement was a strategic diplomatic initiative undertaken in a decade .
 The NSG gave its consent on 6 September, and the bill was introduced to Congress on 10 September . The bill is expected to be introduced to the US House of Representatives .
 The Hyde Act of 2006 required that Congress be in 30 days of continuous session to consider the deal had to be sidestepped . In order to conclude the deal before the Congressional recess, the Hyde Act was passed by Congress in 2006 .
 Subramaniam is head of Prime Minister Singh’s Global Strategic Development Task Force . He is also head of the Global Strategic Developing Task Force.
 India made a deal with Russia to import 2,000 metric tons of uranium . India also made an agreement with Kazakhstan that includes provisions for natural uranium deliveries to India .
 NNWS should be trusted not to divert nuclear material from unsafeguarded civilian reactors, fuel-fabrication plants, etc. NWS must put all their activities under safeguards, and on the other, must be trusted to not divert material .
 All civilian activities should also be placed under safeguards in these countries . To avoid yet another differential treatment in favour of the NWS, NWS should be put under safeguards .
 The NPT mandates that safeguards agreements be concluded within 18 months of the Treaty’s entry into force . Failure to do so is a violation of the NPT, so failure to complete the agreement is a breach of the treaty .
 Report: Reinforcing the Global Nuclear Order for Peace and Prosperity, Report prepared by an independent commission at the request of the Director General of the International Atomic Energy Agency, May 2008 .
 No international legal instrument obliging the parties to stay non-nuclear had been established . The safeguards that were introduced in the second decade had limited coverage .
 In this period, the P5 did not conduct their nuclear-weapons programmes under the guise of dual-use facilities .
 The existence of the programmes could not be hidden given the size of gaseous diffusion facilities, scientists say .
 The dual-use option became attractive later on when there were more technologies and facilities to hide behind . Non-proliferation nomis, obligations and safeguards had begun to take hold. Dual-use options became attractive when there was more technology and facilities .
 India and Pakistan were the last ones not to violate any such commitment . Pakistan and India did not violate the commitment, says Pakistan .
 Waldo Stumpf was appointed by Frederik de Klerk to lead the dismantlement of the weapons programme . He delivered a 1995 lecture entitled, “The Birth and Death of the South African Nuclear Weapons Programme” in Italy .
 President de Klerk publicly revealed to the Parliament and the world that South Africa had built nuclear weapons in 1993 . President deKlerk was not until 24 March 1993 that he publicly revealed the secret to Parliament .
 It was never turned into law, but have been repeated by Japanese leaders ever since . It has never been passed into law but has been repeated since .
 In the 1960s, the number was fast increasing because of the decolonisation wave . The number of people in the UK were fast increasing due to the decoration of the continent .
 A favoured way out is multinational or international solutions to the fuelcycle problems, says the author of the book .
 These are complex propositions, however, and they have yet to be applied in any region of proliferation concern . They are complex, but they are yet to apply in any area of concern .
 Prohibited under the NPT are activities unambiguously related to nuclear-weapon production, such as weapon-design studies and development of implosion mechanisms . Prohibited such studies include weapon design studies and implosion techniques .
 They were insurance, it seemed, against losing the whole program at once . They were also insurance against losing them all at once, but not the whole thing .
 SCO consists of China, Russia, Russia and the Central Asian states except Turkmenistan . The SCO is based in Beijing, China and Russia . It is the only one of the three countries in the region .
 Hymans suggests that such leaders are rare, but in Iran this is a common state of mind . Iran's president has been in the country for more than a decade .
 Whether it was a genuine offer, a means of alleviating a dire threat to Iranian security at that point in time, or a combination of these factors remains unclear .
 The site was selected on purpose in a place that would be protected against aerial attack . It is one of the pre-emptive measures .
 Ahmadinejad vows dramatic expansion of Iran’s nuclear program . Thomas Erdbrink, “Ahmadinejad vowed dramatic expansion” in 2009, Washington Post Foreign Service .
 When levelled in the name of nonproliferation, sympathisers would be fewer . However, when levelled, the sympathisers are fewer than sympathisers, they are fewer .
 The NIE also concluded, with a lower level of confidence, that the weapons-oriented activities have not been resumed . NIE: With a lower confidence, the NIE concluded with a less confidence that they have not resumed .
 Respect for other countries’ systems of government was a confidence-building measure that facilitated agreement on human rights and political freedoms . respect for other nations’ governments is a confidence building measure that facilitates human rights, political freedoms, the EU says .
 In due course, promotion of rights and freedoms tend to translate into systemic change, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 The Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe became a precursor to regime-change in Eastern Europe in the wake of the Cold War . This way, the conference on security and cooperation in Europe was a precursor .
 In 2003, it withdrew because it was designated by the United States as part of the “Axis of Evil” and targeted by the U.S. pre-emptive strike policy . In 2003 it said it withdrew due to the threat of a pre-emption strike policy
 The 2005 NPT Review Conference failed even to note what North Korea had done . The 2005 conference did not even note what it had done to North Korea .
 See “Joint Declaration on the Denuclearisation of the Korean Peninsula”, 1992 . See ‘Joint Declaration on the North Korea Peninsula’ .
 The October 2007 Accord did not say that the weapons that North Korea has produced should be eliminated . The 2007 Accord didn't say that such weapons should be banned .
 North Korea undertook to close down and seal facilities in Yongbyon and invite the IAEA back to monitor and verify these actions . On 13 February 2007, the parties had reached agreement on “Initial Actions for the Implementation of the Joint Statement”
 The core concept of Juche is the ability to act independently without regard to outside interference . The concept is to be independent of outside interference in order to achieve success .
 Juche is a malleable philosophy reinterpreted from time to time by the regime as its ideological needs change . Originally described as a creative application of Marxism-Leninism in the national context . Originally .
 It was a Canadian reactor of this kind that produced plutonium for India’s explosion in 1974 . Israel got the same type of reactor in the early 1960s . India got the reactor from Canada in 1974, and Israel did in the 1960s.
 Had the Agency also asked for special inspections in other, less-sensitive settings than the North Korean one, the reaction may have been different .
 North Korea was not ready to make its nuclear programme fully transparent . North Korea's nuclear programme has not yet been fully transparent, says South Korean official .
 The U.S. indicated that it would support the introduction of lightwater reactors in the DPRK . Pyongyang suggested it would invite the IAEA to implement safeguards to the Agency’s satisfaction .
 Later, that willingness abated, as became obvious in connection with the occupation of Iraq in 2003 . The willingness of the U.S. to intervene in Iraq has abated since 2003 .
 KEDO selected the South Korean designed Ulchin 3^ LWR as the reference model for the project . South Korean finn to be the prime contractor . KEDo selected the U.S. designed the Ulchin LWR .
 South Korea undertook to cover most of the costs, of the order of $3 billion . South Korea is expected to cover the cost of the project .
 In the event North Korea wanted to restart its facilities in Yongbyon, it would take approximately a year to do so . In the view of Christopher Hill, the United States negotiator, it meant that in the event . Hill: "In the event [North Korea] wants to restart
 The North Koreans resumed construction of the 50MWe reactor after the breakdown of the Agreed Framework . The reactor is expected to be completed in 2016 .
 Chinese observers emphasise that the Soviet Union should never have let Estonia and the other Baltic states go . Chinese observers say it was a mistake to let Estonia go .
 France also looked at the British Empire, which was considered to be stronger than the French, and saw it was declining . The British Empire was considered stronger than France, and was declining in France .
 For France, it was therefore important not to be sliding on a downward slope . France is not going to be on the downward slope again, says the French president .
 Iran’s influence in the Middle East has been growing in recent years . By comparison, Iran's influence has been shrinking in the region .
 The challenge for Iran is that its influence is stiffly contested by the US, Arab states and others, which are building the broadest possible coalitions against it . The challenge is that Iran is being challenged by the U.S.
 Okada released the Japanese version of the letter at a press conference in Tokyo on 22 January 2010 . Okada's letter was released in Japan in 2010 .
 The interest in reviving the objective of a NWFW has also spread to the political mainstream in countries that had not been very vocal on this matter in the past . These and other statements by a great many leaders .
 A third article by the “four horsemen” in the Wall Street Journal of 19 January 2010 advocates increased support for the stewardship programme in order to maintain the safety and security of the nuclear arsenal .
 On 29 January, Vice President Biden announced that the administration’s FY 2011 budget proposed an increase of $600 million, and $5 billion more for the next five years . The administration has proposed a $6 billion increase in the budget .
 Kant warns that by following narrow prudential interests, leaders of victorious states undermine the possibility of constructing a durable peace, which is the ultimate aim of warfare . Kant says peace is peace, not war, but peace is the aim of war .
 The same warning applies to arms control as a tool of unilateral advantage . Arms control should not be used to win back unilateral advantage, experts say .
 The web of arms-control agreements broke up under the pressure of aggressive U.S. unilateralism . The most important remaining treaty the NPT was used to promote non-proliferation interests while neglecting those parts that constrain United States freedom of action .
 This was done at the expense of trust between nations, casting a shadow of suspicion into the future that jeopardises the prospects for anus control and disanuament . This is done at a cost of trust, and it could jeopardise the prospects of anus control .
 We have conducted more than 1,000 nuclear tests hundreds more than anyone else . North Korea has conducted more nuclear tests than any other nation .
 Would-be proliferators or modernisers must test if they are to develop the kind of advanced, compact nuclear weapons that are the most threatening .
 The United Kingdom and Norway are doing a joint project, the first of its kind between a nuclearand a non-nuclear-weapon state . The project is the first to be done by a nuclear and non-weapons states .
 The IAEA is already in a position to make use of information stemming from non-governmental sources . The proposition is very attractive, and by a Board of Governors’ decision of 1992, 1992, the decision was made .
 Russia and China are far from ready to institutionalise a verification system that recognises nongovernmental actors . However, China and Russia are not ready to put together verification system . The system is still being considered by the Russian government .
 As long as this is the case, it is better not to burden the process with ideas that are incompatible with their traditions and political systems .
 Unqualified non-use assurances to non-nuclear parties to the NPT would cover such contingencies, while no-first-use doctrines do not . No-first use doctrines would cover contingencies .
 Self-imposed restraints to spare NNWS of the horrors of nuclear warfare can realistically not be expected in any case, regardless of what kind of assurances have been given in time of peace . However, the prime objective is to prevent a nuclear war from breaking out .
 Bar, S “Iranian Nuclear Decision Making Under Ahmadinejad”, paper submitted to the fourth Herzliya Conference, Tel Aviv . Bar: ‘Iranian nuclear decision-making under Mahmoud Abbas’s regime’
 A World Without the Wesf’, The National Interest, The Nixon Center, is published by the Nixon Center . It is published in the National Interest’s "A World Without The Wesf' .
 Mohammed Bedjaoui, Fornier President of the International Court of Justice and Foreign Ministry of Algeria, spoke at the Conference on Trident and International Law .
 Center for Nonpro-proliferation Studies, the Monterey Institute of International Studies, is forthcoming . It is based on the findings of a study by the Center for Nuclear Proliferation Studies .
 Bobo, L “Medvedev and the New European Security Architecture”, policy brief. Medvedev’s role in Russia is key to the country's security policy .
 Bond-Graham, D and Parish, W “Anti-Nuclear Nuclearism”, Foreign Policy in Focus. ‘Anti-nuclearism’ is an anti-nuclear stance .
 Burma suspected of forming nuclear link with North Korea . North Korea is believed to have made the move in recent years .
 China and Southeast Asia in the New Century, Westport: Greenwood Publishing Group, Inc. The book is published in Westport, Massachusetts .
 Washington Institute for Near East Policy: Consequences of Preventive Military Action Against Iran’s ‘Iranian’ response to U.S. military action against Iran .
 Goldblat, J “Should the Right to Withdraw from the NPT be Withdrawn?”, paper commissioned by the International Commission on Nuclear Non-proliferation and Disarmament .
 P. Goldschmidt, P “Strengthening the Non-Proliferation Regime”, paper for the Seventh ROK-UN Joint Conference on Disamiament .
 Hecker, S “Lessons Learned from the North Korea Nuclear Crises”, Daedalus. ‘Lessons learned from North Korea’s nuclear crisis .
 IAEA Implementation of the NPT Safeguards Agreement in the Syrian Republic, GOV/2008/60, 19 November . The IAEa Implementation of Npt Safeguard Agreement in Syria .
 IAEA “Implementation of the NPT Safeguards Agreement and Relevant Provisions of Security Council Resolutions 1737 , 1747 , 1803 , and 1835 in the Islamic Republic of Iran”, report by the Director General .
 International Commission on Nuclear Non-Proliferation and Disannament Eliminating Nuclear Threats, Canberra/Tokyo. The Commission on nuclear non-proliferation. Eliminating nuclear Threats. Elimination of nuclear threats .
 China to accept Arunachal Pradesh as Indian and India to Accept Aksai Chin as Chinese a Secret Agreement in the Making, India Daily reports .
 Kajita, T “ United States Concerned By Japan’s Changes in Foreign Policy”, The Japan Times. Kajitas, T .
 Obama agrees to keep Israel's nukes secret, says D.C. Lake . Lake, E “Obama Agrees to Keep Israel’s Nukes Secret”, Washington Times.
 The Center for Contemporary Conflict, U.S. Naval Postgraduate School, is based in Washington, DC . The Center is based at the U.N. Post Graduate School .
 Conversations avec Dulles, Eisenhower, Kennedy, Rusk, 1958-1964, Paris, Flammarion, is published in Paris, France .
 When will the Obama Administration try actually Engaging Iran?”, The Race for Iran. Leverett, F and H. “When Will the Obama administration Try Actually Engage Iran?"
 Ministry of Defence of the Russian Federation . Immediate Tasks of Development of the Armed Forces of the . Russian Federation of the Forces .
 Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs. Hype or Reality?”, Belfer center for science and international affairs.
 U.S. State Department: Bilateral Agreement for Peaceful Nuclear Cooperation . U.N. Secretary of State Nicholas Burns briefed on the agreement .
 Jenny Nielsen, Jenny “Engaging India, Israel and Pakistan in Non-Proliferation”, Disarmament Diplomacy, Autumn. She says she is concerned about non-proliferation of weapons .
 NPT/CONF .2000/PC IIIAVP.7, paragraphs 11 and 12.7: "NPT IIIVP.2010/PCIIIAVP." NPT IIIIIIIIIVP: "I'm not afraid to be afraid of the future"
 Remarks by the President “On a New Beginning” , The White House, Office of the Press Secretary. Obama, B Remarks .
 Office of the Secretary of Defense “Military Power of the People’s Republic of China 2007”, Annual Report to U.S. Congress. 2007 . 2007 . Report: China's military power in China .
 Why Not Outlaw them first?”, in G Perkovich and J Acton Abolishing Nuclear Weapons: a Debate, Carnegie Endowment for Peace .
 A Strategy for Nuclear Security, Washington, DC: Carnegie Endowment for International Peace . A strategy for nuclear security, Washington-D.C. author says .
 Price, R “Nuclear Weapons Don’t Kill People, Rogues Do”, International Politics, Vol. Nos. 2-3 . Price: “Rogues do’d kill people,’s people.’
 US-China-India relations in eclectic perspective”, paper presented at annual conference of the American Political Science Association . Paper presented at the annual conference .
 Rumsfeld, D . Foreword to the new Nuclear Posture Review, submitted to Congress on 8 January 2002 .
 Arms Limitations and Security Policies to Minimize Nuclear Proliferation, London: Taylor and Francis. Arms Limitation and Security . Policies to minimize nuclear Proliferation: Minimiliating Nuclear Prol Proliferation .
 Steps Toward a World Free of Nuclear Weapons are steps toward a world free of nuclear weapons . Hoover Institution Press. Hoover Institution: We need to find a way to prevent nuclear weapons proliferation .
 Kissinger, Kissinger, H.A. and Nunn, S “A World Free of Nuclear Weapons”, Wall Street Journal, A15. W.J., Kissinger, . Kissinger and . Nunn . Kissinger: "A world free of nuclear weapons” is a
 Kissinger, FI.A. and Nunn, S “Toward a Nuclear-Free World”, Wall Street Journal. W.J. and S. Nunn . Kissinger . Kissinger. Kissinger . Nunn. Kissinger: "Towards a nuclear-free world
 Shultz, P., Perry, W.J., Kissinger, FI.A. and Nunn, S “Flow to Protect our Nuclear Deterrenf’, Wall Street Journal. Shultz P.J. and Kissinger P.M. A. Kissinger, F.
 KW Publishers Pvt Ltd, New Delhi, in association with Centre for Air Power Studies, is publishing the book .
 Russian Academy of Military Sciences Debates Role of Nuclear Weapons in Conference on New Military Doctrine . WMD Insights.com.com .
 Report of the Secretary General. Towards Development, Security and Human Rights For All’s report of the . Secretary General .
 Report: The High-Level Panel on Threats, Challenges, and Change of the United Nations. Our Shared Responsibility’s report .
 U.S. Department of Defense “Military Power of the People’s Republic of China”, Annual Report to Congress . U.D. says Chinese military power is ‘military power’ of China .
 The Joan B Kroc Institute for International Peace Studies provides occasional paper #18 from the Joan B . Kroc institute . The institute is based in New York City .
 Rear Admiral Alfred T Mahan's writings are published by Boston-based publisher Little, Brown, and Company .
 The National Security Strategy of the United States of America . The strategy was created by the U.S. President Barack Obama . It is the first of its kind .
 White House President Bush’s speech on non-proliferation issues, 11 February . President Bush: "I am not a believer in nuclear proliferation"
 Yan, X “The Rise of China and its Power Status”, Chinese Journal of International Politics, Vol. Nos. 5-33 . Yan: China's rise in power status is a sign of progress in China's development .