 A year earlier the U.S. and the Soviet Union had already stood 'eyeball to eyeball' over Berlin . A year later, the United States and the . Soviet . Union had . already stood . 'eyeeball' to . eyeball . over Berlin
 Only recently have we begun to learn something about what happened, but we still do not have an accurate and comprehensive account of the British government's diplomatic and military action .
 This article draws upon recent British and American literature to pose some questions about the British government's attitude and behaviour during the crisis . In advance of the release of the official papers, this article draws on recent literature to ask questions about British and U.S. literature .
 These should be of interest and concern both to historians and to the general public . These are of interest, concern both for historians and the public .
 President Kennedy appeared on national television to announce the verified discovery of Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba . President Kennedy made the announcement on October 22, 1962 .
 A naval blockade or 'quarantine' was imposed around Cuba . U.S. strategic forces were placed on Defence Condition 3, just short of full readiness .
 Squadrons of B-52 nuclear bombers lifted off from their bases to join the Strategic Air Command 's airborne alert as a precaution'
 Recent studies of the crisis have benefited from access to U.S. archive material and personal recollection .
 The twenty-fifth anniversary provoked considerable interest from scholars and participants . There have been a number of significant revelations since that to cast new light on events . The 20th anniversary of the events was marked by significant revelations .
 Many of the senior officials of the Kennedy administration at the time of the crisis had still been in their thirties or early forties . This was only possible because so many of the officials were still in their twenties or early fifties . The Kennedy administration was still in its th
 There remain criticisms of oral history as a reliable technique of inquiry . Fascinatingly the debates between the policy-makers yielded more questions than answers .
 The received wisdom is being challenged by information newly available from conferences, interviews and correspondence . Previously classified transcripts, cables, memos and reports are being released .
 There is still disagreement on how close the world was to nuclear war . There is also disagreement on the significance of American nuclear superiority in Cuba .
 Some of these questions require consideration of evidence from the Soviet side . Some of the questions need to be considered in Soviet history .
 Oral evidence has emerged particularly through conferences organised under Harvard auspices . Access to Soviet archives is only now beginning and many fundamental questions about Soviet decision-making and behaviour remain unanswered .
 The story of the British side of the Cuban missile crisis is as yet untold . The story is still untold .
 British archives are not due to be opened until 1993 and many of the participants are dead . Many of the British participants are now dead . British archives will be opened in 1993 .
 US nuclear targeting plans for 1962 have been declassified . Remarkable, even by American standards oiglasnost, is the fact that U.S. nuclear targets for 1962 were declassified.
 At political level the minutes of the British Cabinet and its relevant committees are unlikely to compare with the transcripts of President Kennedy's defacto cabinet during the crisis . At the political level, the minutes will not compare with those of the Kennedy cabinet .
 Whitehall's craft of minutetaking is of importance in charting policy-making . But it limits the value of the record in assessing the nature of debates or the views of individuals .
 Participants are unaware that their words are being recorded as members of Ex Comm were . This is all the more so where the participants are unaware of their words .
 So far, the Ex Comm meetings of 16 and 27 October have been transcribed and declassified . The meetings were held on October 16, 27 October and 16 October .
 Kennedy and Macmillan had transatlantic phone conversations on Monday 22 October, Wednesday 24 and Friday 26 October . Kennedy and Prime Minister MacMillan called each other on October 22 October .
 Macmillan's biographer Alistair Horne made clear that these provide invaluable insights into the nature and extent of British-American discussions during the crisis .
 Macmillan's diary made at the time should be of value in assessing British perspectives and the British role . Likewise, the diary made in the 1930s should be useful to assess British perspectives on the world's role .
 Some recent disclosures have very important implications for the British dimension of the Cuban missile crisis . Some of the revelations have very significant implications for Britain, writes Andrew Hammond .
 In addition to American revelations there have also been some memoirs and recollections on the British side . Air Vice-Marshal Menaul's memoirs have been published in the UK .
 British strategic nuclear forces were placed on a high state of alert and readiness during the Cuban missile crisis . Air Vice-Marshal 'Paddy' Menaul was the author of an account of the crisis .
 The bases of Bomber Command were sealed, their perimeters secured by armed patrols . V-bombers with their thermo-nuclear bombs and Blue Steel airlaunched nuclear missiles were made ready .
 It is surprising that the actions of the Royal Air Force have not been scrutinised or publicly debated . It is somewhat surprising that it is not being scrutinised by public .
 On 24 October the United States' Strategic Air Command was placed on DEFCON2, a state of alert denoting readiness for combat . The U.S. strategic Air Command placed the alert on 24 October .
 Bomber Command was engaged in a regular alert and readiness exercise at the time of the incident . At that time Bomber Command had been engaged in an alert exercise .
 Commander-in-Chief of Bomber Command, Air Marshal Sir Kenneth Cross, has ordered the training alert to be extended . Air Marshal Cross ordered the alert to extend .
 The British state of alert was strengthened on 27 October, when an American U-2 was shot down over Cuba . The day known as 'Black Saturday' was the day when the U.2 was downed over the island .
 The RAF's 170180 V-bombers and 60 Thor Intermediate Range Ballistic Missiles were prepared for action . The RAF was in full combat mode during the Second World War II .
 Menaul states that both the bombers and the missiles were at 15 minutes readiness . Menaul says both bombers and missiles were ready for 15 minutes before the attack .
 He appears to indicate that all the decisions were taken by the Commander-in-Chief of Bomber Command, rather than by the Chiefs of Staff or indeed by ministers .
 His view is that actions taken were within guidelines for training exercises . This presumably precluded the need for ministerial involvement, he says .
 There are substantive issues involved which should yield to investigation of the official record and further public enquiry . Some of these questions are speculative, but there are serious issues involved .
 Prima facie evidence suggests that the actions of the RAF were not taken at ministerial behest .
 Alistair Home recounts that on 22 October the Prime Minister was urged by General Norstad, the Supreme Allied Commander Europe, to place British forces on a higher state of readiness . Home recounts how he was told by Norstad that the British forces should be on higher alert .
 Norstad refused and told Norstad that mobilisation sometimes led to war . The Prime Minister refused and said mobilisation may lead to war. Norstad was forced to stand down .
 Macmillan did agree to 'certain precautionary measures affecting the RAF""6 although he appears to have been unaware of the extent of the air force's preparations as the crisis reached its climax .
 Foreign Secretary Alec Douglas-Home was completely unaware of the measures which Menaul describes . Foreign Secretary was apparently unaware of measures which he describes .
 Aspects of the role of the British Ambassador have been known for some time . The British Ambassador's role in the role has been known to some time.
 The Ambassador suggested that the plan for intercepting the ships be amended to give Khrushchev more time to change his mind . The Ambassador was briefed on the impending naval blockade .
 He is credited with having persuaded Kennedy to accept Macmillan's advice and publish photographic evidence of the missiles to sway world and European public opinion .
 So far, little archive material has been uncovered that sheds light on the British diplomatic role in the crisis . So far it has been revealed that little is known about the British role .
 Home's account confirms the view that the British first began to suspect what was happening before they were told . The British government first began suspecting what happened before being told, Home Home says .
 President invited British Ambassador for Sunday lunch to tell him what had been discovered . On Saturday the President invited the British Ambassador .
 At noon on Monday David Bruce, the American Ambassador in London, met Macmillan to convey a personal message from the President .
 Later that night Kennedy phoned for the first of their transatlantic conversations . "I know that together with our friends we shall resolutely meet this challenge," he said .
 The scale of British-American consultation will only become clear with careful examination of the relevant archives . The scale and extent of the British-U.S. consultation with the U.K. is only clear .
 How far the British were consulted and how far this entailed influence are key issues . How far this involved influence is key issues for the British government .
 Ormsby-Gore: 'I can't honestly think of anything said from London that changed the United States action it was chiefly reassurance to JFK'
 October 1962 was the anniversary of the occasion when the streets of Berlin saw Soviet and American tanks face each other across Checkpoint Charlie . First, October 1962, was the occasion that Soviet and U.S. tanks faced each other .
 For over 16 hours the tanks stood only 75 yards apart, the Americans with their gun racks loaded and made ready for firing . The tanks stood just 75 yards away from each other for 16 hours on 27 October 1961 .
 Both Kennedy and Macmillan believed that Soviet actions in the Caribbean were part of a strategy for resolving the Berlin situation in the Soviet Union's favour .
 The myths of the missile and bomber gaps had by then been dispelled, but Soviet theatre nuclear forces were considerable . Second, while the myth of the gap had been debunked, they were considerable in the theatre .
 General Curtis LeMay believed that a strategic nuclear war could have been fought at the time with 'normal expectable' American losses . There were those including the former commander of SAC .
 Europe remains very much in the front line of a prospective nuclear war . Europe however remained very much at the forefront of a potential nuclear war.
 NATO had deployed land-based missiles and aircraft in Europe capable of reaching the Soviet Union . The Thor IRBMs in Britain were among those in Italy and Turkey . NATO had also deployed air and ground-based missile systems in Europe .
 Khrushchev's own account emphasises the importance of the Turkish Jupiters in his decision to install the missiles in Cuba . The Turkish missiles were the first to be installed in Cuba in 1959 .
 In addition the role of these Jupiters in the eventual solution of the crisis remains a subject for debate . The role of the Jupits in the future remains a question .
 In foreword to Robert Kennedy's posthumous account Macmillan proclaimed his own position was one of 'complete support for the President at every stage' including for 'his most difficult decision'
 Anatoly Dobrynin has also testified to the existence of this arrangement . Anatoly Dobrynin testifies to the existence of this arrangement in Russia .
 The degree to which the U.S. consulted or even informed its closest ally on this issue of crucial importance to European security and NATO alliance is of great interest . In the context of the 'special relationship' the degree to . which the United States consulted or . informed its . closest
 Either he did and was an accomplice or he was kept in the dark, like all the other European governments, he says . Either he was involved or he did not, or he didn't, he is said to have done so, he said .
 Careful scrutiny of the official record may or may not yield answers to this fascinating question . Careful examination of the record may yield answers .
 Britain provided bases for SAC and other U.S. nuclear forces . A fourth consideration is that Britain also provided bases .
 During the 1973 Middle-East crisis American F-lll nuclear fighter bombers and other U.S. forces in Britain were placed on DEFCON-3.35 This caused an outcry in Britain when it became known that the British government had not been consulted or informed .
 SAC did have B-47 nuclear bombers operating from British bases at this time . SAC units in Britain were placed on alert and placed on standby .
 American forces in Europe moved to a less complete alert than forces based in the United States . General Norstad suggested the move for fear of undermining Western Europe's political support .
 Bomber Command was informed by SAC that the Americans had gone to DEFCON-2, although he says they were told on 25 October, the day after the U.S. Air Force was moved to the higher state of alert .
 His account suggests that the lines of communication were at the military, rather than the political level . Moreover his account suggests his account was not the same as that of the previous leader .
 The American DEFCON-2 alert is considered an extraordinary fact about the U.S. alert . The alert is the equivalent of a U.N. nuclear missile warning .
 American strategic nuclear forces have only been ready for combat on this one occasion . The U.S. has only been able to launch a nuclear attack on the U.N. Korea mission .
 The decision to place American bombers and missiles on a war footing was taken by President Kennedy on 24 October . The naval quarantine around Cuba came into force in October .
 Soviet intelligence would presumably have heard USAFB-52s flying toward the Soviet Union, receiving orders to prepare for war . The U.S. Air Force would have heard the news .
 If the Soviet leadership had misinterpreted the signals it could have considered pre-emptive action, given the nature of Soviet strategic doctrine at the time, including attacks against SAC bombers in Britain .
 We do not know what General Powers told his colleagues in Bomber Command about this extraordinary piece of military initiative . We are not sure what he told them about the project .
 Thor IRBMs are a key part of British-U.S. relations with the U.S.-U.K. relations . Thor BMs are the most powerful weapons of the world's most powerful anti-terrorists . ThorBMs have been involved in the development of
 These were armed with one megaton warheads and were less than 25 minutes flying time from targets in the Soviet Union . The weapons were armed .
 They had been deployed in Britain since 1958, at the request of President Eisenhower . They were deployed in the UK since 1958 at request of the President .
 The RAF owned the missiles, the USAF owned the warheads and the active consent of both countries was necessary to fire them . They were dual-key systemsthe RAF owned .
 The U.S. had been keen to deploy IRBMs in Europe to compensate for perceived weaknesses in its ICBM strength .
 This raises important questions about dual key control and military consultations between the UK and U.S. governments, says Simon Tisdall .
 Any launch order simulated or otherwise had to be authenticated by both RAF and USAF officers at Bomber Command in High Wycombe . It took several hours to prepare the missiles to launch .
 With or without warheads, for the Thors to have been at 15 minutes readiness, USAF involvement was necessary . Therefore, with or without the warheads, it was necessary to involve the U.S. military .
 By that stage in the launch procedure the USAF might not have been needed at all . However, by that stage the USAF may not have needed to .
 RAF officer attended simulated launches of Thors, at one such test, and with zero hour approaching, the American officer who had the necessary key had not appeared . According to the RAF officer, who attended the simulated launches, the key was not found .
 RAF officer produced a screwdriver and inserted it in the other key-hole . This enabled the simulated launch to take place in a simulated launch .
 RAF missile control officers possessed both keys necessary to arm the warhead . According to a visiting American Congressman the RAF had both keys needed to arm a warhead.
 In his memoirs Harold Macmillan refers to the fact that 'some rather devious approaches had been made to the Foreign Office, alleged to come from a member of the Russian Mission' Dr Stephen Ward and Captain I vano v, the Soviet Naval Attache, in the Cuban
 Captain Ivanov visited Ward to ask him to pass a message to the British government . Ivanov, known to British Intelligence as an officer of Soviet Military Intelligence, visited Ward on 24 October .
 The message was that if Macmillan called a summit conference, Khrushchev would accept the invitation, turn his ships around and discuss the withdrawal of the missiles from Cuba . The message from the Soviet Union was that it would withdraw the missiles .
 Ward passed the suggestion on and it reached the Permanent Secretary of the Foreign Office, Sir Harold Caccia .
 Ivanov also used a back-bench Conservative MP, Sir Godfrey Nicholson, to communicate with the Foreign Office . Ward is a friend of Ward, who is a close ally of Ivanov .
 Nicholson delivered Ivanov's message to Caccia . Head of Joint Intelligence Committee, Sir Hugh Stephenson, was also briefed .
 Prime Minister suspected Soviet attempts to drive wedges between Britain and the U.S. was refused . Macmillan believed he was dealing with a genuine message from Khrushchev .
 It has recently been suggested that a corresponding approach in Washington was made independently of Moscow . However, it has recently suggested that it was made independent of Russia .
 The Soviet diplomat, Aleksandr Fomin, was the KGB Station Chief in Washington . Fomin's real name was apparently Aleksander Feklisov, the KGB station chief .
 Hours later a letter from Khrushchev arrived, including a similar deal . Hours later, a similar letter from the Soviet Union arrived, with a similar agreement .
 The crisis did not abate until the 28 October, but the events of the Friday were the beginning of the end . It has frequently been assumed that Fomin's actions were coordinated with Khrushchev . The crisis continued until October 28 October .
 It has been suggested that the KGB officer acted independently of Moscow . Doubt has now been cast on this, and it has suggested that he acted independently .
 Fomin's actions had a material influence on how Kennedy and his advisers read Khrushchev's first letter . What is not in doubt is that Fomin had a significant influence on Kennedy's decision to read the letter .
 The KGB may well have played a crucial role in the peaceful resolution of the crisis . The KGB played a key role in resolving the crisis in Russia .
 Whether the approach in London was likewise independent is open to question . Whether it was the same in London, it's not clear whether the approach was independent .
 The implications of this may well require further exploration in the archives in both London and Moscow .
 We do not know the British Government's views on the unfolding of the Cuban missiles crisis . Conclusion: We are not sure what the British government thought about the Cuban missile crisis .
 We do not know how it assessed the risks involved and the risk of war in Europe . It is not clear how the risk was assessed by the government .
 We do not know how the British Cabinet viewed American policy and the implications of the withdrwal of the Turkish Jupiters . We are not sure how the Cabinet viewed U.S. policy .
 "We do know something about the consultation at heads of government level and at the military level," says minister . "We are very keen to know what is happening at the highest level in the world," he says .
 It is yet unclear whether these were part of a coherent pattern of relations or reflected a degree of military independence from political control .
 The Kennedys both quoted Barbara Tuchman's book, The Guns of August, on the outbreak of the Great War, on their books .
 President Obama initiated a similar mobilisation of America's nuclear forces . Yet the President initiated a comparable mobilisation with the US nuclear forces.
 We know Macmillan opposed the idea of similar steps in Britain at the start of the crisis . We know that he opposed it .
 We do not know whether he agreed or was aware of the various preparations of British and British-based American nuclear forces . We do know whether or not he agreed .
 We do not know if Britain exercised any influence in Washington, but there is nothing in the Ex Comm transcripts to challenge Ormsby-Gore's assessment of Britain's influence . Alistair Home said the principal British role was to provide support for the United States in particular .
 We do not know what part Britain played in Soviet calculations . Perhaps most intriguingly, in the light of the debate about the British 'independent nuclear deterrent' we do not .
 McGeorge Bundy argues 'a little nuclear deterrence goes a long way' in the context of the Soviet nuclear arsenal .
 With the opening of the PRO files, the continuing march of glasnost and the American Freedom of Information Act may soon become possible .
 On the Brink provides accounts and analyses of various conferences and interviews in 1987 . James Blight and David Welch wrote the book On The Brink . The book was published in 1987 by David Welch and James Blights .
 Anthony Summers and Stephen Dorril, Honeytrap The Secret Worlds of Stephen Ward, published in Honeytrap . The Secret World of the World was Stephen Ward's first book . Honeytrap is Stephen Ward’s second book of the world .