 After a cold start, the mercury hit 71 degrees, six degrees above normal . Temperatures reached 71 degrees Tuesday morning .
 International efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions aim to reduce emissions . International efforts such as the Paris Agreement have failed to achieve their goals .
 Experts say countries aren’t doing enough to limit dangerous global warming . But experts say countries are not doing enough .
 The swift development of effective vaccines against COVID-19 was an unprecedented scientific achievement . Backgrounder by Lindsay Maizland January 31, 2022 Americas Asia Europe & Eurasia .
 Production challenges, vaccine nationalism, and omicron and other variants have presented hurdles . But production challenges and vaccine nationalism have all presented hurdles for the project .
 Reflecting sunlight should be considered a potential stopgap for rising global temperatures, argues Stewart M Patrick . Backgrounder by Claire Felter April 1, 2022 .
 Natasha Warikoo talks about diversity, equity, and inclusion in college and university admissions . She also discusses the role of diversity and equity in admissions .
 And Other Dilemmas of Race, Admissions, and Meritocracy at Elite Universities . The study was published by Harvard University, Harvard University and Yale University .
 The admissions chief says diversity, equity, and inclusion strategies are key strategies in college and university admissions . He says he's seen diversity and equity in admissions at colleges and universities across the U.S.
 "I thought I would do, as I thought I thought about this question about DEI and admissions, is sort of to take us—to zoom out a little bit. So what I thought . I thought it would do is to sort of take us out of this question, to
 I think when we think about DEI in the context of admissions that’s sort of what immediately comes to mind. So I’ll talk about affirmative action because I think . I think we think when . we think of affirmative action as a matter of policy, that�
 "I want to take us broader and think also just about admissions more broadly," she says . But she says she wants to take the admissions policy to be more inclusive .
 I think we need to move away from this idea that there is one best, most fair way of admitting students to college . So I want to start by saying that there should be no one best way of admission to college, he says .
 The narrative is that you work hard, and you can get into the U.S. You show your grit and you show your achievements, and can get in . You work hard and you get in, you can't get in. You work your grit, you show you achievements,
 affirmative action is one small kind of fix to ensure that the system is fair to everyone . Affirmative action is part of the plan to increase financial aid and recruiting around the country .
 Ivy League students thought admissions worked, and it was because affirmative action kind of corrected underrepresentation . And I found this in my interviews with Ivy league students in Diversity Bargain, I found that students .
 Working-class students, Black students, and Latinx students, continue to be underrepresented . Students were satisfied with how admissions were done, despite the fact that multiple groups, including working-class, are underrepresented.
 A recent study of college mission statements found that these three goals endure . College mission statements have been found to be successful .
 Most college mission statements express commitments to teaching, as well as the public good, inculcating civic values . Most colleges commit to teaching and public good as part of their mission statements .
 U.S. universities see themselves as much more embedded in the fabric of society compared to those in Europe and Britain . And in general, United States universities are embedded in society, making it more equitable, more diverse .
 Many Americans imagine higher education to be a kind of engine for social mobility . And many Americans also think higher education is an engine of social mobility, they say . Many Americans also see higher education as a way to help them get ahead .
 "We think about, you know, since the 1950s, the expansion of higher education. We think about ... since the . 1950s," he says . "We're not going to be able to do this again, but we're going to do it again"
 "We sort of look to higher education as a mechanism for bettering ourselves and our futures," says the author of the book "Higher Education" The author says higher education is a "meansance for betterment" of society .
 Colleges should be in pursuit of these goals, not individual certification of merit, or who’s deserving . So what colleges do—when they admit students, then, should be . It's not individual merit, but who's deserving .
 Colleges need to make this goal explicit to prospective and current students, says CNN.com senior author.com editor-in-chief .
 This year's admission rate is the lowest ever, according to the university's admissions policy . The university has admitted the lowest admit rate ever . It's not the best class ever, it's the lowest admitted rate ever, the lowest admission rate .
 We should be really sort of talking about admissions in the context of what we're trying to do as a university and embedded in society, he says . The admissions process should be taken into account, he adds .
 Lani Guinier argued in her book The Tyranny of Merit argued that college admissions should be a mechanism to a more robust democracy . Lani's book was published by the late Lani . She said we should consider college admissions as a mechanism for a robust democracy.
 Guinier argued that standardized testing should be discarded in favor of broad, inclusive representation . She argued that it should lead us to discard standardized testing as a part of the application process .
 If we consider the goal of social mobility, it becomes even more unclear why certain kinds of academic achievement in general have become the central focus for college admissions . And I want to argue, if we consider this, it .
 In fact, one might even make the case that academics should play the opposite role to what it plays . "Academics should play an important role to academics, not just academics," says John Sutter .
 If colleges want to promote social mobility, perhaps admissions should be akin to means-tested social supports . Those who need it most should be provided to those who have financial hardships, racial exclusion or weak academic skills .
 Families of a majority of students at top colleges pay more per year than the median household income in the U.S. Students at top college pay more than they do in the United States .
 A 4.3 grade point average seems increasingly to be a prerequisite to even be considered for admissions at top colleges . And a 4.4 grade point is also a prerequisite for admission .
 It's hard to shake the belief that selective colleges should foreground achievement in admissions . There's one best way to do this, and there’s no best way for it to be done, says the author .
 Unlike the labor market, applicants are chosen for jobs on the basis of what a company needs, not a reward for the kind of best applicant . The marketing job would go to a different person than the head of engineering job, and that would be different person from head of finance job .
 In higher education, admissions are a reward for hard work and dedication . But in higher education it is a reward, not just admission admission, it's a reward .
 Seeing admissions as a competition to decide who's the most deserving reinforces ideas about who’s deserving and undeserving . Admissions are admissions admissions, but admissions are a competition, not a competition .
 Given the outcomes of admissions, people who are economically advantaged, who are White and who are Asian American, are more worthy and deserving . Those groups tend to be who are the ones that are rewarded in the admissions process .
 The tension between an individualist, winner-takes-all meritocracy and a process of selection is what lies, to me, at the heart of controversies over affirmative action . The tension lies between individualism and the mission of research, teaching and the public good .
 "I see it less as a kind of fix to this individual meritocracy, but rather as a critical policy, an important policy, that promotes four important organizational goals," he says .
 The U.S. Supreme Court has said in the 1978 Bakke decision that is allowable under the law . This is the argument that the Supreme Court, starting in 1978, has said it is allowable .
 As long as you have a narrowly tailored version of attention to race, then, you know, if you are looking at race in order to fulfill a university mission of having a diverse learning environment in which everyone flourishes, then that is allowed . Well, as long as . you have
 Social scientists have been studying diverse environments for decades . They say diverse environments can improve cognitive capacity, racial attitudes, civic participation in future .
 The problem with solely talking about this kind of diverse learning environment argument is that it ignores inequality . The Diversity Bargain is based on the idea of diversity in a diverse environment .
 Colleges need to do a lot better job of talking about racial inequality, says John Sutter . Sutter says colleges need to talk more about the history of affirmative action, he says .
 "When we think about the goal of promoting social mobility and opportunity, we have to take into consideration race in admissions," says the president . "We have to consider race as a factor," he says .
 "Sometimes people say, well, it’s related to class and not race. I won’t go through all of this, but just to say that, sometimes people say ... it” Sometimes people say that .
 Even within the same social class, we see racially different opportunities, says CNN.com . But even within social class they see different opportunities .
 Working-class Whites tend to live in more advantaged neighborhoods than working-class Blacks, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "Working-class whites tend to be more affluent than Blacks"
 A recent study found that Black—upper middle-class Black adults—excuse me. And a recent study finds that Black . middle class Black adults are Black .
 Black adults who grew up in upper middle-class families are much more likely to experience downward mobility than White adults . White adults who grow up in higher-income families are less likely to have downward mobility .
 "We see this kind of intergenerational differences in terms of the transmission of privilege," he says . "And so we see this sort of ... different kinds of ... privilege," she says .
 Reparations not just from the harms of slavery, but also from U.S. intervention in foreign wars abroad . And reparations not only from the harm of slavery . But also from United States intervention in war abroad .
 Many elite colleges have benefitted from the slave trade, from slave labor, from slavery, from foreign policies that led to poverty in other countries, says John Sutter .
 Reparations is another way that I think—another institutional goal that can be met through affirmative action. And so reparations is a way that . I think it's another institutional goal, met through . affirmative action . Reparations can be a way of reaching out to those in need of
 President Obama talked about how he thinks he benefitted from affirmative action, just as Sotomayor talks about how she was an affirmative action baby . President Obama also talked about the benefits of affirmative action .
 "To see leadership that looks like them is increasingly important," says Julian Zelizer . "It matters in order for leadership to be seen as legitimate, to be ... people seen"
 This is one small way that higher education can play in society, he says . He says. And so, again, thinking about the contribution .
 "There are winners and there are losers. So the last thing I want to say is that any way you admit students, there are winners," she says .
 British students think their way of admitting students is the best . "When I talk to British students, they—Britain has a very different way to admit students," she says. "They think their [British students] way is best"
 Even within the U.S., we’ve changed the way we define merit and admit students over time as well as in Europe . And even within the United States, we have also changed our definition of merit over time .
 History suggests that reasonable people and selective colleges will disagree on how to admit students . And so history suggests that selective colleges and reasonable people will disagree about how to do it .
 "We need to change our typical vision for college admissions as an individualist, meritocratic competition. So overall, I want to—I want to ... change our vision," she says .
 When we consider affirmative action within a broader consideration of the purposes of selective higher education in the U.S., we can see its true worth . We can see the true worth of affirmative action in the United States, says author .
 College admission is not and should not be an evaluation of the worthiness or deservingness of individuals . College admission should not not be a evaluation of worthiness, deservingness, it should be an individual's worthiness .
 "We need greater representation to make sure our future leaders are exposed to diverse perspectives and lived experiences," she says . "Our future leadership is seen as legitimate," she said .
 Colleges in the U.S. are embedded in a society plagued by rampant inequality, including racial inequality . We often turn to education as a mechanism to address that inequality, and often turn it to education .
 The lack of clarity sometimes on university purposes allowed families to map their own meanings onto selection . And so, I think . I think the lack of clear language sometimes allowed families . Families to map themselves onto selection.
 Universities need to correct these misunderstandings explicitly. And I think that universities need to do so . Universities should be more transparent about their role in the process.
 So, of course, affirmative action is enough to fully address the diverse roles of our universities. So, the university should have affirmative action, it says .
 The impact might be paltry compared to increasing financial aid, increasing funding for state and community colleges . And it's also important to increase funding for Historically Black Colleges and Universities, social supports for working-class and poor families .
 We should pursue all of them, alongside affirmative action, not as a replacement . We need affirmative action not to be replaced by affirmative action .
 Supporting affirmative action doesn’t preclude supporting an expansion of all these other provisions to increase equity, either within higher education or beyond . And so, supporting affirmative action does not preclude supporting other provisions .
 And now we are going to go to all of you for your questions and comments . We will be happy to answer all of your questions .
 I have a few comments, but I also then want to raise a question on something that was not covered . I also want to ask if there is something that is not covered in this article .
 As you probably know, Manuel Justiz and I wrote the book in 2001 on The Quest for Equity in Higher Education . Manuel justiz and Michael Justiz wrote a book on the topic of equity in higher education .
 Roger Geiger deals with historical aspects of his work on historical aspects . He says he has a number of colleagues who deal with historical matters .
 For example, testing came into place because there were too many Jewish students at elite universities like Yale and Harvard . Testing came to place because of too many Jews at elite colleges like Harvard .
 I should tell you also tell you that I am still a professor of higher education and international policy studies . I should say that I'm still a university professor, and I'm a professor in higher education .
 "There’s these changes that occur that don’t necessarily reflect what is done in the actual admissions office. And what we often see is there, there's these changes ... that often reflect what's happening in the admissions office," she says .
 The second really critical issue, and you’re welcome to read my book that’s just coming out, is on higher education policy in developing and Western countries .
 Parents are doing everything to be in that higher education university, whether it's a public Ivy like Berkeley, or Texas, or Wisconsin, or Virginia . Parents are trying everything to get into higher education universities .
 No one is raising—or, very few people are raising these questions about second-tier . And no one is . raising . or raising . these questions . No one has raised . or raised .
 U.S. News and World Report is one that many American parents will look at, but internationally it's the Times Higher Education and QS, for example .
 Because historically and currently, many of the people who are in DEI are people of color, we asked to ask if you can help .
 Students are not involved in the admission process, whether at the undergraduate or the graduate level . They're really not involved with the admissions process, as well as the university itself .
 I didn't know that your book was out, so I’m super excited to read it. Well, I didn’t know that . Your book is out now .
 It's clear that the rankings are just—have this terrible influence in higher education. It’s clear that . It's not just the rankings just, but the rankings have a terrible influence .
 A study by Wendy Espeland and Michael Sauder looked at law schools and how law schools seem to respond to rankings and how it’s sort of changing the organizations, they say .
 The U.S. is obsessed with selection and ranking in the United States . When you rank people, people are always looking up, he says . "We’re so obsessed with ranking people," he says. "We're so obsessed"
 "I want to be number nine, and then I want to go number eight," he says . "If there’s a ranking and I’m number ten, well, well," he adds . "I’ve never been ranked No. 10 in a ranking
 CNN.com: "They’re trying to figure out ways to sort of increase their standing. And then they're trying to ... increase their ... standing. They’ve got a lot of work to do," she says .
 Students with higher SAT scores are being brought in to bump their average SAT score . They are doing things like rather than more financial aid for—based on what your family needs, merit-based financial aid .
 The most elite colleges maybe can get away with not participating, but the lower-status colleges say, well, if we don't participate then, they look for the data and then just put us lower than we should be. And I think the most elite college might get away .
 "I think it will take an organized effort to sort of move away from those rankings. I think it would take a ... organized effort" to change the way the rankings are .
 Students who don't have the educational opportunities as much as privileged students do . They hurt students who are not privileged students, he says .
 In terms of DEI, I think that this is a problem not just in higher education, but in other areas, it's also a problem . The problem is not just higher education but it's a problem in other parts of the world .
 I think in the corporate sector, all over we see, on the one hand this promising increase in chief diversity officers, heads of diversity in a lot of different kinds of organizations . I think all over the world we see an increase in diversity officers in a variety of different types of organizations
 The extent to which they have power to impact change varies tremendously, experts say . And on the other hand, the extent of their power to influence change varies .
 A solo voice is a solo voice, and it really depends on how much they are backed by the administration, by leadership. And, if that person being—a solo voice .
 Former students were admissions officers when they were getting their master’s degrees in higher education . And they’ve had a lot of former students who are admissions officers .
 Students say they want to help shape the student body of a selective college in a way that would increase opportunity . And they really—they talked about how they thought that being in this role they could help shape student body .
 Even heads of admissions would like to give out more financial aid to students, he says . He says, "There are all of these things that don't allow them to really do that to the extent that they would like"
 Even in a place like Harvard, right, with this crazy endowment, is admitting students that almost half of them can pay full price . Harvard's endowment is higher than median household income in this country .
 The financial model is based on the assumption that you’re not going to be a representative group of students. And so their whole financial models are based on that, it’s not a representative student group, it says .
 I think it’s going to take a much broader shift in the culture of higher education to expand admissions, he says . And so I think—I think it's going to be a much larger shift in higher education .
 Emory ranks near the top of the top twenty or top twenty-two universities in terms of social mobility . Emory ranked in the top 20 or top 20-22 universities in the social mobility rankings .
 Georgia has two Democratic senators and a Democratic presidential candidate . President Biden won by a narrow margin in Biden's hometown .
 You sense a backlash as you listen to people whisper that, for instance, it sounds like quotas . You may not use the word, but it's like quotas, says the author . But you sense the backlash .
 There’s 14 percent Hispanics persons persons in the United States . We want 14 percent of Harvard to be Hispanic, says President Obama .
 "We shouldn’t have 50 percent from that group, even if it’s two Black doctors or their parents," she says . "Well, we shouldn't have 50% of that group," she adds .
 You know, I think part of the problem is that we don’t understand the reality of racial inequality and the history of racial exclusion in the United States. I think most people, myself included until probably I was in college or maybe even later, understand racial inequality in the U
 We all learn about slavery, the heinous history of slavery and segregation and the Civil Rights Movement . So, we all learn how to respect the victims of slavery, segregation and segregation .
 "We're never taught it and we don't talk about it. And I don't think many people really understand that," she says . "I don’t think that, because we’re never taught that."
 "Not enough understanding of that history is part of the problem. And I think—I actually think that is ... rather than too much attention to it, I think that's the problem . And I actually think ... that is . Rather than paying attention to that history, it's the
 "It should make us go, hmm. Just to sort of say, well, when we see these massive differences, it should say," he says . "Just to sort . of say well, well- . it should be a matter of concern," he adds .
 When you talk to most people in the country, they—young people, they want to go to college, they think it’s important . Young people are very interested in going to college. Young people think it's important, and young people are interested in college, he says
 I’m not saying that there should be—that college student bodies should explicitly mirror the population around them . I'm certainly not saying . There is no need for student bodies to mirror the people around them, but there is a need for it .
 Atlanta elite colleges, like Black colleges, and then historically predominantly White colleges like Emory, are examples . Emory is one of the most historically predominantly white colleges in America .
 The endowment was built at a time from times when there was legal segregation . And their endowment is built in a time when there were legal segregation laws .
 The donations to HBCUs is great, but it’s not even coming close to making the resources for those colleges comparable to the resources that the historically—the predominantly White universities . And so these donations to these HBCU is great .
 "We have a long way to go to sort of truly equalize those colleges, even though I think there has been more attention. And so, I think we have a lot more to go," she says .
 The population has been steadily growing since, with fits and starts, says President Obama . "I mean, the population has grown steadily since," he says . Obama: "I'm not surprised. I mean, I'm surprised."
 Higher education has not kept up with population and interest in elite higher education over the last half-century . But they have not kept pace with the increasing population .
 "One thing we could do is expand enrollment at these places. And so I do think one thing I could do ... expand enrollment," she said . "I do think that we could expand enrollment in these places"
 "There's so many amazing young people, these colleges reject so many applicants," she says . "There are so many incredible young people," she adds .
 I think part of the problem is you have declining admit rates making it feel like you’re kind of constantly in competition with each other . The problem is that it’s hard to compete with other colleges and universities in the U.S.
 Eric Watts: "Why don't you just unmute and identify yourself and ask it yourself. So, Eric, why don't?" Eric asks .
 The school is focused on, in the last two years, on a very strong DEI effort to increase the number of Black and African American students . And we’re focused on ... increasing the number .
 "Our number of Black and African Americans aren’t the numbers we’d like it to be. We are a Hispanic-serving and minority-serving institute,’s director says . The institute is Hispanic and minority .
 "Because it sounds easy, we put together mandates, put together programs," says President Obama . "Because of the power of the government, it's easy to get things done," says Obama .
 "There’s a little reluctance at times to change. But at the end of the day, we’re working with people on these admissions committee, and they're not always," she says .
 "We really need to examine and admit students, sometimes more holistically," she says . "What kind of evidence, what kind of strategies can we use to kind of move people along the continuum to get," she asks .
 GPA is a five-times better predictor of college success than the standardized scores, experts say . GPA is five times more likely to be a predictor of success than standardized scores .
 Some individuals are so used to using sort of this metric of standardized scores, it's hard to move them away from that, it’s hard to change that . But some individuals are used to ... say, you know, this isn’t really the best measure, most
 The data shows that GPA and standardized test scores are more predictive than GPA . The data also shows that the racial difference is that we see in these scores . The racial differences are shown in the GPA and the standardized test score .
 "I think when you understand that it’s, like, oh, OK, so this is the history of this," she says . "When you understand this, you understand it, it's like a history lesson," she adds .
 Students who didn't have high SAT scores and did well are able to sort of have -- your college made a positive impact in their lives, she says . "Just profiles of students ... of students who maybe didn’t have that high SAT score," she asks .
 "Sometimes people need that story of—to sort of have this image in their head," she says . "I'm helping people see that either through someone coming to a meeting, or a profile, so that they—sometimes people need to sort of . see that."
 There might be this sort of stereotype in their minds of, this is what these students are, they’re not going to be successful or take advantage, or what have you. Because I think sometimes there are these—there might be these stereotypes in people's minds .
 "Counter-stereotypic examples can sort of combat those stereotypes," he says . "But if they can see kind of what we call counter-Stereotyped examples, that can kind of combat that," he adds .
 "I do a lot of things related to DEI work, and I do read applications at the admissions level for our honors program," she says . But she says she does read applications for admission to the honors program .
 "I'm totally on board with that. But admission on the level of admitting for mission, I’m totally on Board with that," he said .
 "I believe our universities should look and be more like a cross-section, as you said, of teenagers in our country right now," says President Obama .
 Mission’s often out ahead of culture where inclusion is concerned, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: Mission is often out before culture when it comes to inclusion . Mission's mission often comes ahead of cultural inclusion, he says .
 Our institutions change very slowly, because that’s what institutions do, unfortunately, unfortunately . Our institutions are changing slowly, and that's what it does, unfortunately. We need to change our institutions .
 "A disproportionate amount of the emotional labor of institutional change winds up falling to students who come and then clamor for the reality that their admission would suggests would meet them when they get to schools that are not historically committed to this as possible"
 The problem then becomes an unintended consequence of admitting for diversity as a mission value . That gap between the ideal and the real then exacerbates the sense of exclusion that students come with, he says .
 I don't want this to be an argument against admitting for this reason or on this model, but just sort of a request for how to think about this. And I don’t want this . to be . an argument for admitting, he says .
 Eric Liu: People are worried about are these students going to be successful, or they're looking at test scores and maybe they’re thinking test scores . Liu: So, part of my—when people say, well, the—I’m sorry—Eric, Eric
 "We need to make sure there are a quorum of peers who have similar lived experiences," says Dr. John Defterios . We need to ensure we have a 'quorum' of peers, he says .
 We need—and I think higher education, some colleges have done better than others in these. We need . We need--and higher education -- to have some colleges do better, says John Sutter .
 Academic supports for students who haven’t had the same educational opportunities are incredibly important . And so absolutely there have to be these simultaneous—if the student body is changing and we’re expanding access, we need to change the culture and change .
 "It will be a harder lift for students who haven’t had those educational experiences," she says . "I think the reality is that it will be harder for students," she adds .
 It's not just that we need to meet their needs and prioritize those as well . But that doesn't mean that they shouldn't be there, right, right . We need to work hard just to meet them and prioritize other needs .
 "It really is a drain, especially during the pandemic, which just multiplies everything," says CNN.com's John Sutter . "I really am a drain," he says. "And it really is ... a drain"
 "I’m worried—not so much the academic lift, but—although those supports are absolutely important. So that’s part of where I'm worried," she said . "I'm worried about the impact of that lift," she added .
 They want more of the change for which they were admitted, to highlight that this is a very important value . But, they want more . of the . change .
 I’m also a member of our diversity, equity, and inclusion leadership team. I'm also a . member of . our diversity and equity leadership team .
 "We are a very high-quality institution, but we would not be considered in an elite," he says . "We're not considered an elite. We are very high quality institutions," he adds .
 We are in the unfortunate position of most years receiving fewer applications than we have spaces available . We're in an unfortunate position most years we receive fewer applications for space .
 I’m curious what your research would say to us about how we might work at increasing diversity, equity, and inclusion when we’re not kind of selecting between individuals .
 "I didn’t hear where you’re teaching and where your college is located," she says . "So I didn't hear where I’m teaching," she asks . "I’ll be happy to hear that you are teaching at a college," she
 White students as well as students of color are important to think about in terms of DEI for White students . So I think there’s a lot that is important to consider, especially White students, as well . Students of color and White students should be aware of their DEI
 We need to find ways for students to think and feel in order for them to see a particular college as a viable option . I think that’s what students need to—we need to . Students need to think, feel and think about what they think about in order to see
 Students start to sort of see a place differently as well as students as well, she says . "Then there’s a quorum of people, and then they—and then there's a network," she says. "Then it doesn’t feel as exclusive"
 "My concern is with mental health and anxiety in the students once they get here. My concern is ... mental health," she said . "I don't want them to be scared of the students," she added .
 25 percent of the students will be in the bottom quarter of the class, but 25 percent will be at the bottom of the grade .
 Fifty years ago a then-dean of admissions at Harvard said, well, we deal—you know, this is before all of the equity and diversity . This is before the equity, diversity, diversity. 50 years ago, Harvard admitted that .
 There's not a lot of emphasis on ranking within a college, like once students arrive. I don’t know if kind of—there’s not a little of—a lot of—ranking within a . college, he said .
 There seems to be a lot of grade inflation on elite colleges, especially at elite colleges . Especially on elite college campuses, there is a considerable grade inflation .
 Students who aren’t academically prepared may struggle may struggle, but for the most part I think that’s become less . I think no one—I mean, students—I think students ... may struggle . I don't know that that's the driver of some of
 Social media is "probably number one right now," says Dr. Aaron Miller . "There are other sort of drivers of that, like social media," he says .
 "I think those are some of the things that I think are driving some of these mental health issues. And I think that's some of those things," she says . "I'm not going to let it go, but I'm going to help people who are suffering from mental health
 "What drives kind of mental health issues may be slightly different for different young people," she says . "I mean, what drives [Mental Health] issues are slightly different," she adds .
 "We really see that certainly at the high school level as well across the board, across lines of race and class," says CNN.com's John Sutter . "But we really see ... that certainly . across the . board"
 "It was just a comment about ... mental health," she said . "It's just a joke about mental health. It was just the comment," she added .
 A dean at two different types of universities, we can’t really consider a lot of individual-type mental health unless it’s been in the public sphere, he says . And having been a dean, he said, “We can” really consider individual-
 There is a considerable amount of resources for students to deal with mental health . However, once in the student enters, there is a lot of resources to help students .
 Virginia Polytech was a very sad situation at VPI, a decade ago . But I taught a unit, for example, after the sad situation, Virginia PolyTech was over a decade .
 The student had mental health issues, but the university was not able to have access to that, she says . "We were not able—not ‘we’t “we”—the university, not “We’re not able,” she
 There are two types of kinds of dimensions to mental health issues: mental health . So there are two different dimensions to the mental health issue, says CNN.com's chief executive .
 CNN's John Sutter talks about the backlash surrounding the Emory University of Georgia . Sutter: "I wanted to go back to the comment that was made earlier from the gentleman from Emory in Georgia about backlash"
 "There are political constituencies out there who really want to fight this. I mean, we know that there are ... political constituencies," she says . "I mean, there are political ... constituencies ... out there are people who want to ... fight this."
 It's difficult for universities to advance agendas when they know that the cost of lawsuits, even when they're right, they're doing the right thing . Universities are doing something that is legal, but the costs of lawsuits become prohibitive. And it makes it extremely difficult for them to advance
 I wondered if you encountered that or you addressed that at all in your research, and what advice you would have related to that. So I wondered .
 This sort of supposed anti-CRT—critical race theory—stuff. But—and it’s K-12 education, as we see with this sort of . It’ll be interesting to see if this is true, but it's not, it's K-
 "I don’t know what the solution is besides just keep doing what we’re doing. My only response to that is that I don't know what I’m doing," he said .
 "You can’t back down in the face of these impending lawsuits," he says . "I feel like the right is so organized in their attacks on anything related," he adds .
 If we don’t talk admissions, there’s this new attack on selective high schools, where most recently a judge—there was a lawsuit towards a selective high school in Virginia that went from exam-based admissions to holistic admissions . A judge recently ruled against a school that
 "You can sort of back off and you’re still going to get sued," he says . "You’ve got sued. So I think you can sort off and back off," he adds. "So I think ... back off"
 "We don't want to be paralyzed. So I think the solution can’t be to back off," she says . "We want to avoid paralysis," she adds .
 Some of the research on affirmative action shows that there seems to be a sort of backing away from affirmative action because of these fears of lawsuits . I mean, some of the . research shows that . there seem to be an . sort of a backing away because of . fears of . lawsuits
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots at CNN iReport.com photos of your favorite colleges in the U.S. Explore the gallery for more .
 Colleges are going to be thinking strategically about their finances, the likelihood of being sued . But, again, I’m not sure—obviously colleges have to protect themselves .
 I don’t think—I’m not sure what to do about that threat besides saying, ‘It’s a reason to not do this work.’ But I don't think it’ll be a reason not to do it,’
 No one’s doing a lottery, but I have written a little bit about it . Well, no one's doing a Lottery Lottery .
 President Obama says selection is not an individual certification of merit . He says it's important to change the meaning of selection . Obama: We have to stop thinking of this as an individual merit .
 A naturalized citizen, she says, her husband was on jury duty for the first time yesterday for jury duty . She says, "It’s funny, I’ll tell you a story, my husband was just on Jury duty for his first time."
 CNN's John Sutter says he didn't really want to be put on trial because it would mean—they said it was going to be, like, a long trial . So he came home and said, “You know, I didn’t really want ... to be
 "When they said, OK, you’re dismissed at the end I felt a sense of disappointment," he said . And then he said, “When they . said, "OK, you're dismissed at . the end, he said."
 I never wanted to be selected. I mean, obviously if you're selected, you’re selected. You’ve got to be chosen. I’m not sure if I want to be in the U.S. Senate .
 In high school, kids have, like, a private pitching coach . Or did you get to sign up for? Or did your parents pay for you to sign it up?
 Let's put all the potential people, all the names in a hat, and let's just have a lottery. Let’s put all of the potential . people, the names of those potential people in a . hat . Let's not have a lot of people, just have
 "We want to have a quorum of full fee-paying students," the school says . "And, we can think about, like, do we want to ... have ... full fee paying students?" the school board says .
 "People who, athletes or whatever it is ... that that college is sort of looking at. People who ... are sort of ... looking at," he says . "People ... who ... they're looking at"
 I think we can't have kind of set metrics like, you get extra points or anything like that for being underrepresented, but we can think about it holistically, and being put into this lottery . I think that—and we can . think about diversity holistic—I think we
 "There are a lot of amazing young people in this country who could thrive at most of these selective colleges," she says . "It would acknowledge the fact that there are a number of amazing students in the U.S."
 "I think it would change the meaning in a way that I think is very productive for society," says President Obama . "It would be very helpful for society. And I think it's very productive," he says .
 I don't know if anybody has other questions or comments, but I will ask one more. I don’t know if anyone has any other questions . I'll be happy to answer one more: ‘I’m going to talk about how I’ve been
 White students and students of color perceive the benefits of diversity differently, says White students . Students of color and white students of white students perceive diversity differently . White students believe diversity is a good thing for them .
 "Some of them would get annoyed when they saw, like, a table of Black students in the cafeteria," she says . "If diversity is all about improving my own educational experience, I can see how I have benefited from those diverse voices in the classroom"
 White students should be integrating into these White spaces, White students say . And of course, they didn’t notice all those other tables of White students in the cafeteria, White .
 Black students are expected to integrate into predominantly White spaces, says CNN's John Sutter .
 "There are all these unfair expectations on the underrepresented students of color. And so I think there were all these . unfair expectations," she says .
 We know that’s not the case. And of course, they’re all assumed to have benefitted from affirmative action, and we know that . We’ve all assumed that they all benefitted in affirmative action .
 President Obama says students of color at high school could have experienced racial discrimination if they didn't get into Harvard . Obama: "If I hadn’t gotten into Harvard, I would have felt that I experience racial discrimination"
 And even with affirmative action, it’s just there to benefit themselves, says CNN.com.com's John Sutter .
 "We need to focus in on racial equity and, again, the history of racial exclusion in this country. And I think we need to get away from that," she says .
 Even these institutions themselves have benefitted from slave labor, from the slave trade, from building their endowments at a time of racial segregation, at a . time when there were very few, if any, students of color on their campuses . The way that even these institutions have benef
 Legacy benefits "continue that sort of intergenerational racial exclusion," she says . "And then, legacy benefits ... continue to continue," she adds .
 Beverly Lindsay has suggested Beverly Daniel Tatum’s book, Why Do All the Black Kids Sit Together in the Cafeteria . Beverly Lindsay also suggested Beverly Tatum's book, "Why Do Black Kids sit together in Cafeteria?" Beverly Daniel is also suggesting Beverly Daniel .
 We are at the end of time, if you want to just make any final remarks before we close, you can make them . We are in the midst of the final moments of the day .
 I mean, I’ll just say that I think it’s important to pay attention to admissions, but I also have started to think much more broadly about DEI and higher education . “I’m just saying that I . think it . is important to
 "We need to also look well-beyond these, sort of, selective colleges. And I think we need to look well, well beyond these sort of selective colleges," says Obama .
 We need to look at the endowment per pupil at some of these selective colleges, compared to—and what they’re doing for social mobility compared to, I’m sure, like the college in Miami, community colleges, open access state colleges .
 "We just need a lot more supports for those colleges that are engines of social mobility," she says . "I think we just need more supports," she adds .
 "It's incredibly important to look also beyond admissions. And, again, if we think about the mission of higher education and how we, as Americans, see how we want to ... sort of, what kind of society we want, he says .
 CNN.com's John Sutter hosts a Q&A panel of experts from around the world to answer questions and answers . Sutter: "To everybody taking the time to participate and for your great questions and comments. Thank you for your comments. And to everybody ... thank you for
 Our next higher education webinar will be on Tuesday, April 19, at 3:00m. The webinar is a free webinar for students and students .
 I encourage you to follow us on @CFR_academic, visit CFR.org, ForeignAffairs.com, and ThinkGlobalHealth.org .
 The weather was in many ways a metaphor for the mood in the White House . The weather is a sign that the mood is changing in the President's administration .
 The thirteenth day of the Cuban missile crisis brought a deal between President John F Kennedy and Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev . After twelve stress-filled days, the deal was reached .
 Kennedy decided immediately to take yes for an answer. Defense and Security Diplomacy and International Institutions Kennedy said yes . Kennedy said: "Yes" when asked about Kennedy's decision .
 Kennedy directed ExCom to prepare a separate response to Khrushchev's Radio Moscow address . Kennedy also directed the ExCom . ExCom prepared a separate, formal response to the official version of the Radio Moscow .
 JFK was not going to let a wayward U-2 derail a resolution of the crisis . JFK would not let the wayward plane derail a solution of the U.2 crisis .
 James M Lindsay analyzes the politics shaping U.S. foreign policy and the sustainability of American power . 2-4 times weekly. The Water's Edge offers analysis of foreign policy .
 Daily News Brief is a summary of global news developments with CFR analysis delivered to the daily News Brief . Url Email Address Address View your email address .
 CFR's The World This Week is a weekly digest of the latest from CFR on the biggest foreign policy stories of the week . This week's feature includes briefs, opinions, and explainers .
 Think Global Health A curation of original analyses, data visualizations, and commentaries, examining the debates and efforts to improve health worldwide . A curated version of this article has been compiled by CNN.com/Heroes .
 CFR is committed to developing the next generation of technology in the U.S. to develop a new generation of innovative new technologies . The U.N. National Institute of New York City is developing a new program to develop new technology .
 Confident that the crisis was headed to a peaceful and satisfactory conclusion, Kennedy called former presidents Herbert Hoover, Harry Truman, and Dwight Eisenhower .
 He didn't tell them about the secret promise he had made to remove the Jupiter missiles from Turkey . He didn’t tell them .
 The former presidents applauded Kennedy’s skill in forcing Khrushchev to capitulate . Former presidents not surprisingly applauded Kennedy .
 Not everyone was pleased that the missile crisis had been resolved peacefully . Not everyone one was pleased with the resolution .
 Robert Kennedy invoked the memory of Abraham Lincoln . After calling presidents Truman and Eisenhower, he turned to his brother, Attorney General Robert Kennedy .
 Council on Foreign Relations is a partnership with the Council of Foreign Relations . The Council is a partner in Washington, D.C. and Washington, DC .