 This was the closest we came to WW3 . The event occurred in Cuba on January 1 1959 .
 Though Batista is a corrupt and repressive dictator, U.S. values his anti-Communist views, especially as it embarks on protecting the world from the spread of the evils of Communism .
 Batista can be depended on to neutralize any Communist movements from growing in Cuba and prevent any Communist takeover . Batista is expected to remain in control of Cuba until the end of the decade .
 Given his pro-business interests, he is certainly the lesser of the two evils . Also, given his pro business interests, it is certainly a lesser of two evils. Also, he's certainly the better of the other evils.
 The Soviet government welcomes the Castro-led Cuban revolution, especially as he fights against the evils and corruption of Western capitalism . The Soviet state welcomes the Cuban revolution .
 Soviet support for Castro grows in tandem with America’s increasing hostility toward him . U.S. is increasingly hostile to Castro, and the Soviet Union is increasingly wary of him .
 Cuba has never before been an obedient ally or proxy of Moscow . The Soviets foresee that the country will increasingly depend on them for military and economic aid .
 As America prohibits the importation of Cuban sugar and turns its back on Cuba, the Soviets happily gain a new, strategically located partner through whom they can challenge U.S. hegemony .
 CIA is left with no choice but to remove Castro from power . Castro nationalizes industries that Americans had cultivated over many years . He is a clear danger to American investments in the region, the CIA says .
 1,400 American-trained Cuban exiles who had fled their homes when Castro took over . President Kennedy fears that Castro is a Soviet agent trying to subvert the rest of Latin America . The Bay of Pigs invasion was a CIA-led invasion by exiles .
 After less than 24 hours of fighting, the badly outnumbered exiles surrender in failure . Unfortunately, after less than a 24-hour battle, the soldiers surrender .
 America's embarrassing and disastrous Bay of Pigs operation could not have worked out better for the Soviets . America’s embarrassing . and disastrous . operation could have worked . out better than the Soviets.
 President Kennedy’s paranoia about Castro being a Soviet agent led him to approve the operation . It was fortunate for the Soviets that President Kennedy approved the operation. President Kennedy's paranoia led to approval .
 After the Bay of Pigs, Castro declares his commitment to Communism for the first time . While Kennedy’s fear had been wrong, it was nevertheless prescient, as Castro declared his commitment . Castro was the leader of the Cuban Revolution in Cuba .
 There is growing conviction in Moscow and Havana that Kennedy is preparing for another invasion of Cuba . Nikita Krushchev cannot allow the American military to invade Cuba, which he cannot .
 CIA engages in strategies to sabotage and wreck Cuba’s economy, including assassinating Castro supporters and bribing foreign suppliers to send faulty goods to Cuba, etc. etc. To make sure Castro doesn’t underestimate U.S. resolve, the CIA engages .
 America also does a large-scale military exercise in the Caribbean, which includes a mock invasion of an unnamed island and overthrow of its dictator, all to warn Castro .
 President Khrushchev secretly introduced medium-range nuclear missiles into Cuba . The Kennedy administration is busy wasting their time on Operation Mongoose . The missile launch was one step ahead of the Kennedy administration .
 Khrushchev is sure an American invasion is imminent, especially after the U.S. mock island invasion as part of Operation Mongoose . Given that America turned Cuba into the battleground of the Cold War,
 He therefore feels compelled to place the missiles in Cuba as a defensive tactic . The missile launch comes as a result of the U.S. President Barack Obama's actions in Cuba .
 The Soviets know that their only chance to win is to fight back with missiles that contain nuclear warheads . As chances would be slim against defending Cuba from a conventional American attack, the Soviets know they must use nuclear weapons .
 President Kennedy calls together 18 of his closest advisers to try to resolve this perilous U.S.-Soviet confrontation . The confrontation was the most dangerous of the entire Cold War . Kennedy: "It was a very dangerous moment in the history of the Cold War"
 For the Americans, this dangerous crisis is the first time they realize that they could all be killed on their soil . Unlike the Soviets, who have a long history of enduring threats and invasion, for the U.S. Americans, they realize they could be killed .
 The Soviets know that they can never catch up to the Americans . The dangerous poker game of nuclear “one-upmanship” between America and the Soviet Union is on hold .
 Having missiles in Cuba significantly rectifies their disadvantage and strengthens their strategic position by providing a vital psychological boost . However, having missiles in Cuban territory is still a major problem .
 It gives the impression of a parity, especially considering the presence of American missiles in Turkey . The presence of U.S. missiles in the region is a major concern .
 This gives the U.S. a taste of their own medicine and shows the Soviets that their president is tough and aggressive on foreign policy . This not only gives the Americans a taste, but shows that their President is tough .
 The only help the Soviet Union is giving to Cuba is assistance in growing crops and defense . Neither does he let on that he knows Gromyko is blatantly lying after he states that the only help is to Cuba .
 The Soviet Union favors peaceful coexistence and opposes countries like the U.S. interfering in the domestic affairs of others, he says . The Soviets tried to shift the burden of escalation onto the Americans .
 As such, the Soviets have no choice but to react firmly to America’s global nuclear presence . The U.S. has a global presence in the world .
 ExComm suggests sending United States ships to Cuba to prevent Soviet ships from reaching the island . ExComm: U.S. ships should be sent to Cuba .
 It's a quarantine instead of a blockade, since the latter is considered an act of war . Doing their utmost to avoid escalation, they call it a quarantine . The quarantine is called a quarantine, not a blockade .
 Robert Kennedy tells his brother, President Kennedy, about the quarantine recommendation . Robert Kennedy: Quarantine recommendation is a good idea for President Kennedy to consider .
 The president lies about having a cold so he can return to Washington to deal with the escalating crisis . The president, who is in Chicago, says he has a cold, but is not sick .
 Still unaware that their missiles have been discovered, the Soviets continue to deny their presence and intention in Cuba . The Soviets are still unaware of the discovery of their missiles .
 Khrushchev is getting increasingly aware of the massive number of both Soviet and American ships northeast of Cuba . However, President Khrushchev is becoming increasingly aware .
 The Soviet leader is increasingly nervous about the possibility of having an actual military crisis on his hands . Feeling pressure that his strategy of denial may be exposed at any moment, the Soviet leader .
 Kennedy sternly states that he has ordered a Navy quarantine around Cuba and has ordered the Soviets to remove their missiles . Kennedy also orders the Soviet Union to remove its missiles .
 Anxiety high in Moscow upon hearing about Kennedy’s impending speech, alerting them to the fact that the Americans have discovered their missiles in Cuba .
 Khrushchev’s fears are confirmed after hearing the speech, but he is also relieved that Kennedy's first response is to the quarantine of Cuba, as opposed to war . Kennedy's response to the speech was to quarantine Cuba, not war .
 Khrushchev hastens completion of completion of the missile site and puts Soviet forces into combat readiness . Worried that U.S. will act impulsively and aggressively, he hastens the completion of missile site .
 U.S. orders those farthest from Cuba to turn back and halts others . To prevent the United States from capturing strategic technology aboard Soviet ships, he orders those .
 The Americas view this threat as empty bluster but are nevertheless taking account of the gravity of the situation . The Americas are taking into account the seriousness of the threat, they say .
 Khrushchev refuses to remove missiles from Cuba . U.S. was trying to intimidate the Soviet Union . Khrushchchev first public admission that Soviet missiles exist .
 President Kennedy put the world at risk of a nuclear war by ordering the U.S. quarantine of Cuba . Since they are there purely for defense, he assuredly accuses Kennedy of putting the world on risk of nuclear war .
 Khrushchev is confident in sending his message because the Americans don’t yet know that nuclear cruise missiles were being deployed to pre-launch positions in Cuba . The Americans were not aware of the deployment of the missiles when they were deployed .
 U.S. ambassador Adlai Stevenson confronts Soviet Ambassador Valerian Zorin about existence of Soviet missiles . Stevenson produces U-2 photos of Soviet missile missiles . U.N. ambassador produces the photos for the world to see, rightfully humiliating the Soviets .
 A Soviet tanker accidentally reaches the quarantine line, a nearby American destroyer challenges it with flashing lights in an anxiety-ridden moment . The incident occurred during the Second World War .
 President Kennedy lets it continue toward Cuba, showing weakness in deferring to Khrushchev . Thankfully, President Kennedy decides to let it continue . President Kennedy shows weakness by letting it continue to go toward Cuba .
 Khrushchev convinced by intelligence sources that Kennedy will not accept the missiles in Cuba and is actively preparing for an attack . Khrushchell has no other choice but to compromise, says Kennedy .
 He regretfully sends a letter to Kennedy gallantly proposing that Soviet missiles could be removed if Kennedy will not invade Cuba . The letter was sent to Kennedy in a letter .
 An American jet rescues him just in time, before the Soviets react in an aggressive manner that would escalate to war, such as shooting down his plane . Americans wait with baited breath, as Americans wait for the rescue of the man .
 Each sub is carrying a nuclear-tipped torpedo . Unknown to the Americans at that time, each sub carries a nuclear torpedo . The sub is believed to have been carrying the torpedo .
 The Soviet commander of the surfaced sub, Commander Savitsky, had not been able to communicate with Moscow for the last 48 hours . He believed that war had already started and believed it had already begun .
 Under almost unbearable physical conditions, emotional strain and stress, he was understandably prepared to fire . He said: "He was under almost unbearable . physical conditions and emotional strain."
 Three other officers on board needed authorization from all three other officers . Two were in favor, one was not, and while two were against it .
 Vasili Arkhipov saved the world from nuclear war with a reluctant Soviet officer . Vasili was reluctant to take part in the fight against a nuclear war . He saved the planet from a nuclear bomb .
 The president secretly agrees to remove United States missiles from Turkey as long as it remains a secret . The president also secretly agrees that the U.S. missiles will be removed from Turkey .
 The world goes to sleep that night waiting to see if Khrushchev will agree to the arrangement and finally end this nerve-wracking crisis . The world went to sleep waiting for the end of the crisis .
 The Soviets agree to the terms of the agreement to end the crisis . That evening, after one last vital meeting between the Americans and the USSR, the Soviets agree . The Soviet Union and the United States agreed to the agreement .
 The next morning, Khrushchev announces that the missiles are being dismantled and removed from Cuba . The next day, the missiles were being dismantled . The missiles were removed from the Cuban territory .
 Castro refuses to allow inspections, forcing the U.S. to maintain low-flying U-2 flights for photographic surveillance . The United States quarantine remains in effect during missile removal .
 Castro considers this an invasion of Cuban territorial rights and threatens to shoot down the U-2 planes . Castro considers the U.2 planes an invasion .
 He even fires at some of the Cuban soldiers, making America more resolute in its anti-Castro and anti-Cuba stance .
 USSR sends Soviet leader Anastas Mikoyan to Cuba to soothe a livid Castro . Knowing they ignored Castro throughout the October crisis, the USSR sends him to the island .
 Castro proves he cannot be trusted with them or to keep their existence a secret from America . It's a deal with the devil, as Castro proves to be a fool . Castro proves that he can't be trusted .
 Fearing Cuban irresponsibility with the nuclear weapons, the Soviets, once again forced to play the role of responsible adult, pass a law preventing the placement of nuclear weapons outside of the USSR, and finally remove the weapons from Cuba . The Soviets were forced to act as a responsible adult
 Castro admits his dictatorship could not exist without Soviet help . Despite initial hard feelings, relations remain good between the Soviets and Castro . Castro admits he would not have survived without the Soviets' help .
 Cuban revolutionary Fidel Castro during an address in Cuba after Batista was forced to flee . Fidel Castro was the first Cuban revolutionary to take over Cuba in the 1930s .
 Cuban prime minister Fidel Castro talks with parents of some of the American prisoners held hostage for food and supplies by the Cuban government after the failed Bay of Pigs invasion .
 Former Russian and U.S. officials said the world was closer to a nuclear conflict during the 1962 Cuban missile crisis than governments were aware of . Former officials said that the world had been closer to the 1962 conflict than governments knew .
 American Democrat politician Adlai Stevenson is leader of the United States delegation to the United Nations . Stevenson is a member of the Democratic Party .
 Soviet cargo ship ‘Fizik Kurchatov’ leaving Cuba en route for Russia after the Cuban missile crisis . The ship was en route to Russia when the crisis broke out .