 You must answer Question 1. The Development of the United Nations, 1945–1991 . You must also answer Question 2. The development of the U.N. in the United States .
 Read the Sources and then answer the question . The United Nations and the CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS are at the center of the crisis in Cuba .
 When answering Question 1, candidates are advised to pay particular attention to the interpretation and evaluation of the Sources both individually and as a group . Candidates are advised .
 On 16 October 1962, President Kennedy learned that the Soviet Union was building nuclear missile installations in Cuba . Source: President Kennedy learns that the Soviets were building missile installations .
 He announced a ‘naval quarantine’ of Cuba, pushing the world closer to nuclear war than ever before .
 UN Secretary-General U Thant was to play a significant role in de-escalating and then resolving the nuclear standoff between the superpowers . In the deepening crisis, UN secretary-general played a key role .
 He sent appeals and messages, relayed proposals, offered reassurances, advanced the ‘non-invasion for missiles’ formula that formed the basis of the final agreement, shuttled to Cuba to mollify Castro .
 It is unfortunate that the role of the Secretary-General has gone unsung in the history of the crisis . It was unfortunate that it was not highlighted in the crisis, says the secretary-general .
 The UN and U Thant enjoyed enormous public prominence during the crisis . In fact, the UN and the UN enjoyed considerable public prominence .
 Headlines in U.S. and Russian newspapers hailed U. Thant for his part in de-escalating the crisis .
 It was only later later, as history was being written, that the UN was edged out . The UN is now being edged out of the world's most powerful organisation .
 Cuban government: We repeat refusal of unilateral inspection on the part of any organisation, national or international, of Cuban territory . Source B: Regarding your conciliatory efforts, we repeat to you our refusal to unilateral inspection .
 It is an inalienable right of a sovereign nation to resolve, within its territory, all the problems in agreement with the will of its government and its people . It is the right to resolve all problems within the territory of a nation .
 Each day the incursions of war planes over our territory grow more alarming . Each day, the incursion of warplanes over the territory grows more alarming.
 "No sovereign state can allow its air space to be violated in this manner," says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Russia's air space was violated in violation of air space, says Putin .
 We believe in the right to defend liberty, sovereignty, and the dignity of this nation . We will exercise it up to the last man, woman or child capable of holding a weapon. We are committed to defending liberty .
 Fidel Castro, Prime Minister of the Cuban Revolutionary Government, in a letter to UN Secretary-General U Thant, 16 November 1962 . Fidel Castro wrote to the UN secretary-general in 1962 .
 The prompt and successful implementation of the naval quarantine around Cuba, the rapid securance of NATO support, the speed of the U.S. conventional military build up and the speed . The alert measures taken by American strategic forces around the world, must all in varying degrees have impressed the Soviet
 Khrushchev had to act quickly in order to limit his losses . U.S. prepared for the invasion of Czechoslovakia . American preparation convinced him to move quickly .
 From a book entitled ‘Strategic Power and Soviet Foreign Policy’, 1966. ‘Stalin’s ‘strategic power and Soviet foreign policy’ was written in 1966 .
 Source D U Thant can hardly be said to have left the office of United Nations Secretary-General in a blaze of glory . Thant left office of U.N. secretary-general in 2010 .
 In many quarters the dominant emotion aroused by the prospect of his departure was relief . It was accompanied by something approaching elation at the thought of a new man in the job .
 In his address to the Security Council on 24 October 1962, U Thant underlined that what was at stake was the very fate of mankind .
 He called for urgent negotiations between the parties directly involved in the conflict . He sent appeals to President Kennedy and Chairman Khrushchev .
 For the USSR it would mean a voluntary suspension of all arms shipments to Cuba . The USSR would have to suspend arms shipments . For Cuba, the suspension would mean an arms embargo .
 For the USA it would entail a voluntary suspension of the quarantine, especially the searching of ships bound for Cuba . For the U.S. it would mean a voluntary ban on ships bound to Cuba, especially those bound for Havana .
 After the American and Soviet acceptances, U. Thant travelled to Cuba for conversations with Cuban leaders .
 U. Thant’s visit was of importance since it gave the Cuban leaders an opportunity to let off steam . U Thant's visit was important for the country .
 Question 1 Source D © A James; U Thant and His Critics; Stevens and Sons; 1972 . Question 1: "What do you think of Thant?"