 History offers no parallel to the 13 days of October 1962, when the U.S. and the Soviet Union paused at the nuclear precipice .
 Never before had there been such a high probability that so many lives would end suddenly . The tragedy was the worst in the history of the United States .
 Other catastrophes and inhumanities of history would have faded into insignificance . The world's most heinous crimes have been carried out in the hands of humanity .
 Having peered over the edge of the nuclear precipice, both nations edged backwards towards détente . North Korea and the U.S. have been at odds for decades .
 Never again was the risk of war between the two nations as great as it was during the last two weeks of October 1962 .
 An understanding of this crisis is essential for every serious student of foreign affairs . Thus an understanding of it is essential to every serious foreign affairs.
 American sources and newly available material from the Soviet Union now permit us to reconstruct the Soviet arms build-up that culminated in the conversion of Cuba into a major strategic missile base . Operation Anadyr is based on the conversion in Cuba by converting Cuba to a major military base .
 The Soviets and Cubans negotiated the next phase of military assistance in early 1962 . The Soviet-Cuban agreement was reached in the spring of that year .
 The Soviet Presidium approved Cuban requests for additional weapons in April 1962 . The Soviets resumed arms shipments at a markedly increased pace in late July .
 By 1 September, Soviet arms in Cuba included surface-to-air missiles, cruise missiles, patrol boats armed with anti-ship missiles . More than 5000 Soviet technicians and military personnel were in Cuba .
 The first Soviet nuclear ballistic missiles reached Cuban soil on 8 September . The missiles were sent to Cuba by the Soviet Union .
 The medium range ballistic missiles were secretly transported to Cuba beneath the decks of Soviet ships . The missiles were hidden under Soviet ships in Cuba . They were transported to the island under the cover of Soviet vessels .
 Additional MRBMs, missile trailers, fuelling trucks, special radar vans, missile erectors, and nuclear warhead storage bunkers arrived and were rushed to construction sites . More than 1,000 people are believed to be working on the project .
 Similar equipment to set up longer-range intermediate range ballistic missiles soon followed . Similar equipment was set up to set-up missiles in the 1980s .
 Unknown to the USA, Cuba received nuclear warheads for the MRBMs on 4 October . The U.S. also received dozens of warheads for Sopka coastal defence cruise missiles and six nuclear bombs .
 The final decision to put missiles in Cuba was made in the Soviet Presidium, but the details of the operation were delegated to appropriate Soviet organizations . The path from the general decision to the actual appearance of operational missiles was delegated .
 Standard Soviet operations, particularly where nuclear weapons were involved, imposed secrecy beyond anything approached in the U.S. government . Standard Soviet military operations imposed secrecy .
 Secrecy deprived each organization of information about other organizations and made it impossible to keep the whole operation in view . Secrecy deprives each organization from information about each other organizations . It made it difficult to keep an entire operation in the public eye .
 The clandestine shipping, unloading, and delivery of the missiles to the construction sites was a major organizational success, eluding all methods of detection until missiles were deployed in the field . The clandestine shipment of missiles was a success, according to the author .
 Operation Anadyr was planned by a specially created sub unit of the operations branch of the Soviet General Staff . The sub unit worked closely with Soviet intelligence agencies .
 Group of Soviet Forces in Cuba took over Cuba after weapons and equipment arrived in Cuba . The Cuban government was overthrown by the Soviet Union in 1991 .
 At the sites, each team did what it knew how to do: emplace missiles . Each team placed missiles on the ground, according to the book . The book's author says each team placed a missile on each of the sites .
 The Soviet Union had never installed MRBMs or IRBMs outside the Soviet Union before Cuba . They had never been installed in Cuba .
 John F Kennedy Presidential Library, Boston, MA. in the Soviet Union. Reprinted by permission of the John F. Kennedy Presidential . Library .
 Camouflage would have created extreme discomfort for people working under the netting or plastic covers in the tropical heat . The heat would have been too much to bear in the extreme heat .
 Working stealthily at night would have slowed the pace of construction and put the work even further behind schedule . It would have put the construction work behind schedule and put it even further back on schedule .
 An intelligence agency would probably have made a different choice, but a field organization in the business of deploying missiles could be expected to focus first on completion of preparation for possible combat .
 A U-2 had flown over the areas where the missiles were deployed on 14 October . The missiles had been deployed in the area .
 There had been more overflights on 15 and 17 October, which presumably were observed too .
 Gribkov: 'Moscow had sent them to Cuba to defend against air attack, not actual espionage' But Moscow had sent the troops there to defend from air attack .
 Standing orders to air defence units told them to fire only if attacked, perhaps to avoid provoking any incident or unwanted attention before everything was ready .
 The standing orders were undoubtedly written by someone who was not present when Khrushchev expressed his concerns, so the Soviet leader’s intentions never entered the operational directives to the relevant implementing organizations . The standing order was written by a person not present at the time of the incident .
 There is evidence that, on 14 October, Pliyev suspected that the missiles had been discovered . There is also evidence that he suspected that they were discovered .
 There is no evidence that the ‘Soviet government’ learned of these suspicions . But there is no . evidence that there was no evidence .
 On 22 October, worried that Kennedy was about to announce an invasion of Cuba, the Presidium drafted an instruction authorizing Pliyev to use tactical nuclear weapons to repel it . The Presidium actually drafted the instruction .
 On 26 October, acting on his own authority, Pliyev ordered the movement of a number of nuclear warheads closer to missiles that would carry them . The move was ordered by the head of state television .
 Unsettled, they sharply reminded him that he must wait for central authorization before using any weapons . They told him to wait until he received central authorization .
 There are no technical safeguards to physically prevent nuclear use by field units . But there are no physical safeguards to prevent field units using nuclear weapons .
 The Americans did not even know that Soviet forces in Cuba had tactical nuclear weapons until late in the crisis . The U.S. did not know about the Cuban nuclear weapons .
 Kennedy called ‘this secret, swift, and extraordinary build-up of communist missiles’ posed troubling questions indeed .
 Kennedy's senior advisers considered these questions when they convened at 11:50m. on Tuesday, 16 October . Kennedy’s senior advisers consider these questions at 11.50m .
 An analyst who knew nothing about the Soviet Union, except that it was a powerful country, might infer that the powerful country would come to the aid of its weak friend, Cuba .
 The 1961 effort to invade Cuba with a force of CIA-trained Cuban exiles had failed disastrously . The Soviet Union had substantial reason to believe that the USA might return to do the job right .
 In support of the Cuban defence hypothesis, it is clear that Cuba was surely on Khrushchev’s mind . The Cuban defence theory is supported by the theory of the Soviet Union's defence .
 Attempts to explain Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba with the Cuban defence hypothesis will not withstand careful examination . Although persuasive, attempts to explain the Soviet missile defence hypothesis are not withstand examination .
 If deterrence, meaning the prevention of a major attack, had been the objective, the presence of a sizeable contingent of Soviet troops would have been a better solution . If deterrence was the main objective, it was to prevent major attacks .
 Castro worried that deployment could provoke an intense crisis . Castro did accept longer-range missiles, but he worried that they could provoke a crisis . In the end, Castro accepted the missiles .
 A final problem with the Cuban defence hypothesis is that the move actually made Cuba’s position more, not less, perilous . So a final problem is that it actually made the move more perilous, not more .
 The defining feature of the Cold War was the global competition between American and Soviet values and interests . Cold War politics was the competition between U.S. and Soviet interests .
 Whenever one side loses, the other gained—and it was seen to do so by others around the world . The two sides were seen to gain, and the world saw that .
 A rival might seize the opportunity to display the extent of its global power, especially so near its enemy’s shores . A rival may seize the chance to display its global might, especially in the region .
 If the USA accepted the build-up, it would lose the confidence of its allies in Latin America and around the world . The U.S. would lose its confidence in Latin American allies, say experts .
 Secretary of State Dean Rusk concluded that ‘the hard line boys have moved into the ascendancy.’ The hard-line boys have 'moved into the . ascendancy’
 Arthur Schlesinger Jr asked Kennedy why the Soviets had put missiles in Cuba . Kennedy said the Soviets put missiles there in Cuba in October 1961 .
 First, the Soviet Union would demonstrate that it was capable of bold action in support of a communist revolution, impressing China and healing a split between Moscow and Beijing that had widened since 1959 . China and Moscow had been at odds for decades .
 Second, the Soviets would radically redefine the context of the Berlin . The Cuban leader Fidel Castro giving a speech .
 Despite the persuasiveness of Cold War arguments, this hypothesis ignores five key aspects of the situation . Despite the persuasive arguments, the Cold War argument is not all-sufficient .
 Second, the size and character of the Soviet deployment went well beyond a mere political probe . The size of the deployment went far beyond the mere political inquiry into the matter .
 To challenge American intentions and firmness, even a few MRBMs threaten the entire southeastern USA should suffice . To challenge U.S. intentions, the U.N. should be able to challenge its intentions .
 The deployment of MRBMs and IRBMs, plus plans for a nuclear submarine base, jeopardized the essential requirement for a successful move on the Cold War chessboard, namely that it be a fait accompli .
 A small tailored nuclear deployment that became operational before it was discovered could have given the Soviet Union a Cuban enclave no less defensible than the Western enclave in Berlin .
 If the Soviet probe provoked a forceful American riposte, it would be counterproductive . A vivid Soviet defeat would make the whole venture counterproductive, he says .
 In 1962 the Soviet government found itself with only twenty intercontinental ballistic missiles capable of launching nuclear weapons that could reach U.S. territory from bases inside the Soviet Union . The Soviet government had only twenty intercontinental missiles capable of launching nuclear weapons that could
 The Soviets had doubts about the reliability and accuracy of these missiles . The Soviets also had well-founded doubts about their accuracy and reliability of the missiles .
 A clear-eyed strategic analyst could quite reasonably conclude that in 1962 the Soviet Union had a problem . The Soviet Union was in the midst of a crisis in 1962 .
 Moving existing nuclear weapons to locations from which they could reach U.S. targets was one option . Moving their existing nuclear arms to locations could be one option, officials said .
 Khrushchev would use the missiles to solve the Berlin problem—on his terms . The missiles would solve the problem on his terms, he says . The missile would be used to solve it on his own terms .
 As a prelude to a confrontation over Berlin, Khrushchev’s manoeuvre made sense . As a result of the manoeuvre, it made sense. The manoeuvre was a precursor to a showdown over Berlin .
 If the Americans did nothing, Khrushchev would force the West out of Berlin, confident that the missiles in Cuba would deter the Americans from starting a war . If the U.S. didn't act, the West would be forced to leave Berlin . The West was confident the missiles
 If the Americans tried to bargain, the terms would be a trade of Cuba and Berlin . If the U.S. tried to negotiate, it would be the terms of a trade between Berlin and Cuba . The terms of the deal would be similar to that of a deal between Cuba and
 Since Berlin was immeasurably more important than Cuba, that trade would also be a win for Khrushchev . Berlin was more important to the Soviet Union than Cuba .
 If the Americans blockaded or attacked Cuba, Khrushchev could then use this as the excuse for an equivalent blockade or attack on Berlin . If the U.S. blockaded Cuba, it could then be used as an excuse for a similar blockade or Berlin attack .
 Kennedy thought Europe would blame the loss of Berlin on the USA, since they would not understand why U.S. felt the need to attack Cuba .
 Khrushchev would gain a quick and relatively cheap boost to Soviet missile power, and the Berlin crisis might be pressed to a successful conclusion . The Berlin crisis would be a quick boost to the Soviet missile arsenal .
 Khrushchev could return to his hopes for Soviet domestic renewal . Now better able to move resources from defence and heavy industry to the needs of his people .
 It must be acknowledged that the missile power and Berlin hypotheses fail to account for many other features of what the Soviets actually did . The Berlin hypotheses, as well as the others considered above, do not hold up the theory of missile power .
 It appeared to the Americans that the MRBMs were installed before the cover of SAMs was in place . The U.S. military says the SAMs were installed in place before they were put in place by the Americans .
 We now know that in fact the Soviet Union did install the air defence cover on time, before the missiles were put in place, in order to shield the missiles from being discovered .
 Khrushchev’s grand plan for unveiling his fait accompli presents a second difficulty . ‘I don’t think he’ll be able to do so,’ he says. ‘‘I’m not going to get it,
 He planned to visit the USA and announce the true situation in the second half of November .
 Only the MRBMs would be in place after the U.S. announced the discovery of the missiles . The round-the-clock construction schedule was adopted after the discovery was announced .
 A third puzzle arises over the Soviet omission of camouflage at the missile sites . The Soviet omission is not the only explanation for the omission .
 A Soviet desire to be found out hardly squares with the extensive and effective camouflage and deception that shielded the transport of the missiles to Cuba and then from the docks to the sites .
 Khrushchev did not ask his ambassador in Washington or any other known experts on the USA for a considered analysis of their judgement . The Soviet leader did not discuss the judgement of the U.S. with his ambassador .
 According to Gromyko’s account, Khrushchev was simply unmoved by this advice . The Soviet leader was unmoved from the advice, according to the account .
 Ambassador Dobrynin later complained that Khrushchev ‘grossly misunderstood the psychology of his opponents.’ Ambassador Dobryryin later said that Khrrushchev’s 'misunderstood' his opponents .
 Had he asked the embassy beforehand, we could have predicted the violent American reaction to his adventure once it ­became known .
 The men advising President Kennedy differed sharply about what should be done . The men advised President Kennedy on what to do with his administration .
 The process assumed a more regular formal quality in successive meetings of the National Security Council on 20, 21, and 22 October . The meetings took place at the end of October .
 Evidence about what members of the U.S. government were seeing, doing, and even thinking is much greater than for most events . Because of the centrality of this crisis to the presidency of John F Kennedy, evidence about what the government was doing is greater than most .
 With the publication of the secret tapes and most of the classified documents of the crisis, one can follow the perceptions and preferences of individual players with more confidence .
 The Soviet decisionmaking process remains more opaque . Unfortunately, even with the new evidence about the Soviet side of the equation, the Soviet decision making process remains opaque .
 Assistant Secretary of State Edwin Martin received a phone call on Monday, 15 October, just as he finished delivering a speech to the National Press Club addressing the Soviet activity in Cuba .
 The caller informed Martin that offensive missiles had been discovered in Cuba . The call was made to the U.S. State Department .
 The U-2 photographs presented conclusive evidence of Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba . The U.2 photographs were taken by U.S. soldiers in Cuba in the 1950s .
 To fail to act forcibly could produce a number of undesirable outcomes, the government says . To act forcibly, failure to do so could produce undesirable outcomes .
 First, it would undermine the confidence of the members of his administration, especially those who had so firmly defended his policy towards Cuba .
 It would convince the rest of the government that the administration had no leader, encouraging others to challenge his policies and destroying his reputation in Congress . Second, it would convince others that the president had no leadership .
 Weakness in the face of the crisis would cut the ground from under fellow Democrats who were standing for re-election on Kennedy's Cuban policy .
 Failing to act forcibly would also drive the public to doubt Kennedy’s word and his will, he says . The Bay of Pigs would also deepen dismay over the Bay, and shake Kennedy's confidence in his own leadership .
 Kennedy had to be responsive to the pressures to which he was responsive to, he says . "The entire circle of pressures pushed him in a single direction—vigorous action," he adds .
 Dean Rusk, the Secretary of State, says the initial issues were diplomatic . Rusk: "The initial issues are diplomatic. They are diplomatic"
 His main suggestion was to try to get Castro himself to push the Soviets out of Cuba . He suggested trying to get him to push out the Soviets .
 Rusk wanted to warn the Cuban leader that the Soviets were putting his regime in mortal danger and would in the end happily sell him out for a victory in Berlin . Rusk warned the Soviets that they were putting the Cuban regime in danger .
 Kennedy thought that the proposal had no prospect, and no one outside the State Department spoke up for it . Kennedy: "I thought that no prospect of it having no prospect"
 For Secretary of Defense McNamara, the missiles were principally a political problem . McNamara: "For Secretary McNamara it was principally a . political problem" for McNamara .
 In his view, the overall nuclear balance would not be significantly affected by the Soviet deployment, he says .
 At the start, McNamara was sceptical about the need for military action . Therefore, at the start of the war, he was skeptical of the need to intervene .
 McGeorge Bundy, the National Security Adviser, is uncharacteristically reticent . Bundy was uncharacteristicistic reticent. Bundy is a former Air Force Vice President . Bundy: "I'm not sure what I'm going to do"
 Two days later, he advocated taking no action, fearing that the Soviets would retaliate in kind against Berlin . Two days after the attack, he called for no further action .
 The next day, Bundy changed his mind again and supported an air strike against the missiles . Bundy: "I'm not sure what I really want to do, but I'm sure I'm going to do it"
 UN ambassador Adlai Stevenson joined McNamara in the ranks of the sceptics .
 New overflights revealed IRBMs had also been shipped to Cuba . IRBersuns were also shipped to the island nation .
 Taylor tipped to join his JCS colleagues in support of an invasion to follow up the air strikes . This news tipped Taylor to join colleagues in supporting an invasion of Syria .
 Former Secretary of State Dean Acheson supported an air strike, but called for a narrow strike against missile sites only . Achesons called for the strike only, ignoring the Soviet bombers, fighter-bombers and anti-aircraft units .
 Robert Kennedy and Rusk objected that any American surprise attack would be immoral, comparing it to Pearl Harbor . The two men were opposed to the idea of a surprise attack .
 President Kennedy outlined the case for his subordinates on 18 October . Kennedy's argument was the most telling argument he made for the White House . Kennedy said the case was a good example of American exceptionalism .
 An attack on Cuba would cause a retaliatory attack on Berlin which in return would instantly present Kennedy with no meaningful military option but nuclear retaliation .
 This left the intermediate option of the blockade originally broached by McNamara . McNamara was forced to withdraw from the U.S. military .
 President Kennedy met with the Joint Chiefs of Staff and found them adamant in support of an immediate air attack against Cuba that would retain the military advantages of surprise . The Joint Chiefs were adamant in supporting the attack .
 Air Force chief of staff Curtis LeMay, confident of his own political base of support on Capitol Hill, was boldest in confronting the President . LeMay: "I'm not going to back down, I'm going to stand up to the President"
 Opinion was still divided between a blockade and an immediate air strike, with McNamara emerging as the chief advocate of a blockade–negotiate option .
 President Kennedy returned for a decisive White House meeting on 20 October, where McNamara presented the blockade–negotiate approach .
 Following the blockade, the USA would negotiate for the removal of missiles from Turkey and Italy and talk about closing the United States base at Guantanamo in Cuba .
 Taylor presented the case for an air strike to begin two days later on Monday, 22 October . Taylor, supported by Bundy, presented the . case for the air strike, Bundy and Taylor .
 Robert Kennedy agreed with Taylor that the present moment was the last chance to destroy Castro and the Soviet missiles in Cuba . Kennedy: "The present moment" is the last opportunity to destroy the Soviet missile system .
 Sorensen, who was sympathetic to the blockade– negotiation approach, disagreed with the approach . The U.S. State Department was sympathetic with the blockade .
 If the Russians did not comply, the USA would proceed with an air strike . The U.S. would then proceed with a possible air strike on Russia .
 That would get away from the Pearl Harbor surprise attack problem, he said . That, he explained, would get . away from a surprise attack .
 Instead of an ultimatum or an offer to trade U.S. assets, the objective could simply be to freeze the situation . The objective could be to simply freeze out the situation in the United States .
 The Soviet missile installations in Cuba would be monitored by UN observation teams . UN teams would monitor the installations in the communist country .
 President Kennedy first sharply ruled out the blockade–negotiation variant, feeling that such action would convey to the world that the USA had been frightened into abandoning its positions . President Kennedy felt such a move would convey that the U.S. had been 'frightened'
 He then ruled in favour of the blockade–ultimatum option, urging that any air strike be limited only to missile sites . He then said air strikes should only be limited to the missile sites only .
 The blockade would be narrowly focused on Soviet arms deliveries, not on all shipments of vital supplies such as oil . The group also agreed that the blockade would only be focused on arms deliveries .
 In the speech draft the next day, Kennedy sided further with the blockade–ultimatum faction . The speech draft of the speech was written by Kennedy . Kennedy's speech draft was published the day after the war .
 He removed an invitation to Khrushchev to come to a summit meeting to talk about the crisis . He removed the invitation .
 First, it was a middle course between inaction and attack . It was aggressive enough to communicate firmness of intention, but not as precipitous as a strike . First, the middle course was aggressive but not precipitous .
 No possible military confrontation could be more acceptable to the U.S. than a naval engagement in the Caribbean . Indeed, no possible military confrontations could be worse than that of the Caribbean.
 A blockade also permitted the USA to exploit the threat of subsequent non-nuclear steps in which the it would enjoy significant local superiority . By flexing its conventional muscles, a blockade also allowed the U.S. to exploit .
 A blockade placed on Khrushchev the burden of choice for the next step . The blockade placed the burden on the Soviet Union on the leader .
 He could avoid a direct military clash simply by keeping his ships away from each other .
 At 7m. on 22 October 1962, President Kennedy delivered the major foreign policy address of his career . At 7.30pm, Kennedy delivered his first major speech on foreign policy since 1964 .
 The first Soviet ships approached the quarantine line on Wednesday 24 October, but halted and turned around just before challenging it . The Soviet ships were the first to challenge the line .
 President Kennedy’s announcement of the blockade emphasized that it was an initial step in a series of moves that threatened air strikes or invasion . President Kennedy emphasized that the blockade was not only but also a threat of air strikes and invasion .
 No attempt to disguise the massive build-up of more than 200,000 invasion troops in Florida . No attempt was made to disguise a massive build up of the massive force .
 JFK's address to the American people, 22 october 1962 . My fellow citizens, let no one doubt that this is a difficult and dangerous effort on which we have set out .
 On 27 October, McNamara called twenty-four troop-carrier squadrons of the Air Force Reserve to active duty . About 14,000 men were called to duty for the first time .
 Kremlin plunged into crisis deliberations after hearing Kennedy's plans to address the U.S. people . The Kremlin is considering its own crisis deliberations in response to Kennedy's announcement .
 When a formal decision was needed, Khrushchev convened the full Presidium . When a decision was made, the Presidium would convene with a formal approval vote .
 Khrushchev feared the worst, namely that the Americans would simply attack Cuba . Not yet knowing what Kennedy would say, he feared that the U.S. would attack Cuba. Not yet known what Kennedy had said .
 Kennedy’s blockade announcement was greeted not with fear, but with relief by the Soviet leadership . The Soviet leadership considered it a weaker response that left room for political manoeuvre . The blockade was greeted with relief from the Soviet leader .
 The next day they issued a flat unyielding response to Kennedy’s demands . They issued the next day .
 By the morning of 25 October, the Soviet leadership had received a tough terse reply to Khrushchev’s defiant pronouncement of the previous day . The Soviet leadership responded with a tough reply .
 Khrushchev agreed to accept UN Secretary-General U Thant’s proposal for avoiding a confrontation at the quarantine line, promising to keep Soviet ships away from this line . The Soviet Union refused to accept the proposal .
 He also dictated a long personal letter to Kennedy suggesting a peaceful resolution of the crisis .
 Khrushchev came to a judgement on 27 October that the Americans could be pushed harder . For reasons that are still obscure, Khrushchevitch came to an agreement that the US could push harder .
 Perhaps he misjudged U.S. resolve because of the way that the Americans were failing to enforce the quarantine, he said .
 Khrushchev convened the Presidium and explained that he thought that the Americans would no longer dare attack Cuba . The Presidium was informed that the U.S. would not be attacking Cuba again .
 Khrushchev would send another letter on Saturday, making a more concrete offer that acknowledged the presence of missiles in Cuba but also demanded that the USA withdraw its missiles in Turkey into the bargain . The U.S. would also demand that the U.K. withdraws its missiles from
 The lengthy discursive personal ‘Friday letter’ suggesting withdrawal of Soviet missiles for a non-invasion pledge was sent secretly . The letter was considered by the ExComm in secret .
 ‘Saturday letter’ changed the terms of the deal, adding a new demand . It did so in a public message, making it politically impossible for Khrushchev’s U.S. counterparts to accept this compromise . The letter was published in the 'Saturday letter'
 The first took the 'soft' line that Russia would remove its missiles from Cuba in return for ending the United States quarantine and assurances that the USA would not invade Cuba . The first, not made public, apparently took the ‘soft’ line .
 The second took a harder line in seeking the removal of United States missiles in Turkey in return for taking Russian missiles out of Cuba . The U.S. proposal to trade NATO missiles in Turkish for Soviet missiles in Cuba was the problem .
 Bundy argued that a trade deal would make it ‘clear that we were trying to sell out our allies for our interests’ Bundy said that a deal would be ‘a trade’ would make the U.S. sell out allies for their interests . Bundy said it would
 The struggle to avoid being impaled on one horn or the other of this dilemma made Saturday's deliberation the most intense and difficult of the crisis . Saturday’s deliberation was the hardest of the day .
 Before the USA had to make the final decisions about military action, Khrushchev moved . The U.S. had to decide whether to go to war .
 Warning signs of imminent combat in Cuba arrived in Moscow during the day of 27 October, waking Khrushchev from his apparent complacency . The Soviet Union had been preparing for war with Cuba for the first time .
 Castro asserted that an American attack in the next twenty-four to seventy-two hours was ‘almost inevitable’—probably a massive air strike but possibly an invasion . In it, Castro said an American air strike was 'almost inevitable' and that it was likely a massive strike
 If the Americans did invade, Castro urged Khrushchev to consider the ‘elimination of such a danger’ - a reference to the use of Soviet nuclear weapons against the Americans .
 American U-2 was shot down by Soviet SAMs in Cuba and its pilot was killed . Air defences in Cuba then began shooting at American reconnaissance aircraft .
 Robert Kennedy asked Robert Kennedy and Theodore Sorensen to compose a response to Khrushchev . Kennedy asked them to write a response in response to the crisis .
 At 8m., the public message to Khrushchev was simultaneously transmitted to Moscow and released to the press . At 8 p.m. the message was sent to the Soviet Union and the public was released to Moscow .
 Kennedy invited a small group to join him in the Oval Office to discuss the message he would convey personally to Ambassador Dobrynin . Kennedy then invited a group of friends to meet with him to discuss his message .
 No Soviet missiles in Cuba, no U.S. invasion, and no United States invasion, the President's new letter says . The President's message was simple, stern, and quickly decided to agree on the basis .
 Robert Kennedy left immediately to meet Dobrynin at the Justice Department and deliver the private message . Robert Kennedy then left immediately and delivered the message . Kennedy was in the middle of the conversation .
 "We had to have a commitment by at least tomorrow that those bases would be moved," says Pentagon spokesman . "Those bases had to be moved by tomorrow," he says .
 Khrushchev’s other proposal was to remove missiles from Turkey, he said . He then asked me about Khrushche's other proposal dealing with removal of the missiles .
 I mentioned four or five months—I said I was sure that these matters could be resolved satisfactorily . I mentioned that I said I would be sure, but I said it could be solved satisfactorially .
 A public message from Kennedy to Khrushchev arrived late on Saturday evening, 27 October, in Moscow . Kennedy's message arrived late in the evening of 27 October .
 It laid out the deal that would entail the verified withdrawal of Soviet ‘offensive weapons’ in exchange for the non-invasion pledge .
 Khrushchev opened the Presidium session on the morning of Sunday, 28 October, with yet another about-face in his assessment of the American danger .
 Soviet leaders broadcast an urgent message over the radio, announcing that they would withdraw their missiles from Cuba . Soviet leaders announced the withdrawal on the morning of 28 October .
 Only when coupled with the threat of further action in the form of alternatives did it succeed in forcing Soviet withdrawal of the missiles . The Soviet Union was forced to withdraw the missiles from the Soviet Union .
 Without the threat of air strike or invasion, the blockade alone would not have forced the removal of the missiles . The blockade would have been more effective if it were forced to remove missiles .
 The middle road, i.e. the blockade, may have provided time for Soviets to adjust to American determination to withdraw missiles . U.S. may have given Soviets time to adapt to American withdrawal .
 It left room for the Soviet Union to bring missiles to operational readiness . But it also left room to bring the missiles to an operational readiness.
 Khrushchev believed he faced a clear, urgent threat that America was about to move up the ladder of escalation . What narrowed that room was the belief that he faced an urgent threat, he said .
 President Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev confer at the Soviet Embassy in Vienna, Austria . The two men were photographed together at the time of the assassination .
 In thinking about problems of foreign affairs, professional analysts as well as ordinary citizens proceed in a straightforward non-theoretical fashion . Kennedy, in Sorensen 1963, was the president of the United States .
 A careful examination of events like the Soviet installation of missiles in Cuba, reveals a more complex conceptual substructure . However, careful examination . of events reveals a complex conceptual sub structure .
 The concluding section of this chapter revolves around three central propositions . The conclusion of the chapter is the conclusion of a chapter of three .
 Professional analysts and ordinary citizens think about problems of foreign policy in terms of largely implicit conceptual models that have significant consequences for the content of their thought . They think about foreign policy as a matter of thought .
 Explanations show regular and predictable characteristics that reflect unrecognized assumptions about the character of puzzles, the categories in which problems should be considered, the types of evidence that are relevant .
 Assumptions like these are central to the activities of explanation and prediction, such as prediction and prediction . Assumption is central to understanding and predicting .
 In attempting to explain a particular event, the analyst cannot simply describe the full state of the world leading up to that event . Analysts cannot describe the events surrounding that event, they say .
 The logic of explanation requires conceptual models to single out the relevant critical determinants of the occurrence, such as the junctures at which particular factors produced one state of the world rather than another .
 The logic of prediction underscores, the analyst must summarize the various factors as they bear on the occurrence .
 Conceptual models fix the mesh of the nets that the analyst drags through the material in order to explain a particular action . They also direct the analyst to cast nets in selected ponds, at certain depths, to catch fish he/she is after .
 Foreign affairs are understood as purposive acts of unified national governments . In what is, in effect, the default posture, foreign affairs are seen as unifying national governments.
 He/she focuses attention on the goals and objectives of the government . The government focuses attention to the goals of its government .
 The analyst has explained this event when he/ she can show how placing missiles in Cuba was a reasonable action, given Soviet strategic objectives .
 Predictions about what a nation will do are produced by calculating what a rational action in this certain situation would do, given specified objectives . Predictions are based on calculating what rational action would do in certain situations, given objectives .
 Model I has proved useful for many purposes, it is clear that it must be supplemented by frames of reference that disaggregate the government, focusing on the organizations and political actors involved in the policy process . Model I is a useful tool for many of the government's policies, but it
 If I know an actor’s objective, I have a major clue to his likely action, I know his objective . If an actor knows his objective, he has a clue to what he is likely to do, it will be interesting .
 By observing behaviour and considering what the actor’s objective might be, when I identify an objective that is advanced effectively by the action, I have a strong hypothesis about why he/she did it . By observing and considering behaviour, I can find a good hypothesis about what he/
 The full RAM includes not only objectives but also calculations about the situation in which the actor finds him/herself . This is the full RAM of the actor's objectives .
 This context presents threats and opportunities that the agent packages as options with pros and cons . The agent packages these options as options that he packages as pros or cons .
 The actor chooses the alternative that best advances his/ her interests . Actor chooses the option that best interests his/ their interests .
 In explaining what an agent did, or in making bets about what he/she is likely to do, analysts must consider the options identified, the costs and the benefits estimated to follow from each option, and the actor's readiness or reluctance to take risks .
 Model I analyst seeks to answer key questions in explaining government action or estimating the likelihood of an action can be summarized . Model I analysts try to answer the core questions they seek to answer in explaining an action or estimate the likelihood it will happen .
 Two alternative conceptual models, the Organizational Behaviour Model (Model II) and the Governmental Politics Model, provide a base for improved explanation and predictions . The Governmental Politicians Model is based on a model of organizational behaviour .
 According to the Organizational Behaviour Model, what Model I analysts characterize as ‘acts’ and ‘choices’ are thought of instead as outputs of existing organizations functioning according to regular patterns of behaviour .
 Model II analyst focuses on the existing organizations and their standard operating procedures for acquiring information, defining feasible options, and implementing a programme . Faced with the fact of Soviet missiles in Cuba, the analyst looks at the existing procedures of acquiring information and defining feasible targets .
 Model II analyst explains the events when he has identified the relevant Soviet organizations and displayed the patterns of organizational behaviour from which the action emerged .
 Predictions identify trends that reflect existing organizations' fixed procedures and programmes . Predictions are based on existing organizations and their fixed procedures, programmes. Predictions reflect existing trends and programmes.
 It is a vast conglomerate of loosely allied organizations, each with a substantial life of its own . CNN.com will feature iReporters from around the world in a new book series .
 Governments define alternatives and estimate consequences as their component organizations process information . Governments act as these organizations enact routines, governments act as routines . Governments define alternative alternatives and estimates consequences .
 Government behaviour can be understood, according to the second conceptual model, less as deliberate choices and more as outputs of large organizations functioning according to standard patterns of behaviour . Government behaviour should be understood as a result of a standard pattern of behaviour, rather than deliberate choices, the author says .
 At any given time, a government consists of existing organizations, each with a fixed set of standard operating procedures and programmes . At the time of any time, the government is expected to be in control of the world's most powerful institutions .
 The behaviour of these organizations, and consequently of the government, is determined primarily by routines established prior to that instance . The behaviour is determined by routines set up prior to each instance, such as the behaviour of organizations .
 Dramatic organizational change can occur in response to major disasters, such as natural disasters . Dramatic reorganization can take place in the aftermath of major disasters .
 Both learning and change are influenced by existing organizational capabilities and procedures . Both learn and change can be influenced by an organization's existing capabilities, procedures .
 The characterization of government action as organizational behaviour differs sharply from Model I . Attempts to understand problems of foreign affairs in this frame of reference produce quite different explanations .
 Model I analyst asks why ‘Khrushchev’ deployed missiles to Cuba, or why the ‘USA’ responded with a blockade and ultimatum . About the Missile Crisis, the Model I Analyst asks why the U.S. responded to the crisis .
 Governments are anthropomorphized as if they were an individual person, animated by particular purposes . Governments are often anthropomorphicized as though they were individual people .
 In Model II explanations, subjects are never named individuals or entire governments . The subjects are not named .
 The subjects in Model II explanations are organizations; their behaviour accounted for in terms of organizational purposes and practices common to the members of the organization, not those peculiar to one or another .
 Events in foreign affairs are characterized neither as unitary choice nor as organizational output, writes David Frum . Events are not unitary choices or organizational outputs, Frum says .
 What happens is understood instead as a resultant of bargaining games among players in the national government . What happens instead is understood to be a result of government bargaining games .
 The analyst focuses on the players whose interests and actions impact the issue in question . The analyst looks at the factors that shape each player’s perceptions and stands, the factors .
 Model III analyst has explained this event when he/she has discovered who did what to whom that yielded the action in question . Model III analysts explain this event in a Model III analysis .
 Predictions are generated by identifying the game in which an issue will arise, the relevant players, and their relative power and bargaining skill . Predictions can be made by identifying an issue in which it will arise and the relevant player's relative power, bargaining skill.
 Model II analysis is part of a further, more refined, level of investigation . But beyond this analysis lies a further level of probe into the Model II .
 Each individual in this group is, in his/her own right, a player in a central competitive game . This is not just a group of players, but a central, central game . Each player is a member of the group and a player of the game .
 Government behaviour can be understood according to a third conceptual model, not as organizational outputs but as the results of bargaining games . Government behaviour is understood as a result of bargaining .
 In contrast with Model I, the Governmental Politics Model sees no unitary actor but rather many actors as players . Players make government decisions not by a single rational choice but by the pushing and pulling that is politics .
 Most players represent a department or agency along with the interests and constituencies that their organization serves . Most of the players represent an organization or department .
 Players’ preferences and beliefs are related to the different organizations they represent, their analyses yield conflicting recommendations . Because players’ beliefs and preferences are related, their analysis yields conflicting recommendations.
 Separate responsibilities laid on the shoulders of distinct individuals encourage differences in what each sees and judges to be important . Separate roles encourage differences between the two .
 Model III analysis begins with the proposition that knowledge of the leader’s initial preferences is, by itself, rarely a sufficient guide for explanation or prediction . The model is based on the knowledge of a leader's initial preferences .
 The proposition reflects the fact that authoritative power is most often shared . "Authoritative power is often shared," the proposition says .
 The Rational Actor, Model II: Organizational Behaviour, and Model III: Government Politics—simply describes events . The rational actor is a model of events that describes events in society .
 In attempting to explain what happened, each distinguishes certain features as the relevant determinants . Each person is trying to explain the events in which they occurred .
 Each combs out the numerous details in a limited number of causal strands that are woven into the most important reasons for what happened . Each comes out of the many details of what happened.
 Each emphasizes quite different factors in explaining the central puzzles of the crisis . Moreover, each emphasizes a different factor in explaining why the crisis exists .
 The outline of a partial ad hoc working synthesis of analysis using these three models begins to emerge as one considers the core questions each model leads one to ask in pursuing explanations or prediction .
 Model I fixes the broader context, the larger national patterns, and the shared images . Model I fixed the larger context of the images and shared images. Model I fixes the wider context of these images.
 Model II illuminates the organizational routines that produce the information, options, and actions . Model II is a look at the organization that produces the information and options .
 Model III focuses in greater detail on individuals who constitute a government . The politics and procedures by which their competing perceptions and preferences are combined are combined .
 Each, in effect, serves as a search engine in the larger effort to identify all the significant causal factors without which the decision or action would not have occurred . Each serves as an attempt to identify the significant factors in a decision, action, decision .
 The best analysts of foreign policy manage to weave strands from each of the three conceptual models into their explanations . The best foreign policy analysts weave strands of each of these models into an explanation .
 By integrating factors identified under each model, explanations can be significantly strengthened . The model is based on the data from each of the models .
 The story of the missile crisis provides many opportunities for one to use the alternative lenses in re-analysing questions that members of the U.S. government, and the Soviet government, answered .
 The question arose whether Gromyko and his colleagues in the Soviet central circle expected the USA to discover missiles being installed in Cuba before they became operational . President Kennedy’s meeting with Foreign Minister Gromko on Thursday, 18 October, was discussed .
 Evidence of what the Soviets had actually done in constructing missiles in Cuba, including the standardized features of ballistic missiles at each of the sites, led some in the U.S. government to conclude that the Soviet government must have expected the USA to discover the missiles .
 The extraordinary and effective disguise of the missiles during shipment from the Soviet Union to sites in Cuba suggested to some that the Soviet government expected the USA to discover the missiles at about this time . The absence of any equivalent camouflage at the sites, on the other, suggested that the . absence of
 If the administration had accepted that judgement, it might have developed a different script for the conversation with Gromyko . The administration has been criticized for its handling of the situation .
 Model II competes directly with Model I and yields precisely contrary conclusions . Model I competes with Model II and yields exactly contrary conclusions, the author says .
 The Missile Crisis maintains its special claim on policy makers and citizens alike . No other event so clearly demonstrates the crack between the unlikelihood and the impossibility of nuclear war .
 The further one gets from the event, the harder it becomes to believe—existentially—that nuclear war could really have happened . The further they get, it becomes harder to believe, that nuclear war really happened .
 USA responds affirmatively to first Khrushchev letter but says first, first, missiles now in Cuba must be rendered inoperable . U.S. urges quick agreement and urges quick deal with Khrushchchev .
 Consider an obvious scenario for nuclear war beginning with steps 1–7 above but then proceeding hypothetically as follows . Consider, however, a hypothetical scenario for war .
 Soviet and/or Cuban forces fire upon United States surveillance aircraft over Cuba on 28 October . U.S. surveillance aircraft were shot down by Soviet and Cuban forces .
 At this point, if not a step or two earlier, the Soviet government would be intensively considering possible pre-emptive nuclear strikes against the USA, especially command and control centres like Washington, in order to limit the damage inflicted by the overwhelming first strike .
 If the Soviets preferred to place the burden of first use of nuclear weapons on the Americans, Moscow could use its conventional military forces to seize all of Berlin, thus forcing the Americans to decide whether they would indeed keep their promise to use nuclear weapons first to defend their allies .
 Use of Model II and Model III would greatly enlarge the menu of nightmarish possibilities, adding misinformation, false warnings, accidents, and inadvertent clashes to the mix . Use of the Model I and II and III would add misinformation and accidents .
 Other paths from what occurred to nuclear weapons exploding in the USA and Soviet Union start with unauthorized actions by individuals or units of both governments making choices that they clearly had the technical capability to make .
 This order violated the Air Force’s ‘buddy system’ doctrine, which required at least two officers to be in physical control of a nuclear weapon at all times . This order violates the doctrine, requiring at least one officer in control of the weapon at every time .
 The United States Navy had been using electronic eavesdroppers to monitor four Foxtrot class submarines that had slipped out of the Soviet submarine base at Gadzhievo on the Kola Peninsula on the night of 1 October .
 A U.S. destroyer was closing in on one of the four Soviet submarines in October . It was not to sink the submarine, as it turns out, but simply to force it to the surface .
 Unknown to the destroyer's commander, there was a 10-kiloton nuclear torpedo stacked in the B-130’s bow . The torpedo was loaded with a 10 kiloton nuclear bomb, the Navy says .
 With the push of a button, Shumkov could have unleashed the weapon . The weapon had over half the destructive force of a Hiroshima-style nuclear bomb .
 Model II and Model III analysts caution against confidence in the impossibility of nations stumbling, irrationally in Model I terms, into the use of nuclear weapons . Analysts caution against the impossibility in the . impossibility of . nations stumbling into . using nuclear weapons, or in the manageability of
 Through Model II lenses, the USA’s success included crucial organizational rigidities and even mistakes . The U.S. was successful in the early years of its success .
 The probability of war with Cuba would have been much higher if it had been sooner . The Cuban government and U.S. forces had been unable to attack the island nation .
 Khrushchev might have proceeded with his plan to stage a nuclear confrontation in Berlin that could have proved even more dangerous . The organizational and political dynamics that produced sufficiently persistent displays of U.S. resolve to tilt Khrushvich’s wildly oscillating estimates of American determination .
 Only barely did the leaders of both governments manage to control organizational programmes that threatened to drag both countries over the cliff .
 In several instances, both Americans and Soviets were just plain lucky . Both Americans and Sovietians were lucky to have survived the Cold War .
 The information and estimates available to leaders about the situation reflect organizational capacities and routines as well as facts . It reflects organizational capacity and routines and facts .
 The options presented to the leaders are much narrower than the menu that analysts might consider desirable . Analysts say the options presented are much more narrow than what analysts might want .
 Coordination among organizations is less finely tuned than leaders demand or expect . Coordination in organizations is not as finely tuned as leaders demand .
 In a crisis, the overwhelming problem will be that of control and coordination of large organizations . The overwhelming problem is that of controlling and coordinating large organizations, he says .
 Given insurmountable limits to control and added dangers that can be created or compounded by the interacting plethora of the safety routines themselves, such crises must be avoided . Such crises must always be avoided, says author .
 Lessons that emerge from Model III provide even less reason to be sanguine about our understanding of nuclear crises or about the impossibility of nuclear war . Model III is the first nuclear test of its kind .
 Actions advocated by leaders of the U.S. government covered a spectrum . From doing nothing, to seeking a diplomatic bargain with Khrushchev at a summit meeting, to invasion of Cuba .
 The process by which the blockade emerged included many uncertain factors . The blockade has been described as a 'process by which it emerged'
 Had McNamara been less forceful, the air strike could well have been chosen in the first day or two . McNamara was less forceful .
 Had Kennedy proved his mettle domestically in a previous confrontation, perhaps the diplomatic track would have prevailed . A major Berlin crisis could have erupted in November and December of 1962, 1962 .
 If a president and his/her associates have to manage a nuclear crisis, the informal machinery, free-wheeling discussions, and devil’s advocacy exemplied by ExCom, have many advantages .
 The mix of personality, expertise, influence, influence and temperament that allows such a group to clarify alternatives must be better understood . But the group bargains over separate preferences .
 This book addresses modern-day nuclear threats from a variety of sources . The book is available on Amazon.com, Kindle and Kindle.com .
 This volume brings to light either significant re-evaluations of the crisis, or startling challenges to the conventional wisdom surrounding much of that crisis . This volume is the latest attempt to shed light on the events surrounding the crisis .
 This book offers an insightful look into the executive power of American presidents . It offers an insight into the ‘agency’ around foreign policy decisions .