 President John F Kennedy's patience and willingness to settle the conflict peacefully helped keep the Cold War from becoming a nuclear nightmare . President Kennedy helped progress towards the end of a political dogfight .
 The Cold War was escalating in hostility and the Soviet's communist regime was moving westward closer to the U.S. when Cuba fell into communism . Cuba was a key ally of the United States during the Cold War .
 Kennedy had exceptional patience when negotiating with the Soviets . It was his willingness to try an unorthodox strategy that was the main reason this threatening issue was settled .
 The Crisis in Cuba was the climax of the Cold War . It was settled by Kennedy, and after it began its decline . The Cold War began to begin its decline after it was settled .
 Since the end of World War Two the Soviet Union has had a strong communist control over a large part of Eastern Europe . The Soviet Union is still in control of large parts of the country .
 The Soviet Union had missiles set up in Cuba for some time before the Crisis occurred . The Soviets claimed that they were only for defensive purposes .
 In October of 1962, the Soviet Union aimed many different types of missiles directly at the United States . The Soviet Union was emulating an offensive attack on the U.S. in October of that year .
 Cold War caused distrust between the U.S. and the Soviet Union . The Cold War was caused by the fear of nuclear annihilation . The United States and Soviet Union feared nuclear war .
 The Soviets built a missile base in Cuba, which proved to be extremely treacherous to America's safety . The base was extremely dangerous to the U.S. in Cuba .
 The Soviets placed several medium range nuclear missiles on the communist island of Cuba . This is when the Soviets, under the order of Nikita Khrushchev, attempted to gain some leverage .
 The Soviet Union was right behind the United States in the arms race for the Cold War . It needed an extra boost to guarantee its defenses .