 The leaders of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics were worried that the U.S. of America would invade communist-ruled Cuba and overthrow Fidel Castro . Read the passage carefully and answer the questions that follow in the book .
 Cuba was an ally of the Soviet Union and received both diplomatic and financial aid from it . Cuba was a major ally of Soviet Union in the 1950s and '60s .
 Nikita Khrushchev, the leader of the Soviet Union, decided to convert Cuba into a Russian base . Cuba was a Soviet base for the Soviets during the Cold War .
 Three weeks after the Soviet Union had placed the nuclear weapons in Cuba, the U.S. became aware of it . Three weeks later, the Americans were aware of the weapons .
 The U.S. President, John F Kennedy, and his advisers were reluctant to do anything that might lead to full-scale nuclear war between the two countries . They were determined to get Khrushchev to remove the missiles and nuclear weapons from Cuba .
 Kennedy ordered U.S. warships to intercept any Soviet ships heading to Cuba as a way of warning the USSR of his seriousness . Kennedy ordered the intercepts as part of a warning to warn the Soviet Union .
 The prospects of this clash made the whole world nervous, for it would have been no ordinary war . The prospect of this war would have made the world nervous for the first time .
 Eventually, to the world&rsquo;s great relief, both sides decided to avoid war . Both sides decided not to go to war .
 Google searches for the world's most famous women in the U.S. and Canada .
 The leaders of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics were worried that the U.S. of America would invade communist-ruled Cuba and overthrow Fidel Castro, the president of the small island nation off the coast of the United States . Read the following passage carefully and answer the questions that
 Eventually, to the world’s great relief, both sides decided to avoid war . Both sides decided not to go to war .
 In response to the presence of American Jupiter ballistic missiles in Italy and Turkey, and the failed Bay of Pigs Invasion of 1961, Nikita Khrushchev agreed to Cuba’s request to place nuclear missiles on the island .
 Nikita Khrushchev agreed to Cuba’s request to place nuclear missiles on the island to deter a future invasion . In response to the presence of American Jupiter ballistic missiles in Italy and Turkey, and the failed Bay of Pigs .