 Soviet SS-4’s, secretly brought into Cuba, were ready to destroy Washington and the entire U.S. East Coast . I recalled those days of fear while staring at a rusting Soviet medium-ranged . missile displayed outside the fortress .
 President John Kennedy backed down, pledging the U.S. would never invade Cuba . President Kennedy later backed down and pledged the United States never invaded Cuba .
 U.S. missiles in Italy and Turkey targeted on the USSR were removed . The missiles were removed from the Soviet Union's territory .
 Nikita Khrushchev won his goal of saving Cuba and Fidel Castro’s Marxist regime from a U.S. invasion . The Soviet leader won’t win his goal to save Cuba from a US invasion .
 The Soviet Politburo deposed Khrushchev shortly after . But it was such a terrifying gamble that it was too much of a gamble for the Soviet leader .
 In the early 1960’s, Communist Cuba was the vanguard of revolution in Latin America, then Africa . In the 1960s, the Cuban government was in the forefront of the revolution .
 Fidel Castro and Che Guevara's Cuba was the only Communist regime outside Mao’s China that had romantic appeal to western youth . Fidel Castro was the first Communist regime in the world to have romantic appeal .
 Fidel’s vows to promote education, health care and land distribution sounded revolutionary when Latin America was mostly ruled by US-backed oligarchs and generals . Fidel's vows were made in the 1950s and '60s .
 The combined pressure of crushing U.S. trade and financial sanctions and the inherent failures of the Marxist economic system left Cuba isolated, trapped in the past . Cuba's economic system has failed to cope with the failure of its Marxist system .
 Once picturesque colonial Havana is a Caribbean Pompeii, a museum of the 1950’s with its crumbling buildings and magnificent vintage American cars . Havana's crumbling buildings are now a museum . Havana is once picturesque . colonial Havana .
 Latin America has rid itself of inept military dictators and achieved dramatic social and economic development . Half a century later, Latin America is rid of dictators and has achieved dramatic economic and social development .
 The United States no longer treats Latin America with the paternalism and frequent contempt it did fifty years ago . The U.S. is no longer treating Latin America as paternalism or contempt . Latin America is now a model of democracy .
 Cuba, with a living standard not far from that of the U.S. in the early 50’s, was left behind in a time warp . Ironically, Cuba's living standard was not far behind that of that of America in the 1950s .
 Castro’s Cuba does have a high standard of health care and education, but the rest of the economy and society are battered beyond belief . Castro's Cuba has high standards of health, education and education but the economy is battered .
 Castro dictatorship has been honest and genuinely concerned for its people . Still, the Castro dictatorship, now run by brother Raul, has a reputation for being honest and genuine .
 The famed La Floridita Bar is sadly an over-priced tourist trap . My parents used to meet Ernest Hemingway for daiquiri cocktails at the bar .
 No big changes occurred after Raul Castro assumed leadership from the ailing Fidel Castro . No major changes were made in the leadership of the Castro family .
 Cuba has seen a number of small but significant developments in recent years . Cuba has not yet seen significant changes in the country's rule of statehood .
 Thanks to Raul’s recent reforms, small private enterprise is bubbling up everywhere . Raul's recent reforms are helping small businesses flourish in the country .
 People are more outspoken, less wary of the secret police and informers . People are now more outspoken and wary of secret police .
 Havana is poised to resume its role of 50 years ago as the most fun – and perhaps wickedest city – in the world . With its beautiful buildings, friendly, attractive people, and little music bars with their superb salsa bands, Havana is set to return to its former glory . Havana
 America’s Great Satan, Fidel Castro, is sidelined by age and illness, but Cubans still love their national papa figure . America's Great Satan Fidel Castro is sidelined . Cuba's great Satan, Cuba's Fidel Castro still loves his national figure .
 Half a million Miami-based Cubans will return and rebuild Cuba . Either a power grab by the military and old guard, or a return by the half million . Cuba's new president is expected to be elected in 2016 .
 A tsunami of U.S. money will swamp Cuba, washing it into the modern world, says Cuban President Obama . Cuba has been hit hard by a wave of anti-Cuban sentiment, but it's unlikely to change .
 Many friends of Cuba do not look forward to this change, though Cubans desperately need relief from their threadbare existence . Cubans need relief, but many friends of the Cuban people don't like this change .
 Fidel Castro was admired across Latin America for proudly defying the mighty U.S. He was admired for refusing to follow Washington’s direction . The Castro family is now living in exile in Cuba .
 Latin America 37 Responses to “CUBA STARTS TO COME ALIVE” thetsar says: “Cuba starts to come alive”
 The ‘B’ – Brazil – may be able to offer Cuba good advice and assistance if necessary . The “B” - Brazil - may also offer Cuba some good advice .
 "I think that it will become more important as United States and her lackies decline. But I think that . But I . think that   U.S. and her . lackies . decline .
 As many Cubans remember it, the Soviets did not prevail . Also as I remember, and as many . remember it . As I remember it,. and as . many . Cubans, the Russians did prevail, the Cuban president says .
 I don't share the bleak fatalism with which you look at what will likely happen after the departure of Raul .
 In the 1990s, it was commonly believed that after Fidel’s departure the system would collapse rapidly because Raul – the obvious successor –would not have the moral authority of Fidel .
 There was never a moment of panic or uncertainty before Raul took over . The transition to Raul was very smooth, says the Spanish star . Raul has been in charge of the Spanish team since 2003 .
 Those who anticipated a cataclysm were wrong before and may be wrong again . I am just pointing out that those who anticipate a catastrophe were wrong . I'm just pointing to that .
 Eric Margolis’s parents likely socialized with in Cuba might have been almost as well off as Americans back in the 1950s . But I don’t for a second believe that was the case for most Cuban people aty that time .
 If they had been as well off as Margolis suggests, Communism would not have been so tempting to the poor tenant farmers and urban working people who initially supported Fidel Castro so strongly .
 Marx envisioned his system for Britain, not massive countries like Russia or China . Marx envisioned Britain's system for the first time . The system was designed for the British people .
 Perhaps without the external pressures his theories might have fared better in Cuba . Perhaps without external pressures, his theories may have fared worse .
 The official United States attitude is medieval & obviously needs to change . The official U.S. attitude needs to be changed, says CNN.com correspondent .
 I’m looking forward to expanding upon that next winter when The GF & I visit . The GF and I visit The GF will be at the end of next winter .
 I was barely into kindergarden during the crisis, but do remember the tense atmosphere around the house . I do remember being in the 'tense' atmosphere around my family's home .
 My dad was a freshly-retired Clunk driver in the OLD RCAF & his late 1950’s postings in Europe had convinced him of American hypocrisy on this issue .
 'Great look & a lot more visually friendly. Anyway, like the new forums; great look . Great look and a lot of visually friendly .
 As a regular Platelet donator, I can visit the U.S. and Western Europe, but can be temporarily suspended by the Canadian Blood Services if I stray to far afield . For now, as a regular platelet donor, he can't visit the United States and Western
 Cuba has a sustainable economic plan that permits self-sufficiency and environmental conservation, says Eric .
 People assume that once the so-called “embargo’s” ends Cuba will be at the mercy of U.S. corporate interests .
 The embargo/blockade is a U.S. policy whose intention is to force Cuba into economic isolation . Cuba has been hit hard by the embargo and the Cuban people .
 Cuba would have the option of allowing U.S. business interests uninhibited access to Cuba . If the United States suspends this policy, Cuba would be able to offer the option . Cuba has the option to allow business interests to continue to visit the island .
 We should not assume that Cuba is a nation of Brian Mulroneys, itching to be penetrated by U.S. capital . However, Cuba is not a nation that is ready to accept the idea of a new nation, it is a country of opportunity .
 Cuba might preserve and strengthen current rules about foreign investment and the importation of foreign goods . Cuba might very well preserve and even strengthen current laws on foreign investment .
 Fidel and Raul are gone, it’s going to be a new era of politics in Cuba .
 The United States had no intention of invading the island, which Kennedy made abundantly clear – and paid for direly – during the Bay of Pigs . The U.S. made it clear in the context of the invasion .
 Invading the whole island would have made Vietnam look like a cakewalk, and Kennedy, no stranger to war, readily understood that . Invading Vietnam would have been a cake walk, Kennedy said .
 The Russians backed off, turned their ships away. What the world saw, and what invariably happened, was the Russia backed off . The world saw what happened, and it was the Russians backed .
 Kennedy curbed the hawks in the Situation Room, and McNamara, eager for a display of strength, were curbed by Kennedy . The hawks were curtailed by Kennedy, the president's spokesman says .
 U.S. set a naval blockade which turned back Russian ships . The missiles in Turkey were obsolete and due for removal anyway .
 The Cuban people are NOT America’s enemy…the true enemies are alive and functioning in Washington,DC….sadly. The true enemies in Washington are still functioning in the U.S.
 There are those pseudo-state media and there are those ignorant generic public voters who think Muslims eat babies . There are also people who think Islam is a religion .
 It is sane – – a rational and also effective way of pursuing U.S. foreign policy issues . It is also rational and effective way to pursue United States foreign policy matters .
 Cuba's health care system is seriously undermined by the Cuban embargo . The embargo deprives Cuba of the natural market for many of its exports . It also undermines the country's ability to import food and medicine .
 Cuba suffers a deformed socialist economy, not the robust socialist economy it might otherwise have . Cuba would be an intolerable ideological embarrassment to the U.S. and the rest of Latin America .
 The embargo makes absolutely no sense to me . The vast majority of politicians are highly unsensible .
 For the Americans to allow Cuba to show its full potential, would be suicidal for their decrepit version of capitalism . For the U.S. to let Cuba show its true potential, it is suicidal for its decrepit capitalism .
 It already is under very high strain because of megalomanic mismanagement . It is under strain because it is under high strain due to mismanagement, it is claimed .
 It seems pretty quiet on the site this morning .
 I keep reminding all of our American friends how liimited their rights and freedoms are when their supposed ‘great” country tells it’s citizens that they can NOT travel some where . The U.S. is not a great country, but a great place to travel
 I too will feel something is missing when Castro brothers are no more and the ‘ignorant’ expatriots from Florida start to return and claim what was supoosedly theirs . Anyway, I am rambling this morning as I too feel something missing when the Castro
 An interesting column that I’ll be sharing with my barber, who herself is from Cuba .
 Nikita Khrushchev wasn't overthrown for another two years, in October 1964 . However, his actions during the missile crisis were only a few of the reasons for that .
 By their actions, they prove again and again who is running the mighty USA and for what outcome . The U.S. government is in charge of the U.K. President Barack Obama's administration .
 A society that kicked out the corporations and have no obesity problem to contain with. A society kicked out corporations and . have no . obesity problem with. with. no obesity problems with. No obesity problem .
 A country where one can smoke in the street and not be harassed, or suffer adverse health effects, is a country where people can smoke without being harassed . A country of smoke in a street is a place where people are not harassed or harassed .
 My wife and I are frequent visitors to Cuba going back to before the Soviet withdrawal . We have witnessed the very difficult times the Cuban people have experienced .
 As much as we would like to see conditions improve, we fear the return of the Americans . We fear they will return, but we are not optimistic about their return .
 Unless a strong government in Havana stands up to them the people will be no better off than they now are, they won't be better off . Maybe we are selfish but maybe we're selfish but we're not selfish .
 Eastern European countries had to deal with the return of expats when Communism collapsed . We hope Cubans will follow models developed there. Eastern Europe has seen how it dealt with returning expats .
 I think based on your phrase “a tsunami of U.S. money will swamp Cuba” you are concerned too. I think . I think a tsunami of United States money will . swamp Cuba .
 Mercosur and China, will provide the kick start Cuba really needs, not the snobbish buyout that ex-pats and Americans would provide . Not the snobbyish buy-outs that would provide. Most likely a combination of the two… MercosUR and China
 Independence and pride maintained, yet firmly on the road to the future . Independence and Pride maintained .
 Cuba’s allies in Latin America declared on Saturday that they would be boycotting future summits if the country was not invited to attend . Cuba's allies threatened to boycott summits in the region if they were not invited .
 The bloc was set up by Venezuela and Cuba but now includes Bolivia, Ecuador, Nicaragua and the Caribbean islands of Dominica, Antigua and Barbuda, as well as St Vincent and the Grenadines .
 The Americans seem to veto anything they don’t like in any international group . Why do the Americans always veto anything that they don't like? Spoiled children sometimes need a spanking and theirs is long overdue .
 Spanking is long overdue, says the author of the book .
 The image brought back memories of Captain George of Mystery Lane on Markham Street . Captain George was Captain George from the Silver Age comic collecting .
 Non-binding memorandum could allow Mexico to help Cuba drill for oil on adjacent tracts of Gulf .
 Mexico, Venezuela and Brazil are all that Cuba needs to increase energy self-sufficiency . Cuba needs the energy from these countries to increase self-sustaining energy production .
 I have worked for a couple of companies that had dealings with Pemex . Good for Canada too .