 Cuba is one of the most isolated countries in the world . Cuba has been hit hard by the Cuban government's crackdown on corruption .
 The crisis was unique in a number of ways, featuring calculations and miscalculations as well as direct and secret communications and miscommunications .
 The dramatic crisis was primarily played out at the White House and the Kremlin level . The crisis was played out with relatively little input from the respective bureaucracies involved in the foreign policy process .
 Nikita Khrushchev reached a secret agreement with Cuban premier Fidel Castro to place Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba to deter any future invasion attempt . The Bay of Pigs invasion was a failed U.S. attempt to overthrow the Castro regime .
 Kennedy summoned his closest advisers to consider options and direct a course of action for the U.S. that would resolve the crisis . Kennedy called the crisis a "national moment of national security"
 Some advisers argued for an air strike to destroy missiles, followed by a U.S. invasion of Cuba . Others favored stern warnings to Cuba and the Soviet Union .
 The use of “quarantine” legally distinguished this action from a blockade, which assumed a state of war existed . The U.S. also enabled the United States to receive the support of the Organization of American States .
 The letter was the first in a series of direct communications between the White House and the Kremlin throughout the remainder of the crisis .
 The president went on national television that evening to inform the public of the developments in Cuba . He also went on television to discuss the potential global consequences if the crisis continued to escalate .
 Joint Chiefs of Staﬀ announced a military readiness status of DEFCON 3 . U.S. naval forces began implementation of the quarantine and plans accelerated for a military strike on Cuba .
 Khrushchev responded to Kennedy’s message with a statement that the U.S. “blockade” was an “act of aggression” and that Soviet ships bound for Cuba would be ordered to proceed . On October 24, Kennedy responded to the message with
 During October 24 and 25, some ships turned back from the quarantine line . Others were stopped by United States naval forces, but they contained no weapons and so were allowed to proceed .
 U.S. reconnaissance ﬂights over Cuba indicated the Soviet missile sites were nearing operational readiness . Meanwhile, United States reconnaissance  indicated that the Soviet missiles were nearing . readiness .
 U.S. forces placed at DEFCON 2 — meaning war involving Strategic Air Command was imminent . With no apparent end to the crisis in sight, United States forces were placed at DeFCON . The crisis was in the early 1950s .
 On October 26, Kennedy told his advisors it appeared that only a U.S. attack on Cuba would remove the missiles . Kennedy insisted on giving the diplomatic channel a little more time . Kennedy: Only a United States attack would remove missiles would remove them .
 ABC News correspondent John Scali reported to the White House that he had been approached by a Soviet agent . The agent suggested that an agreement could be reached in which the Soviets would remove their missiles from Cuba if the United States promised not to invade the island .
 Khrushchev sent Kennedy a message the evening of October 26, which meant it was sent in the middle of the night Moscow time . The White House scrambled to assess the validity of this “back channel” oﬀer .
 It was a long, emotional message that raised the specter of nuclear holocaust . It presented a proposed resolution that remarkably resembled what Scali reported earlier that day . Scali: "It was a proposal that remarkably resembles what we reported earlier this week"
 U.S. experts were convinced Khrushchev's message was authentic, but hope for a resolution was short-lived . Experts were convinced the message was genuine, but it was never resolved .
 Khrushchev sent another message indicating that any proposed deal must include the removal of United States Jupiter missiles from Turkey . The next day, October 27, he said the United States would have to remove the missiles from the country .
 That same day a United States U–2 reconnaissance jet was shot down over Cuba . The U.S. U-2 was shot downed over Cuba that same day .
 Kennedy and his advisers prepared for attack on Cuba within days as they searched for any remaining diplomatic resolution . Kennedy prepared for a Cuban attack within days .
 It was determined that Kennedy would ignore the second Khrushchev message and respond to the ﬁrst one . Kennedy was determined to ignore the first message .
 Kennedy proposed steps for removal of Soviet missiles from Cuba under supervision of U.N. supervision . U.S. would not attack Cuba, Kennedy told Soviet leader .
 Attorney General Robert Kennedy met secretly with Soviet ambassador to the United States, Anatoly Dobrynin . Kennedy indicated that the U.S. was planning to remove the Jupiter missiles from Turkey anyway, and that it would do so soon . This could not be part of any public resolution of
 The next morning, October 28, Khrushchev issued a public statement that Soviet missiles would be dismantled and removed from Cuba . It was the first time the missiles had been removed from the country .
 The crisis was over but the naval quarantine continued until the Soviets agreed to remove their IL–28 bombers from Cuba and, on November 20, 1962, the U.S. ended its quarantine . The quarantine was over until the Soviet-crippled bombers removed from Cuba .
 The Cuban missile crisis stands as a singular event during the Cold War . It strengthened Kennedy’s image domestically and internationally . Kennedy's image was strengthened by the crisis .
 It also may have helped mitigate negative world opinion regarding the failed Bay of Pigs invasion . The failed invasion may have contributed to the success of the failed invasion .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev struggled throughout the crisis to clearly understand each other’s true intentions . The world hung on the brink of possible nuclear war . Kennedy and his advisers struggled to understand each others’ intentions .
 Second, having approached the brink of nuclear conﬂict, both superpowers began to reconsider the nuclear arms race . Both superpowers agreed to a nuclear Test Ban Treaty .
 On October 26, Kennedy told his advisers it appeared that only a U.S. attack on Cuba would remove the missiles . He insisted on giving the diplomatic channel a little more time . Kennedy told advisers only a United States .
 On October 26, Kennedy told his advisers it appeared that only a U.S. attack on Cuba would remove the missiles . Kennedy insisted on giving the diplomatic channel a little more time . Kennedy: "Only a U .S. strike on Cuba"
 United States military forces urged the president to abandon diplomatic eﬀorts and to attack Cuba . The U.S. military has urged President Barack Obama to attack the island nation .
 Kennedy maintained positive relations with the Kremlin during the Cold War . By relying on diplomatic channels, Kennedy maintained diplomatic channels .
 The United States and the Soviet Union came to diplomatic agreements . Nuclear war avoided because of diplomatic agreements between the U.S. and the USSR .
 It involved media correspondents in ways that had never before been seen in international conﬂicts .
 The United States and the Soviet Union came the closest to nuclear war . It was a point when the U.S. and the USSR came closest to a nuclear war.
 Kremlin-to-White House phone line was used to connect Kremlin with White House . It resulted in a telephone line connecting the Kremlin with the White House. It was used during the Cold War era .
 It helped Americans forget about the failed Bay of Pigs invasion and the threat posed by Fidel Castro . The failed invasion was a success story for the U.S.