 The sign is small, peeking out with a certain timidity over the balcony wall several yards above ground . Roberto Segre is the owner of the sign in Brazil .
 In the apartment next door you can read the same phrase painted on a window . A simple “For Sale” that would go unnoticed if it weren’t that in the next door .
 Two floors higher, neighbors on the 6th floor have hung a piece of acrylic where they include the square feet available, to motivate possible buyers . Neighbors say they are more creative and have hung the acrylic where square feet are available .
 The building is ugly, grey, grey and one of those built in the eighties under the “microbrigade’s microbrigades’ system . It is one of the ugly grey grey buildings in the city .
 The variety and quantity of homes for sale seems to exceed the real capabilities of Cuban wallets right now . The homes are for sale in Cuba's capital, Havana .
 It's amazing to see properties for sale for a quarter or a half million convertible pesos, in a country where the average salary doesn’t exceed 20 . pesos a month . The average salary in Mexico is 20 pesos .
 The greatest movement in buying-and-selling is taking place in the cheapest homes, which are, therefore, smaller, in worse locations, and in poor repair .
 In the luxury residence sector everything goes more slowly, down, at the level of a room in a tenement or an apartment without windows the movement is quite noticeable, especially for all those people in the interior of the country . Meanwhile, in the luxury residences everything goes down, down .
 What is also interesting is the stark and pragmatic assessment that is made of each home for sale . What is interesting is that each home is being sold on the same basis .
 The ads have become sophisticated, accompanied by photos and descriptions of the house’s “good water supply,” its location in a quiet neighborhood, or the possibilities to enlarge it and build on the roof .
 If it was built before 1959, it would be “capitalist construction’s” if it was ‘capitalist construction,” according to the law . But there is one qualifier that no one neglects to add if their housing warrants it, and that is ‘
 There is a clear parting of the waters and implacable divide between that built before the Revolution and that which has risen during it. The Russian Revolution is a very important part of the Russian Revolution, says Vladimir Putin .
 If the apartment building is from the decades of the ‘40s or ‘50s the price soars, while those apartments built by the microbrigades* who raised their prefabricated towers during the years of Sovietization .
 Housing market brings out a scale of values that is far from the official discourse . Housing market reassigns a new amount to everything to everything, an objective yardstick for measuring quality .
 Microbrigades: “Self-help housing” through assigning groups of people from each workplace to build large apartment houses . Small groups of workers assigned to build houses at work .
 Yoani, her husband Reinaldo Escobar, and son Teo live in a microbrigade building erected by his workplace . Yoani and her husband and son live in the micro-brigades .
 Team "yoani" pretends to have the “truthful” information about the state of Cuban property market . So, post 77, just like the team “yoani’s”
 There's a chance someone would try that as an argument in Cuba too. Oh, yes, surely, there’s someone who would try it as a joke .
 When you actually LOOK at those O L D buildings, you quickly realise what is the true meaning of the ‘capitalist construction’ phrase . But when you actually look at those buildings, it's not all about the 'capitalist construction' phrase .
 The dried apricot has confirmed to be living in a Jugoslav-designed building, although the ‘friendly’ translator would love you to believe her lie that the dried Apricot lives in a self-build building… Liar after liar.
 'They fall into the holes of their own lies without even realising how st***d they make themselves to look. They make themselves look. And they fall in the holes they fall into themselves,’s own lies .
 "No one really believes this craft you are vomiting incessantly. Except for 1 and a half pioneers here posting under a dozen or so different nicks, no one really believe this craft."
 I was studying for a difficult exam and wondered if I would finish university . I thought I might not be able to finish university. I'm not sure if I will finish university, I just want to finish it .
 Estuve un estudiante de 21 anos de edad cuando el Crisis de Cohetes Cubanos occurio . Estudiantes Cubano was a student at the age of 21 .
 Estuve estudiando por un exam muy dificil y estuve pensando si ibo terminar la universidad . Estuve  pensando if ibo    to go to the universidad, estuve  thinking about whether ibo ibo to go
 Damir, you are now officially BOOOOOOOOOORING . Anonymous on October 17, 2012 at 11:13 am .
 The joy of democracy in Eastern Europe to be soon in Cuba, Cuba… USAnian style democracy!
 In Romania, reports of vote fraud mar election . Romanians go to polls to help their country emerge from a political and economic crisis .
 Certain media outlets reported instances of electoral fraud . Meanwhile, certain media outlets have reported instances .
 The reports come while the controversial presidential election failed to produce a winner . The center-right incumbent Traian Basescu is facing a runoff vote on December 6 .
 One report put Basescu’s votes at 34. percent, compared to 30. percent for Geoana . Another report said he won 32. percent of the vote, while Geoana won 31. percent .
 Turnout from the 18 million eligible voters stood at 53.52 percent — lower than that of the 2004 presidential election . Turnout was also lower than the 2004 election when Barack Obama was in office .
 Romanian police arrested a number of voters who were caught attempting to photograph their marked ballot with mobile phones . Romanian police have heightened concerns about vote fraud in the country .
 The move is common in vote buying, in which the voter later presents the photo as proof of his vote for the proper candidate . The photo is a common move in election politics .
 There are also reports of massive voter-buying operations by all three major parties in the country . All three parties are believed to be involved in massive voting operations .
 Romanian police had set up checkpoints across the country to block buses carrying ‘election tourists’ Many cars were stopped as they were to ferry paid-off voters to the polls .
 Under Romanian law people are not restricted to voting in their own home district . Such reports of vote fraud come as under Romanian law, people can vote in their home districts .
 Only the wannabe dictators claim to have their compatriots, the ‘small” people, interest in their sight . Only dictators claim that they have the interest of the “small’ people .
 The only other possibility left is the rotten tooth that just came out while the traitor terrorist was all by her own self. So, the only other possible left is a rotten tooth .
 The internet is littered with, mostly subconscious, confessions of her own delusional wet daydreaming . But then, there’s a lot of rot in the traitor… The internet littered with . mostly subconscious . confessions .
 There’s just WAY too much of it to have time to enjoy blowing it into pieces .
 She doesn’t have the internet on which she hangs 24/7 somehow, otherwise she would be ‘posting’ even more often . The rubbish and bullshift, of course.
 The stars and stripes brigade have exchanged Cuba with the U.S. for an Americanised version of what happened .
 “Self-help housing” through assigning groups of people from each workplace to build large apartment houses . “Microbrigades: ‘Self-helping housing’ through assigning . groups of . workers from each . workplace to . build large . apartment houses.
 Theodore Darlymple is one self-deluded and dishonest ‘observer’ of a P A R T of reality in Cuba . He is one of the self-deceased and dishonest observers of the Cuban government .
 A subjective and politically blinded liar who is falling to mention the fact that M O S T of CUBA is clean, well maintained and kept in order. A subjective . liar who says CUBA of the United States is clean .
 The buildings were not intended to be used but to be left to fall apart on their own in the midst of the Cold War imposed on CUBA by the nazist gulag usa through assets freezing, refusal to pay for reparations .
 President Obama addressed the issue two weeks ago . He said: "The bullshift about the salaries in Cuba has already been addressed"
 An inettligent person knows that the numerical comparison, such as the one above, proposed by the team “yoani” just doesn’t work . An expert says that comparison just doesn't work .
 Cuba's government is paying many salaries at least half in CUCs . The government pays many of its employees at least part of their salaries in the CUC . Cuba has a history of corruption, corruption and violence in Cuba .
 The minimum payable is 16 CUCs from what I have seen since the last year . And the minimum payer's minimum is 16,000-a-year-old .
 An average family can still live on a small amount of money . While that may sound little, for many it is still quite strong and the buying power is still strong .
 A truck driver earns on average 1000 Cuban peosos, CUPs, a nurse in a medical centre aroud 800 . And let us not forget what I have already said two weeks ago, a truck driver . Truck drivers in Cuba earn on average between 1000 and 800 Cuban pe
 It's too busy paying out diresctors of failed corporations that have never been profitable in the first place . No, it’s too busy with paying out people who have lived off the working and tax-paying people . The government has never been able to find a way to
 Waiters in the usa too live exclusively off the tips for their “salares’s barely above the “minimum wage” limit . Waiters live off their tips for the first time .
 Cuba's "self-thaught" little ignorant from Cuba know about the world and the life in the big smoke . But what would this “self-learned” little ignorant Cuban know?
 Theodore Dalrymple writes of the ruins of Havana in his article about the dilapidated city falling apart: “The city is like a great set of Bach variations on the theme of urban decay.”
 The stucco has given way to mold; roofs have gone, replaced by corrugated iron; shutters have crumbled into sawdust . Paint is a phenomenon of the past; staircases end in precipices; windows lack glass; doors are off their hinges; walls have
 Every grand and beautifully proportioned room has been subdivided by plywood partitions into smaller spaces, in which entire families now live . The walls that have crumbled away are visible through the windows or in some places through the walls that crumbled .
 Every entranceway is dark, and at night, the electric lights glimmer rather than shine . At night, every entranceway at the entranceway was dark .
 There’s absolutely NO SOURCE of information for the statement . “There is one qualifier that no one neglects to add if their housing warrants it, and that is “capitalist construction””
 'This is plain, simple and rather st**id attempt to peddle more of propagandistic nonsense that has got nothing to do with the facts and truth' 'St**id' attempt is 'plain, simple, simple'
 It IS true that SOME apartments and houses will contain the “capitalist construction” description, but the number of such advertisements is M I N U T E in comparison with the total number of advertisements .
 The role is quite different to what the traitor and terrorist team “yani” would love you to believe . And the role of “Yani’s” is not what the terrorist team would love to believe, it's what they say .
 The team "yoani" bandits would jump to an opportunity to claim what is not there to be claimed . Naturally, the evil-minded criminals like the team “yoani” bandits would . jump to a chance to claim .
 Help, We probably would not be here talking about this if the lunatic castro had had his way . Help, Help, help us out of this crisis, says CNN.com .
 Che Guevara, the castro brothers and their enablers, are all on the same level as Charles Manson and Jim Jones, or worse, says CNN.com.com's John Sutter.com .
 Would like to know how the original order was given and what made castro recall that order . Would love to know if castro recalled that order and how it was given .
 The Missile Crisis had just been defused when Khrushchev, eyeball to eyeball with JFK, blinked . JFK's JFK sat down with the Soviet Union at the height of the crisis . JFK was the president of the United States when the crisis broke out .
 I had posted these links in my article a few months back where the team “yoani” confessed to live in a “Jugosla-build’ building . I had also posted these . links in this article .
 Of all of the reforms brought in by Raul Castro, abolishing exit permits is potentially the one that could potentially most advance the cause of civil liberties in Cuba . Of all the reforms he brought in, it could be the most important reform .
 The true test will come in January when Yoani arrives at Havana Airport with only passport and airline ticket in hand . Yoani will then attempt to return to Cuba some time thereafter after collecting her latest international award .
 If all goes smoothly, this will indeed be a meaningful step forward for civil liberties in Cuba, says CNN.com's John Sutter .