 At 5:00m. , he met for an hour and a half with seventeen congressional leaders from both parties and both houses . At 5 p.m. he met with 17 congressional leaders .
 This meeting was led by President Kennedy and Secretary Rusk and quickly became contentious . Many congressional leaders called for a stronger response to the blockade .
 The information operation to present the United States’ case to itself and the world had begun . The U.S. had begun to present itself and its case to the world .
 Beginning at 3:00m. that afternoon, the President briefed the leadership of the country of his choice to implement a blockade of Cuba . The blockade was intended to encourage the Soviets to remove their missiles from bases installed in Cuba .
 Ambassador Kohler delivered his message to Chairman Khrushchev announcing the blockade and informing the Chairman of the impending speech . One hour before the speech, ambassador Kohler had delivered the message to the Chairman .
 At the same time, Secretary Rusk delivered the text of the speech to Ambassador Dobrynin in Washington . The speech was delivered to the Russian ambassador .
 Kennedy instructed his ambassadors to meet with heads of state of many non-Eastern Bloc countries to provide them advance notice . Kennedy instructed ambassadors to . meet with the heads of . state of . many non . Eastern Bloc . countries .
 In the span of one afternoon, President Kennedy informed the leaders of the U.S. and the non-Eastern Bloc world . President Kennedy told the world's leaders in a single afternoon . Kennedy: "In a span of just an afternoon, the world changed dramatically"
 Kennedy’s speech outlined the recent false statements regarding the deployment of offensive weapons to Cuba . Kennedy proposed that in the nuclear age threats and deception represent “maximum peril,”
 Impose a quarantine on all offensive military equipment, continue and increase surveillance of Cuba, regard any nuclear launch from Cuba as an attack by the Soviet Union, reinforce the base at Guantanamo, and call upon Khrushchev to withdraw weapons from Cuba .
 Chairman Khrushchev received word that the President was going to address the American public . Kennedy's 22 October Address to the Nation was broadcast on October 22, 1962 .
 This, along with the earlier intelligence report of military forces building in the southeastern United States, served as his most clear sign that a serious crisis could be building .
 Khrushchev called a meeting of the Presidium to discuss the possible implications of this address . The Soviet Union leader was assassinated in June 1968 .
 Khrushchev himself was confident that the focus of the speech would be Cuba . Other members of the Presidium offered different opinions; none were optimistic . None were optimistic.
 An emotional Khrushchev declared to the Presidium, “he thing is we were not going to unleash war.” Khrushchchev declared . “He thing is . We were not . going to unleashing war. We were going to ... unleash war," Kh
 He continued debating how Kennedy would act and what the Kremlin could do to respond . Cuba would be in a position to use tactical nuclear weapons to respond to an invasion, he said .
 Malinovsky persuaded the Presidium to follow this more cautious route . He persuaded them that this was a less provocative move . The move was a more cautious move, he said .
 In Cuba, units were several thousand miles from the Soviet Union . Units were not sufficiently manned or supplied for combat operations . Cuba units were not adequately supplied or adequately manned .
 Soviet military leaders assumed a defensive tone and posture though they were prepared to defend themselves with everything they had available . As such, the Soviet military leader assumed a . defensive tone .
 The State Department drafted the OAS resolution for the next morning’s meeting . The resolution was drafted by the State Department in Washington, Washington .
 The letter to Khrushchev and text of the speech that would be given an hour later were conveyed to the ambassador . Ambassador: "It was incomprehensible to him how leaders in Moscow could make such gross error of judgment as to what the United States can accept"
 Ambassador Stevenson relayed a letter to Soviet Ambassador the United Nations Valerian Zorin, in his capacity as the President of the UNSC, calling for “an urgent meeting of the Security Council” citing “incontrovertible evidence” of nuclear weapons in
 This letter followed the same logic and format of the President’s speech . The letter cited the extent of the Cuban missile project, past statements of Russian officials, and the need to secure international harmony .
 Draft resolution calls for removal of offensive weapons, UN observers to monitor withdrawal . Draft resolution also calls for termination of quarantine upon completion of withdrawal .
 The background conference highlighted the plans to conduct the naval quarantine, troop movements towards Florida, the evacuation of civilians and non-combatants from Guantanamo . The conference also highlighted the troop movements and troop movements to Florida . The OAS declared the quarantine was not an act of war .
 The naval base at Guantanamo was ordered to evacuate all dependents and non-combatants . The base has been evacuated from Guantanamo Bay .
 The 1st Armored Division was directed to begin movement to either Fort Stewart, GA or gulf ports . The division has been ordered to begin moving to Fort Stewart .
 The JCS ordered DEFCON 3 for all forces worldwide effective at 7:00m. in Washington that day . JCS orders DEFCon 3 for the first time ever effective effective in Washington .
 The JCS authorized CINCLANT to “expend $20,000 for the purchase of . representative United States magazines and hard items such . as fountain pens, cigarette lighters, etc. to be given to crew members of Russian ships boarded .