 The future of humanity hangs in the balance of a single case that weighs the relative innocence and guilt of U.S. President Jospeh Biden vs. that of Russian President Vladimir Putin . Biden is accused of the crimes of Russia's Vladimir Putin in the case .
 The cards are stacked heavily against Russian President Putin, as Americans have near total power over the world’s media and a hundred years of anti-Russian propaganda weighing in their favor . Lady Justice was, is and will always remain impartial and impervious to even the most perfectly orchestrated and
 The defendant, President Putin currently sits bound and gagged (at least in the western media), rather like the victim of a lynch mob, and is therefore unlikely to get a fair trial . President Putin is currently being held on trial in Russia, but is unlikely to receive a fair
 This book was written to clarify issues and weigh the broadest range of information available dispassionately and present it to the world . It is written to discuss issues and present them to the public .
 Never before in human history have so many people been so totally hoodwinked as this buildup to the U.S. driven war against Russia . The buildup to a war has never been more like this in history .
 It represents the perfect fusion of Hollywood “magic” and “news” production . It represents a fusion of "magic" and "news" production .
 If it looks like a war, smells and kills, it’s probably a war . The war in Ukraine started in 2014 even if western mainstream media “news” does not wish to report it to conceal its own complicity in it .
 For the vast majority of Americans, a foreign war is something very far away that can be enjoyed in the living room in front of the television while eating junk food and/or having a beer, or two .
 The U.S. is going to war with a friend only a few years ago, but still wants to be friends . Now, the United States is fighting a war against an old friend . The United States won't allow the friendship of a friend who wants to see the U.
 For the first time in U.S. history the United States is demonizing, provoking, threatening and attacking via proxy, a contrived enemy that can hit back just as hard or harder . What’s different about this war is for the first . This war is different about
 The living room, the television, junk food, beer, beer and most of what’s left of Western civilization, may be gone soon . Gone soon may be the living room and the television .
 The slide from proxy war to conventional war to nuclear war can happen in days or even hours . The slide between proxy war and nuclear war is possible .
 The only thing that matters to the corporate chiefs that orchestrated this scenario is quarterly dividends . But the only thing they really care about is quarterly dividend payments .
 That they may not be alive to enjoy those dividends appears to have eluded them . They may not have been able to enjoy the dividends .
 Daily “proofs” of President Obama’s absolute evil are paraded before the media zombies of the world. Daily ‘proofs of his absolute evil’ are parades before media zombies .
 More media addicted than ever, frustrated and bored after the long COVID-19 lockdowns, bad economy, fears and helplessness . Americans and western Europeans need someone to lash out at and vent their anger in righteous extreme violence .
 The drumbeat of war quickens the pulse, sharpens the senses, and gives some meaning to an otherwise tepid and meaningless existence . War is the only way to get around the world, and it's a good thing .
 This build-up to a war against Russia was long in the making, pervasive, perfect, and stunning beyond belief . It was long-in-the-making, pervasive and perfect, but it was long and perfect . This build up to the war was long, perfect and stunning
 There isn't any question of innocence or guilt in the minds of western ‘news’ consumers . There isn’t any question . There is no question of guilt or innocence in the mind of western "news” consumers .
 President Putin is a war criminal, a monster, the personification of all that is or ever was, evil, says CNN's John Sutter . Putin is "a war criminal" and "a monster," Sutter says . Sutter: Putin is war criminal and a monster .
 Daily, new atrocities are paraded before the western audiences feeding their hunger for more, for blood, for punishment of the demon in human form, Putin . Putin. Putin .
 America needs a hero, a Knight in Shining Armor like President Biden to rescue them from the doldrums of all the problems in their ordinary lives . Biden is the president of the United States. Biden is a hero. Biden has been in office since 2008 .
 Most of these negative results source back to some bloviating American politician, commentator, editorial writer or journalist for a major U.S. publication . Most of the negative results come from blovating American politicians, commentators and journalists .
 A steady diet of anti-Putin hatred & ridicule in the west, but in Russia itself, the perception is vastly different . The perception of Putin in Russia has been vastly different.
 Putin's approval rating among the Russian people has hovered between 70--80%; far higher than that of any American President or European Prime Minister . Putin has an approval rating of 70-80% in Russia .
 The entire “lynch Putin mob” is a byproduct of that very same magic . In fact, the entire ‘lynch Vladimir mob’ is a result of that same magic, writes CNN's John Sutter .
 Lady Justice and the writer of this book are not fooled quite easily . Fortunately, Lady Justice is not fooled by Lady Justice .
 Given the following information, does your role in the attack on Iraq potentially implicate You, Mr President as a war criminal, or at minimum culpable? Mr President is at least culpable .
 Did You, the President and/or your son Hunter have business relations with Burisma the Ukrainian Gas Company? Did You have business ties with the company? Do you have any such relations with the Ukrainian gas company?
 What year did that relationship begin? 52 7.7.52 7.52 .
 Are You, Mr President aware that your son Hunter Biden DID help secure millions of dollars in funding for a U.S contractor in Ukraine specializing in deadly Pathogenresearch? Are you?
 Did any U.S. government funded or affiliated organization including NED and USAID give any form of material or logistic support including money, to the November 2013 “wave of large-scale protests” called “Euromaidan,” by some and
 Is interfering in the domestic affairs of a foreign nation a violation of international law as enshrined in the UN Charter? The U.S. should intervene in the country's domestic affairs, the author asks .
 Did conditions of the EU loan former President Viktor Yanukovych refused to accept contain “austerity” measures that would have been extremely unpopular with the people of Ukraine? Did conditions contain ‘austerity measures’?
 Did the loan from Russia former President Viktor Yanukovych later accepted contain equally draconian austerity MEASULES?..........cececeesessessseececeeeeseeeseas.
 Have You, Mr President, or any of your family members or close friends attempted to undermine Russia’s energy exports in any other Way? ...... Have You tried to undermine the country's energy exports?
 Would completion of the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline project compete with American fracking oil exports and benefit Russian-EU relations?...........c.c.ccccccCCceeees 54 .
 Do You, Mr President or either Hunter or James Biden have business Cealing with JP MOrgan?...........ccccccsesssssscececeececeesesseaececeeeesseeseaeseeeeeescesseseeaeseeeesesenee
 Se Wells cosas, sace Ncesneatesacn tin eeu Gas ua calaeuiecuina bes ehise ect aule aad aeceatapetaes enacts eames 55 18. Se Wells Cosas: Eames 55 cosas
 Given overwhelming evidence that You, Mr President did lie to then President of the United States Donald Trump, and the American public during the October 22, 2020 Presidential Debate and tried to corruptly pin the source of that lie on Russians, why should anyone believe anything you say ADOUt R
 Does the U.S. Department of State have undue influence within the government of Ukraine, while lacing the government Ne@O-NaZiS?............cccceeeeeeee 56 “News” reports about Russians attacking hospitals and SCHOOIS..............
 Are You, Mr President aware that U.S. trained and funded neo-Nazi brigades such as Right Sector and the Azov Battalion used hospitals, and schools as human? Are you, Mr Obama aware that United States trained and . funded neo .Nazis, such as the Right
 Wal"" savcescaseccasancdeassteedewraas ensdereereapeteeataadaawiess 74 24 24. 24. Wal"" .
 Did You, Mr President or anyone in your administration or military suggest that rapid violent and deadly increase in killing of innocents in Donetsk and Luhansk 7 People's Republics in the days leading up to President Putin’s humanitarian UALR VOR OTG sasc s
 Was that claim another lie to cover Ukrainian intentional provocation designed to intentionally lure Russia into the humanitarian intervention it finally PUPSUCC?........... ... ... ... . ... ... .. .. .. ... ... .... .... .... .. .. .... .. .... .... ... .... .. ... .. ... .... ... ...
 Robert Pope’s Admission of United States violation of BWC in Ukraine..........cccescecsssereeeeeeenees 90 28. United States WMD in Ukraine .......cccccceeseseseeeeees 90 Robert Pope's Admission of U.S. violation
 Did it ever occur to You, Mr President that provoking a war in a nation with 30+ U.S. biological “research” labs could lead to release of biological pathogens that could release a pandemic far worse than COVID-19?............csessececss
 Wintrol’s published confession quoted above makes two of the top three U.S. officials admitting to and confirming Russian allegations about Ukraine having biological pathogens that could be WeaPONIZed .
 The author argues convincingly that this Ukrainian war began with a U.S. financed and orchestrated coup in Ukraine in 2014 . Putin was intentionally provoked in a legion of extreme and deadly ways with the specific goal of eliciting a military response .
 "This book proves beyond any shadow of a doubt those two buzz-phrases are dead wrong," author says . The book will be released in November .
 This book argues if the United States and NATO do not back off very quickly this war will probably lead to thermonuclear war and containment breeches at most or all 300+ U.S. BSL-3 and BSLs-3 laboratories around the world . The book argues
 "He essentially founded what was at that time , a noble, pluralist, unified England," he said .
 President Putin ordered his army into Ukraine February 24, 2022 . Putin was shocked when he ordered his forces into Ukraine .
 A great deal of relevant detail about President Putin’s motivation to launch that invasion has never been explored by western ‘news’ media . Likewise, a great . deal of . relevant detail . about the motivation for the invasion of Crimea has never . been explored .
 President Putin’s motivation to invade Ukraine is to blame for his invasion, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: The facts edged me closer to understanding Putin's motivation for invading Ukraine .
 U.S. intentionally provoked President with a massive eight year killing spree in Donbass, that hugely accelerated in the four days leading up to President Putin’s intervention . MSM “news” was and is instead only acting as a mouthpiece for United States government expansionism
 My current occupation is | edit mostly medical research articles for doctors and medical professors in some of the Asia’s top hospitals and medical universities .
 'I assessed news from both MSM and alt-news dispassionately, came to my own conclusions as to what probably really happened, and the probable consequences of those actions for all parties concerned'
 Number 1 above is the US’ internal excuse for waging one predatory war after another in open defiance of the UN Charter . Number 1 is the U.S. internal excuse . Number 2 above however is the internal excuse that the US has been waging predatory wars after another .
 The psychological pathologies here in my opinion stem from Wall Street’s large corporations’ leadership, CIA headquarters in Langly Virginia, Washington DC . Politicians serve primarily corporate and CIA interests, not American voters or tax payers’ interests, says author .
 Those same corporate bosses own Mainstream Media socalled news that sells all these wars to the tax paying voting public . Only years later finds out all those wars were all based on lies and deceptions .
 There is little doubt all those who align with the United States may justifiably become targets for Russia’s thermonuclear arsenal . The United States seems willing to start a war in order to hang on to its Narcissistic fantasy of being the sole global superpower for the rest
 Hubris has never worked out well for those afflicted and it never will . Hubris never works out well in those afflicted .
 The United States isn’t the first nation to think they can conquer the entire world . All former nations that have attempted such sick endeavors failed in horrifically spectacular and bloody ways .
 The U.S. intentionally provoked Ukraine’s northern neighbor and friends in Russia in many ways . The United States intentionally — using overt and covert means — provoked Ukraine's northern neighbor in many, many ways, says Julian Zelizer .
 U.S. corporate controlled “news” covered almost none of that, and when some tiny mention was made always referred to that region as a “break-away state,” implying a certain treachery on their part for abandoning their “beloved”
 Russia did not want large quantities of the world’s deadliest pathogens right across its border in Ukraine . They can pass through any border undetected making them as or more dangerous as a nuclear bomb .
 Members of the Board of Sponsors are recruited by their peers from the world’s most accomplished science and security leaders to reinforce the importance of the Bulletin's activities and publications .
 This key event occurred 24 days before Ukraine’s President Victor Yanukovych was overthrown on February 20th, and 30 days before the new person to head of the Government, Yatsenyuk, became officially appointed to rule the now clearly fascist country .
 It found various evidence of the involvement of an alliance of the far-right 40 organizations, specifically the Right Sector and Svoboda, and oligarchic parties .
 At least before 21 February 2014, police were seized by demonstrators . The possibility exists that some of the Right Sector snipers were taking positions in and especially atop some government buildings .
 The United States regime and its Ukrainian client-state are the only two nations 42 at the United Nations who vote to back fascism, nazism and Holocaust-denial . Furthermore, the U.S. regime and the Ukrainian client state are the . Only two nations at the U
 The capture at 23:10 the same day shows “No results found” for Ukraine . The capture was captured on the 44 same day as Ukraine .
 Ukrainian national guardsmen reportedly fired their weapons as they tried to close a polling station in Krasnoarmeisk, killing an unspecified number of people . According to U.S. news sources, the incident occurred during the 2014 referendum in the region .
 U.S. sponsored and armed proxy wars with the Yemen War leaping first to mind, but there were and continue to be many more of them . And the above makes no mention of United States sponsored or armed proxy war wars .
 The above Sputnik news article contains grisly details of that short list with references from international sources . The above article contains details of the events in Syria .
 It is instructive reading in regards to the absolute treachery of American foreign policies . It debunks any claims to the United States holding the moral high ground in any disputes regarding international conflicts .
 I’ve been saying we should go in on the ground, we should announce there’s gonna be American casualties,’ says President Obama . “I’m saying we’re gonna go in,” he says .
 Hunter Biden DID help secure millions in funding for United States contractor in Ukraine specializing in deadly pathogen research, laptop emails reveal, raising more questions .
 It has been excluded from the dictionary of mainstream media commentary . It has excluded from mainstream mainstream commentary .
 The composition of the Cabinet broadly coincides with U.S. Assistant Secretary of State 58 Victoria Nuland’s “recommendations” contained in the leaked telephone call to the United States ambassador to Ukraine .
 Abandoned Ammunition Depot of Neo-Nazi Azov Battalion found in Health Complex in DPR April 17, 2022 . The depot is located under the Yalta health complex .
 Censorship of news from foreign and domestic news sources challenging government dictums on the Ukraine War 21. 21. The Ukraine War is currently being fought in Ukraine .
 For each media company is one part of a large interconnected intelligence apparatus — a system, a complex — whose purpose is power, wealth, and domination for the very few at the expense of the many . For the many, the media is one of the world's most powerful institutions .
 Reduction Program e 30-year-old —— o — Ukraine's research lab | to global health. Reduction Program . Reduction Program is Ukraine's program to combat global health issues .
 Those elected “representatives’ have brought those “liberal democracies” to the brink of thermonuclear (and chemical and biological) war . One might wonder if that is true .
 According to the UN, over 70 13,000 have been killed in the region since the Maidan coup d'etat of February 2014 . The UN estimates that over 70,000 people have died in Ukraine since the coup in February .
 He bemoaned that many Americans are unaware of 2 May 2014 ‘pogrom’ in Odessa where roughly 50 people were burnt alive in the Trade Unions House by Ukrainian radical nationalists and neo-Nazis .
 For example, it was common practice during the first Cold War of condemning the Soviet Union for taking over Eastern Europe after the Second World War .
 A charge that Russia had turned to China for potential military help lacks hard evidence, a European official and two U.S. officials say . Likewise, a charge that the Russian government sought military help from China lacks evidence, they say .
 Russian Human Rights Commissioner Tatyana Moskalkova reported that over 500,000 civilians from the Donetsk People's Republic, Lugansk People’s Republic and Ukraine have willingly relocated to Russia since the start of the military conflict . “| responsibly declare that there has never been
 Emails published by the MoD revealed she directly supervised experiments with deadly pathogens . She oversaw the UP-2 Project for “mapping highly infectious diseases in Ukraine,” including anthrax, anthrax .
 The effort “started in 1992 to build the capacity of the states of the Former Soviet Union to reduce the threat from chemical weapons by securing and eliminating CW stockpiles, chemical research capabilities, and production facilities,” the agency says .
 Mary Guttieri was the Executive Vice President at Metabiota from 2014 until 2019 . She has a doctorate in microbiology from UMass Amherst . She was previously the vice president of its Science & Technology Administration .
 Mainstream media will censor the whole illegal biolabs story to ensure the voting public never hears about until years in the future, jf civilization as we know it survives that long .
 “Non-alignment is self-determined by a state and isn't required to be enacted by international treaties. In other words, it does not even allow other 16 states to do so .
 The establishment of a unipolar global system strongly resembles Pope Boniface VIII's November 18, 1302 papal bull, Unam Sanctam . As early as in 2008, statements were made at the Bucharest Summit that NATO would welcome Kiev . NATO would not move east after 1991
 NATO soldiers and Air Force do the heavy lifting, e.g., getting killed . With NATO soldiers, Air Force will do most of the work for the U.S. Air Force .
 The Democrats are going to take a savage beating in the upcoming November elections . Given President Biden’s very low approval ratings, it is obvious the Democrats will take a beating .
 The only way to prevent that is to keep provoking and escalating the Ukraine conflict until — they hope — NATO steps in and greatly expands the war . Russia is trying to keep escalating the conflict in Ukraine until NATO forces step in .
 The phrase was created to reframe the phrase “overthrow foreign governments” to make egregious violations of international law more palatable to American voters . That phrase was used to refram the phrase "overthrow" foreign governments .
 The White House was scrambling to contain the damage done by Biden’s most recent gaffe . Biden's plane could not get off the ground when it landed in Washington, D.C.
 Russia discovered a so-called "spy rock" used by the British intelligence agency, MI6, to communicate with its agents in Moscow . The rock was discovered by Russia of a “spy Rock” used by MI6 to communicate .
 Arnold Schwarzenegger established a tradition of British humour in recent weeks . The tradition has been used by the British media and personally by British Prime Minister Boris Johnson .
 The sad, tragic and almost comical fact of the matter is it’s Americans who have no idea how much the news they receive is censored . The sad and tragic fact is that Americans who don't know how much of the news is censored are censored .
 The United States government has acted in a collusive fashion to hide evidence and silence news critical of the U.S. government’s role in the 2014 coup in Ukraine and subsequent massive deadly indiscriminative violence .
 The threats of missile bases, tanks, and other weapons was exacerbated a million-fold with the presence of potential dual use biological "research" projects and bioweapons that can pass through any nation’s borders with extreme rapidity .
 Ukraine ceasefire agreement signed in Minsk, Belarus, September 5, 2014 . Negotiators representing Russia, Ukraine, anti-government rebels and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe signed a ceasefire agreement .
 Ukraine definitely wouldn't ‘collapse’ if the Minsk Accords were fully implemented, but it might end up with a very different administrative structure in the most extreme scenario . Pd by the Russian tsars in 1654-1917 and Soo 8 by Viad
 The Rada did not exercise any authority over most of these territories, and soon was quarreling with the Provisional Government in Petrograd . The nuance was that the Rada didn't exercise any . authority .
 Putin's comments are "a collection of extremely provocative lies designed to incite violence against Russia, President Putin, and all Russian people," the Kremlin says .
 In the Iraq War at least 2.38 million human beings have been killed thus far and has been lamented as a “mistake””° or a crime . The Iraq War has been called a "mistake" or a "crime"
 President Biden has the temerity to accuse President Putin of genocide, when in fact President Biden is well on the way to pursuing his own, second genocide . Biden is already pursuing a second genocide, says Julian Zelizer . Biden has been accused of genocide by President Putin .
 Separatists in eastern Ukraine say people there have voted overwhelmingly to secede from the state . Kiev and its Western supporters decry the referendum as illegitimate .
 The current penalties put Venezuela in fifth place in the global rating of the most sanctioned 211m a gut-wrenching example of United States ultra-violent duplicity . Saddam Hussein was the darling of the United States political administration, CIA, and DoD during the Iran-Iraq War
 These outrageous blatantly insulting racist stereotypes of Russians echo “ “ and nu style racist stereotypes that should be held in contempt by ose who decry racism and prejudice .
 President Biden has turned it again this time this time against Russia, vilifying all people and things Russian . Biden has vilified all people who are Russian .
 Last year, Mikhail Khodarenok, a retired Russian colonel, discussed in an RT op-ed what this system means for Russia .
 Moscow has not been busy finding ways to respond to U.S. and NATO efforts to build antiballistic systems in Eastern Europe . Nobody should think, however, that Moscow is not keeping tabs on the United States and NATO .
 Moscow immediately got to work on ways to overcome the U.S. anti-missile systems once Washington pulled out of the ABM Treaty . Moscow is looking at ways to bypass the United States' missile systems .
 U.S. efforts paid off in ways that the United States may not have anticipated, say experts . Those efforts pay off in a way that the U.N. may have anticipated .
 Russia might just as well be putting nuclear missile bases on the Mexican side of the U.S. border . Russia might also be putting missile bases in Mexico .
 Solicitation, in criminal law, is the request, encouragement, or direction of one person by another to commit a serious criminal offense . Solicitations can be a serious criminal offence and can be serious criminal offenses .
 A video was circulated on social media in which armed Ukrainians were seen torturing and shooting captured Russian soldiers . The video prompted calls for Kiev to address the issue . Earlier, a video of the incident was circulated by several armed Ukrainians .
 At least 2.38 million human beings have been killed in Iraq and Afghanistan . The Iraq War has likewise been lamented as a “mistake” or a crime, as was the Afghanistan War .
 Ukraine only comes in at 5** place with less than half of the wheat exports of Russia but is usually listed first for some odd reason on MSM these days . Australia: $2.12 billion e. billion e . Germany, Canada: $6.32 billion e France: $
 Often overlooked in this and other analysis of the crimes leading up to and continuing during the most recent phase of the war in Ukraine is the most willing accomplice called Canada . Lebanon, Tunisia, Yemen, Libya, and Pakistan also rely heavily on Canada .
 How do You, Mr President feel about the fact that starvation around the world is 75.5%? How do you feel? Share your thoughts with CNN iReport .
 The US’ long, long history of overthrowing foreign governments will be exposed as pain from the war President Biden intentionally provoked in Ukraine is illuminated, and sinks deeper into the awareness of people around the world .
 The discovery of a torture chamber in the basement of a building previously occupied by the Armed Forces of Ukraine in the village of Kryakovka, Lugansk region, tells another story . However, the discovery of the torture chamber is not all about the discovery .
 Nearly twice as many people strongly disapprove of Joe Biden's performance as strongly approve of it . Nearly half of those who strongly approve strongly disapprove strongly approve .
 Comic book style sales pitches based on greatly amplified versions of the same old lies just aren’t selling that well . Sales pitches are based on exaggerated versions of many old lies .
 She was President Obama’s principal foreign policy advisor that pushed for the disastrous and deadly so-called “Arab Spring revolutions” that left nothing but death and chaos behind . She pushed the disastrous ‘Arab Spring’ revolutions .
 The whole world is not like the U.S. forever fostering and fighting wars, hosting the world’s largest prison system, and promoting endless war and aggression in movies, TV shows, music, games and so on . The United States is not the United States forever fostering wars
 Most of the world is just not as media addicted as are western Europeans and western Europeans . They live more peaceful lives, and have more hope for the future, says CNN.com .
 Theaters of Command tracks the full scope of Pentagon and CIA influence on everything from Lone Survivor to The Last Ship, Marvel to MTV, and James Bond .
 Western media have reported that Russia’s military deliberately attacked the Donetsk Academic Regional Drama theater in Mariupol, Ukraine, claiming that it was filled with civilians and marked with signs reading “children” on its grounds . Western media reported that the theater was marked with “
 By instigating public outrage over grisly Russian war crimes, Ukraine's government aims to generate enough pressure to overcome Biden administration's reluctance to directly confront Russia’s military . The Biden administration has been reluctant to confront Russia's military .
 Prokopenko declared that the Russian military was carrying out a “genocide” against the population of Mariupol, which is 40 percent ethnic Russian . The Russian military is carrying out an alleged genocide against the city, he said .
 Illia Ponomarenko, a Kiev-based, UStrained reporter, has managed to rack up over a million Twitter followers since Russia’s invasion began .
 Real reporters and journalists must be investigators, not just mindless amplifiers of government reports issued by paid servants of any government . Real reporters must be reporters and not just amplifiers, says CNN.com's Tom Charity .
 Chechen leader says NATO Arms Shipments & Mercenaries mean ‘Dozens of States’ Fighting Russia . Chechen Leader says NATO arms shipments and mercenaries mean 'dozens of states' are fighting Russia .
 Wyatt Reed wrote a short article written by Wyatt Reed who then studied . That sounded interesting so | read that short article . Wyatt Reed then studied.
 That means he’s not a dilatant hanging out in a basement somewhere just repeating second and third source information . That means that he isn’t just repeating the information from a basement .
 He's got “guts,” which means is willing to put his life on the line to get accurate information first hand . He’s got ‘guts’ which means he’�s willing to risk his life for accuracy .
 Ramzan Kadyrov is a key figure in the story . He quoted a source in the report . Ramzan is a known figure in Chezakhistan .
 Wikipedia paints him as the very devil himself, in charge of death squads, promoting Islamic Sharia law, etc. Wikipedia says he is responsible for the deaths of thousands .
 Several mayors and other Ukrainian officials have been killed since the outbreak of war . Many have been reportedly killed by Ukrainian state agents after engaging in de-escalation talks with Russia .
 Zelensky has exploited the atmosphere of war to outlaw an array of opposition parties and order the arrest of his leading rivals . Zelenski has further exploited the situation of war by outlawing opposition parties .
 His authoritarian decrees have triggered the disappearance, torture and even murder of human rights activists . Human rights activists, communist and leftist organizers, journalists and government officials accused of “pro-Russian” sympathies .
 The Ukrainian SBU security services has served as the enforcement arm of the officially authorized campaign of repression . The SBU is known for its anti-gay propaganda campaigns in the past .
 The SBU has spent the past weeks filling its vast archipelago of torture dungeons with political dissidents . With training from the CIA and close coordination with Ukraine’s statebacked neo-Nazi paramilitaries, the SBU is filled with dissidents .
 The Ukrainian military has engaged in a series of atrocities against captured Russian troops . On the battlefield, meanwhile, the military has proudly exhibited its sadistic acts on social media .
 The perpetrators of human rights abuses appear to have received approval from the upper echelons of Ukrainian leadership . Ukraine has been accused of a string of abuses in the past year .
 Zelensky spouts bromides about the defense of democracy before worshipful Western audiences . He is using the war as a theater for enacting a blood-drenched purge of political rivals, dissidents and critics .
 The passage of “decommunization’s laws by the Ukrainian parliament eased the persecution of leftist elements . The laws further eased the prosecution of activists for political speech . Ukrainian parliament passed the laws in June .
 The post-Maidan regime has focused its wrath on Ukrainians who have advocated a peace settlement with pro-Russian separatists in the country’s east . The regime has also targeted members of communist organizations .
 Dissident elements have faced the constant threat of ultra-nationalist violence, imprisonment, and even murder . Dissidents have faced constant threats of violence and imprisonment, even murder, for years .
 The SBU has served as the main enforcer of the post-Maidan government’s campaign of domestic political repression . The security service known as the SBU is known for its role in the anti-government crackdown .
 Pro-Western monitors have accused the SBU of systematically torturing political opponents and dissidents . The SBU has been accused of torturing dissidents and political opponents with impunity .
 The SBU “informs not only us, but also Azov, the Right Sector, and so on,” Karas boasted in a 2017 interview .
 Kiev officially endorses assassinating Ukrainian mayors for negotiating with Russia . SBU has hunted down local officials that accepted humanitarian supplies from Russia or negotiated with Russian forces to arrange corridors for civilian evacuations .
 A day before his murder, Struk reportedly urged his Ukrainian colleagues to negotiate with pro-Russian officials . Struk had reportedly urged Ukraine's parliamentarians to take action .
 Ukrainian ultranationalists have long been in conflict with the mayor's office . Prylipko had reportedly entered into negotiations with the Russian military to organize a humanitarian corridor for the evacuation of his city’s residents .
 Gennady Matsegora, the mayor of Kupyansk in northeastern Ukraine, released a video appealing to President Volodymyr Zelensky and his administration for the release of his daughter . His daughter had been held hostage by agents of the Ukrainian SBU intelligence agency
 Denis Kireev, a top member of the Ukrainian negotiating team, was killed in broad daylight in Kiev after the first round of talks with Russia . Then there was the murder of Denis Kirirka, a member of Ukraine's negotiating team who was killed .
 Zelensky invoked martial law to ban 11 opposition parties in March 19 order . The order was followed by a March 19 executive order to impose martial law on the country .
 The outlawed parties consisted of the entire left-wing, socialist or anti-NATO spectrum in Ukraine . They were outlawed in Ukraine in the past .
 Openly fascist and pro-Nazi parties like the Azov National Corps were left untouched by the decree . Pro-Nazi and fascist parties are left untouched .
 Wikipedia should lighten up on Ramzan Kadyrov and throw a lot more balance in their review of the man . If actions speak louder than words, perhaps there should be more balance .
 Kadyrov was given the rank of major general in July 2020, through an executive order of the Russian President, according to a CNN report .
 After his election, he stated that he was going to continue to continue the current course of reviving the republic's economy and society .
 According to ABC news there were 5,000 Muslims in the United States military in 2015 . Douglas Burpee was a Marine Colonel, who was a helicopter pilot for 27 years . Humayun Khan was killed in a car bomb in 2004, according to the report .
 There are probably many more “Muslims” in the U.S. military now because of popular movies like “American Assassin” which is about an American man who becomes a fake Muslim robot in order to kill Muslim terrorists .
 'He's not a government wank in a public relations position. That actually gives him a lot of credibility because he’s not a publicist wank,' he said .
 He’s on the ground in Mariupol, and | found another post by him in Russian which | translated with translate.google.com.com . He's also in the Ukraine .
 Sputnik wanted Kadyrov’s original writing . Not one to rest on the interpretations, the Russian leader wanted to use his own writing . The Kremlin has not responded to the request .
 Look at this vile hypocrisy and the lies of the Azov criminals who have settled in the buildings of Azovstal . Look at the vile hypocrisy of the criminals, says Russian President Vladimir Putin . The Kremlin has been accused of corruption in Russia .
 Russian side always advocated organizing living corridors for civilians, providing them with protection, shelter, food, medical assistance, while the Azov fascists used them as human shields . It was the Russian side that has always advocated .
 'You have decided to pretend to be saviors. And now, when the boot of Russian liberators is pressing on your false fascist throat, you have decided . And now . Now, when . the boot . of Russian . liberators are pressing on . your false . fascist throat
 The order of the Supreme Commander-in-Chief of Russia is to save the civilian population . Russia's President Vladimir Putin has ordered Russia to protect its citizens . The Russian military has been involved in the conflict in Ukraine since 2003 .
 Written in Russian and addressed to Azov, this is a very different kind of evidence than that presented by Kyiv Independent newspaper in English which is funded by American NED, which is famed for overthrowing governments .
 Russian military is highly disciplined, something than cannot be said about Azov . Azov is more interested in splashy headlines in western news gained by way of false flag operations that kill and hold civilian populations, while using them for human shields .
 The U.S. is making the same blunder in this Ukraine War as in the Vietnam War, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: The United States is relying on the same corrupt and ruthless political forces that divide the people instead of uniting them .
 The U.S. news constantly lied about the United States military progress in Vietnam until they lost, and quit, similar to Afghanistan . That is clearly happening again in Ukraine now as well as in Ukraine as well .
 Mariupol Theater bombing was done by Ukrainian forces and falsely attributed to Russian forces in a False Flag operation . The Mariupo theater bombing was claimed to have been done by the Ukrainian forces .
 Social “oreconditioning” of an audience unused to critical thinking is an essential step in getting this audience to accept at face value anything that is put before it, regardless of how egregiously the facts of the story strain credulity .
 The chronology of the narrative produces the first red flag that the story being peddled by Ukraine, and echoed in the West, is not what it seems . Ukraine has been accused of corruption in the past by the West and Russia in Ukraine .
 For reasons which should be obvious to anyone who is willing to apply critical thought. For reasons that should beobvious to anyone’ willing to . applycritical thought .
 Graphic footage from Bucha shows multiple bodies in civilian clothing lying in the middle of a street . Graphic footage of the attack shows multiple people in civilian clothes lying dead in the street .
 A video posted by one of the Kiev territorial defence battalion leaders resurfaced online . It is claimed Russia is behind the 'war crimes' in Bucha .
 Putin: Documents shed light on who and how arrived in Bucha, and how used what kind of transport . Putin: The documents shed light in order to ""set up the conditions"" to stage the provocation. Putin: "Who, how and how, and who arrived and used what
 Kiev and its Western backers immediately blamed Russia for the incident . The Tochka-U operates as a simple inertially-guided ballistic missile . The key to finding the perpetrator lies in this overlooked detail .
 Operators orient the launcher in the direction of their target, and then calculate the distance between the point of launch and point of impact . Simply put, the operators, working from a known location, orient the . location in the . direction of the launcher, they aim to hit their target
 The solid-fuel engine of the Tochka-U burns for 28 seconds, meaning that the range of the missile isn't determined by engine burn-time alone . The more vertical the missile at time of launch, the shorter its range will be .
 Because the missile burns to depletion, once the engine shuts down, the missile will cease its pure ballistic trajectory . The missile will instead assume a near-vertical posture as it heads toward its target . Once the engine shut down, it will stop shooting at the target .
 In the case of the Kramatorsk attack, the Tochka-U was equipped with the 9N123K cluster warhead, containing fifty submunitions, each has the effect of a single hand grenade in terms of explosive and lethal impact .
 Cluster munitions impacting on the ground first, followed by the depleted booster . The depleted booster hits the earth some distance behind the impact of the warhead .
 This creates a tell-tale signature of the direction from where the missile was launched, which can be crudely calculated by shooting reverse azimuth from the point of impact of the warhead through the booster .
 The Tochka-U that hit Kramatorsk is the first real clue as to who fired the Tochkas-U . It is this physical reality which provides the first clues as to the cause of the crash . Kramatork was hit by a missile from a
 Forensic evaluation of missile debris shows it was launched by the 19th Ukrainian Missile Brigade, based near Dobropolia, some 45 kilometers from Kramatorsk . More specifically, the debris shows that the missile debris was launched from a Ukrainian missile brigade .
 The 19th Missile Brigade is considered a strategic asset, meaning it responds directly to the orders of the Ukrainian Ground Forces Command . It responds to orders from the Ukrainian ground forces Command .
 If the missile was fired by the 19th Missile Brigade, it was doing so based on orders given from high up the chain of command . In short, if the missile is fired, it is firing based on the orders of high-ranking command .
 False flag operations are particularly sinister as they target civilians . One can only hope saner minds prevail sooner rather than later and start to deal the realities here rather than the "political objectives" of the real aggressors .
 There is absolutely zero motivation for Russia to fire a missile strike against a train station in Ukraine, writes Andrew Hammond . Ukrainian forces know full well this will spark further outrage against Russia in the west and bring in more money, weapons and possibly ground troops .
 False flags are a longstanding U.S. tradition, dating from the 19th century . False flags have been a longstanding tradition in the United States .
 Nobody is counting the numbers of innocent Vietnamese that were tortured to death by American forces, says U.S. officials . Nobody is aware of the number of Vietnamese tortured by American troops, says the U.N. official .
 The phrase “false flag” can be used to describe an imagined threat by another nation used to justify an attack upon it as in the following quote . The phrase is often used in the context of an alleged threat by a nation .
 Since World War II alone it is estimated that the United States has killed at least 20,000,000 people in over 37 nations . The U.S. is estimated to have killed more than 20 million people in 37 countries .
 Comparing this coverage to that of other conflicts reveals both a familiar reliance on United States officials to frame events, as well as a newfound ability to cover the impact on civilians . Those civilians are white and under attack by an official United States enemy, rather than by the United States itself .
 The number of U.S. troops deployed across Europe has soared from 60,000 to about 102,000 since October 2021 . Meanwhile, the number of United States troops deployed in Europe is soaring from about 60,00 to 102,00 .
 U.S. government funded sources and their Ukrainian acolytes are behind the tidal waves of disinformation . In view of this, it seems only fair to give the Russian news agency TASS at least a moment of this reader’s time .
 In 1997, 50 prominent foreign policy experts, including former senators, military leaders, and diplomats, sent an open letter to then-President Bill Clinton outlining their opposition to NATO expansion . "/t is a policy error of historic proportions," they wrote .
 The unrivaled power of the Euro-American Military-IndustrialCounter-Intelligence-Media-Academia-Think Tank complex has become an existential threat to all life on earth . The Euro-U.S. military-industrial-industrial complex is a threat to the
 President Putin decided the only way to secure his southern border is clear out Ukraine’s war-making capabilities once and for all . President Putin went further, deciding the only . way to . secure that section of his southern . border is to clear out . out Ukraine's war-
 The targets that were hit “were not new targets.” Another woman said that the targets hit were targets that weren’t new targets .
 This article argues that President Biden and his son “Hunter’s” “conflict of interest” investments in Ukraine is masking their desire to stop legitimate Russian energy export business investments in Nord Stream 2, and instead promote American Fracking oil and gas .
 President Obama’s possible motivations for launching the Ukrainian war against the citizens of Donetsk and Luhansk in 2014 are speculative . Potential motivations for President Obama to start a war in Ukraine are plentiful, but speculative .
 President Biden might well have had additional motivation to greatly accelerate the Ukraine War provided by former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton . As she was certainly complicit in the so-called “Arab Spring” series of disastrous and deadly American funded “Color Revolutions” mostly started in 2011
 President Biden cynically used “national security” justifications for his increased support to neo-Nazi militias in Ukraine . Biden used the excuse to cover up his profit and other personal motivations for his support of the militias .
 Raytheon Technologies, maker of the Stinger ground-to-air missile that Germany has pledged to supply to Ukrainian forces, has seen its shares price increase more than 10% since the invasion began last Wednesday .
 Their children, if they survive, will not be so proud when they learn the truth behind, and human cost of their wealth . Their children will learn the whole truth behind the wealth .
 The educated world not enthralled by Euro-American “information war’s falsehoods is currently holding its collective breath waiting to see if President Biden will start WWIII, as a final concluding act in the Third Red Scare potentially causing extinction .
 Top U.S. officials in addition to Hunter Biden, President Zelensky and European weapons manufacturers will not like the plan . The plan is not likely to be approved by the United States at all .
 Like other U.S. wars the truths behind it and the key players will slowly leak out in decades to come, and it will like all the rest since WWII (with the exception perhaps of the Korean War) be labeled a “mistake” provided humanity survives that long
 President Biden, his son Hunter, and top cabinet members with “the appearance of conflict of interest” in violation of United States law and international treaties, policies and laws against corruption is essential . In order to encourage UN Secretary General Guterres to call for a moratorium on weapons
 Whoever makes that stuff up is creative, and knows how to inflame American audiences, however such unsubstituted rubbish only proves they know nothing about Russian military capabilities and protocol in this part of the world .
 America’s allies in this asymmetric war on Russia (and all Russian people everywhere) are being extremely foolish . America's game of international Whac-A-Mole is never ending . The “friends” of the United States today will find themselves on the receiving
 Along with American “help” come certain “strings” like adoption of highly conservative fiscal policies and very liberal social policies . Along with U.S. help, there are also strings attached .
 The UK, Germany, Japan, and so on down the list of U.S. allies in this war effort are not in any way protecting their own nations or interests, but rather ensuring their own demise sooner . In other words, the UK and Germany are not protecting themselves, but
 Helping to knock out the one super-power that might have — would probably have actually helped them when their turns at being the American target nation roll around again, is extremely foolish . Helping out the super-powers would probably help them when they come to be the target nation again
 U.S. citizen currently living under threat of thermonuclear war caused by corruption within the United States government . United States Citizen is currently living in danger of nuclear war . U.C. citizen is currently under threat from the threat of nuclear weapons in the U.K.
 Russia's best and brightest have been brought into their own defense department . Russia's defense department is not an aggressive war machine like the U.S. "Defense Department"
 Currently, the United States spends over $900 million per day on interest payments . The U.S. spends $900million a day on the interest rate .
 Banning Russia from SWIFT is very likely to accelerate that decline into a landslide . Now, banning Russia from the banking system is likely to be a landslide for the Kremlin .
 President Putin knows this, as do |, having worked in several American (and its proxy’s) wars as a journalist and having interviewed many, many war survivors .
 Russian intelligence on the other hand can’t afford to operate that way . Russian intelligence is not likely to be able to operate in the way of the U.S.
 Major General Charles F Bolden Jr. served as USMC Senator Saxby Chambliss . He served as vice chairman of the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence from 2011 to 2014 . He advocated for dramatically improved information sharing .
 Flournoy previously served on the Pentagon’s Defense Policy Board and the CIA director’�s External Advisory Board . Each position gives members access to sensitive information, which can be useful to attracting and serving corporate clients .
 President Biden’s top cabinet members’ close friends and associates. Those wars kill and maim millions of innocents and produce millions more “displaced people,” but also produce greatly increased stock dividends for many or most of President Biden's top cabinet .
 Avril Haines is at the axis of the revolving door between defense industries and the government’s intelligence community . It provably gives at minimum the appearance of conflict of interest .