 I met him on the occasion of the first anniversary of the Sandinista Revolution at the home of Sergio Ramírez who at that time was the Vice President of that country . At that time, he was the vice President of the country .
 Fidel Castro himself told me one day that it was pure fiction . I came to believe it was a real case that had happened in Nicaragua, with that legal nuisance so common in former Spanish colonies .
 Father Ernesto Cardenal is a militant leftist Sandinista and, today, an adversary of Daniel . Frei Betto is a critic, but not an enemy, of Lula, as well as a critic of his predecessor .
 Theology of Liberation was a progressive trend which we always saw as a great step towards unity between revolutionaries and the poor . Father Ernesto Cardenal, unlike others in the Nicaraguan leadership, had an image of sacrifice and privations resembling that of a medieval monk .
 He was never a left-wing extremist, nor did he become a revolutionary through philosophical studies . He came from very humble working class roots and Christian beliefs, and worked hard creating surplus value for others .
 He presents us with reasons and demonstrates this with irrefutable logic . He takes pleasure and makes fun of the cynical lies used to accuse Communists . He presents . reasons .
 Marx's ideas of Marx were just at that time, when everything seemed to depend on the class struggle and the growth of the productive forces, science and technology, that supported the creation of essential goods to satisfy human necessities . But there are absolutely new factors which say that he was right and
 Engels knew that one day the sun would be extinguished as it consumed all of its energy . Engels and Engels knew one day one day that the sun will be extinguished . A few years after the Manifesto was written, other men were born who made inroads in science .
 New knowledge is not in the hands of the poor nations who today make up three-quarters of the world's population . Although it continues in its development and even improves, it again contradicts its own theories .
 "Quite a bit has been written in our press in recent weeks about different episodes of that period. Quite a bit of . that period has been . Quite a . bit of written in recent . weeks about that period .
 Great respect has been shown for various historical dates on the days corresponding to anniversaries that commemorate years ending in a five or a zero . Great respect was shown for dates commemorating years ending five or zero .
 For me, unity means sharing in the struggle, the risks, the sacrifices, the aims, ideas, concepts and strategies . That is fair, but we must be careful, in the sum-total of so many occurrences described in each newspaper or article, according to their criteria .
 Unity means a common struggle against annexationists, quislings and corrupt individuals who have nothing in common with a militant revolutionary . Unity means unity against annexationistists and quislaries, says the president .
 It is to this unity revolving around the idea of independence and against the empire as it advances over the peoples of the Americas that I always referred to. The empire's advance over the Americas is to be seen as a result of this unity .
 The old pre-revolutionary slogan of unity has nothing to do with the concept, because in our country today we do not have political organizations seeking power, he says . Juventud Rebelde reproduced a facsimile of my thoughts on the idea, in my own handwriting,
 Jesús Menéndez would join that of Mella 18 years later . The Communist blood of Jesúa Menérdez would be added to the Communist Party of Spain .
 Our class or social group, having incomes greater than those of the rest of the population, condemned us as human beings to be the selfish and the exploiters of society . I had the privilege of coming to the revolution through ideas, escaping the boring fate of life .
 If a Revolution like ours had succeeded at that time, the USSR would not have done for Cuba what the Soviet leadership did years later, liberated by then from those murky and tortuous methods, and enthused by the Socialist Revolution that burst on the scene .
 The USSR had the most powerful army among all those contending in World War II, but it was purged and demobilized . I understood that very well in spite of the fair criticisms I made of Khrushchev as a result of events that were well known .
 From the very capital of Japan, an important and prestigious Soviet intelligence agent had communicated the imminence of the attack on June 22, 1941 . The attack on Japan was the first to occur in Japan in 1941 .
 Even without their most experienced unit leaders, the Nazis would have clashed with powerful forces from the very first second and they wouldn't have destroyed most of the fighter planes sitting on the ground .
 Soviet soldiers did not surrender when they were told about enemy tanks in the rearguard, the way the other armies from capitalist Europe did . Even worse than the purge, the surprise was the surprise .
 He asked that I give him some of the photos I took of his photos . Now I am going to send him some shirts because he is complaining that the collars on his shirts are too hard .
 I told him that, at the end of my visit to Córdoba, Argentina, where I had attended a meeting with many leaders, and he had been there as well, I came back, and then took part in two ceremonies for the July 26th Anniversary . I told
 I had thought that it would be a quick thing, like the interviews with Frei Betto and Tomás Borge . I had hoped that this interview would be quick, but it was not quick enough, it was a bit longer .
 The book was at the point of being published without my going over it, with some of the answers being a bit off the cuff . And then I became a slave to the French writer's book, when it was at point of publication .
 The head of the Council of State Office was reading me the text, at my insistence, and I was dictating the pertinent changes . I barely slept during those days . I thought that would be the end, and while the doctors were fighting for my life .
 President Fidel Castro visited Cuba in 1985 to take part in a meeting to analyze the overwhelming problem of the foreign debt . Participants representing a wide spectrum of political, religious, cultural and social tendencies presented and discussed their opinions .
 Leaders of worker, campesino, student and other groups assembled to examine the various subjects . Leaders of workers, campers and students gathered to discuss the various topics .
 At that time, Latin America owed $350 billion . He was already well known to us and abroad for his direct and vibrant message .
 I told him that in that year of intense struggle I had written long letters to the President of Argentina, Raúl Alfonsín, to persuade him discontinue the payments on that debt . He said he had written to him to stop the payments .
 I knew the position of Mexico, unmoved in the payment of its enormous debt, but not indifferent to the outcome of the battle, and the special political situation of Brazil . I knew that Mexico would not pay the enormous debt . I also knew that Brazil would not be able to pay
 The Argentine debt was sufficiently large after the disasters of the military government to justify an attempt to open up a breach in that direction . Argentina's debt was large enough to justify a breach, the government says . The country's debt is now the largest in the world, according to the IMF
 A few years later, the debt with the interests rose to $800 billion; it had doubled and it had already been paid . Lula explained to me how that year was different .
 "I assumed that his country had paid enormous sums in order to comply with those institutions," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 In 1971 Nixon suspended the gold standard that had limited the issuing of paper money . In 1971 he unilaterally suspended the system, which had limited paper money issued . Nixon's 'colossal fraud' on the world economy, he said .
 Until then the dollar had maintained a balance in relation to its value in gold . Until then, the dollar was kept in balance with the value of gold .
 Thirty years earlier, the U.S. had almost all the reserves in that metal . Thirty years ago, the United States had almost no such reserves in the metal .
 If there was a lot of gold, they bought it up and sold it . If there is a shortage, they sold it up . If a shortage of gold was a problem, the gold was sold .
 The dollar played its part as an international exchange currency, under the privileges granted to the U.S. at Bretton Woods in 1944 .
 Japan, Germany, the USSR and the rest of Europe had barely any of this metal in their reserves . Europe had little of this precious metal in its reserves .
 Currency reserves of China, Japan, Southeast Asia and Russia combined amount to three trillion dollars . Nobody wants the dollar to devaluate any further, because almost all countries accumulate dollars .
 Greenspan, who for more than 15 years was the chairman of the Federal Reserve, would have died in a panic had he been faced with such situation . If you add the dollar reserves of Europe and the rest of the world, you will see that all that is equivalent to a mountain
 As a result of the harsh measures imposed on the defeated German state at Versailles in 1918, the German mark devaluated to such an extent that you needed tens of thousands of them to buy one dollar . In 1918, when a republican regime came to power, you needed thousands of
 Such a crisis fed German nationalism and contributed extraordinarily to Hitler’s absurd ideas, he says . The crisis fed Germany nationalism and fed extraordinarily Hitler's absurd ideas . Hitler's idea of a war in Germany was absurd, he writes .
 Many of the most important scientific and financial talents as well as writers were Jewish . Jewish people were important in the world of finance and medicine .
 Einstein's theory that energy is equal to mass multiplied by the square of the speed of light made him famous . Einstein was the author of the theory stating that energy equals mass .
 Many of the Russian Communists were of Jewish descent, whether or not they actively practiced the Hebrew religion . Also Marx, who was born in Germany, and many of the Russians were Jewish .
 In 1917, through the Balfour Declaration, the British decided to create the state of Israel within its colonial empire, located on territory inhabited by the Palestinians . In that part of the world, other ethnic groups coexisted for many centuries before our era, among them the Jews .
 Zionism became popular among the Americans, who detested the Nazis, and whose financial markets were controlled by representatives of that movement . Zionism was popular among Americans who rightly detested Nazis .
 The U.S. is practicing the principles of apartheid, says Nelson Mandela . Mandela: "It has sophisticated nuclear weapons and it controls the most important financial centers in the United States. That state today is practicing ... apartheid"
 It was used by this country and its European allies to supply nuclear weapons to that other apartheid, the one in South Africa, to use them against Cuban internationalist combatants .
 Food and oil prices are linked to the price of oil, says David Cameron . He says food producers have discovered important reserves of light crude .
 Brazil has an area of 5,333,750 square miles and 30 percent of the world’s water reserves . The country has 30 per cent of the water reserves in the world .
 The planet’s population needs increasing amounts of food, and you are great food exporters . Food exporters are great exporters. The planet's population needs more food, especially in the future .
 If you have grains rich in proteins, oils and carbohydrates, you can produce all the meat or milk you want . grains like wheat and corn can also be used to make meat and milk . Fruit like cashew nuts, nuts, almonds, pistachio, peanut, soybean,
 Cuba had a cow that broke the world record in milk production, a Holstein-Zebu hybrid . I didn’t mention others on a long list .
 She had to have more than 40 kilograms of fodder, the most she could chew and swallow in a 24-hour period . Soy meal, a legume that is very difficult to grow in Cuban soil and climate, is a basic ingredient .
 The United States has a huge external dependency which is also a weapon . This means that the U.S. has to rely heavily on external sources . This is a huge dependency on the United States .
 It could use all its reserves of land, but the people of that country are not ready for that, says CNN's John Sutter . The country could use its reserves, he says, but it is not ready to that .
 Brazilian producers are already producing ethanol from corn, says Lula . They are taking a great amount of this caloric grain off the market, he says .
 I think that the United States cannot keep up fuel production from corn, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: The United States can't afford to rely on corn for fuel production .
 Food prices will affect many people, says David Cameron . You, on the other hand, can rely on a favorable climate and loose soil, he says .
 When we received tractors from the Soviets and the other Socialist countries, they would break down and we had to buy special steel in Europe to manufacture them here . We bought special steel to make them .
 They were receiving food rations from the state and consuming their own production . They also consumed their own produce from their own sources .
 The climate has changed in Cuba, Lula, I said. Our soil is not suitable for large-scale commercial production of cereals . The cost in machinery and fuel imported by the nation would be very high .
 Nobody says that the prices in hard currency must be shared with foreign partners who invest in the necessary sophisticated machinery and technology . But nobody says that . Nobody says .
 We do not have the required labor force to intensively take part in cereal production as the Vietnamese and Chinese do, growing rice plant by plant and often reaping two or even three harvests a year . Besides, we don't have the necessary labor force for intensively taking part
 It has to do with the location and the historical tradition of the land and its settlers. It has a lot of the history of the area and the settlers .
 In Cuba, sugarcane cutters and the workers in the mountain coffee plantations have abandoned the fields, logically . They did not first go through the large-scale mechanization of modern harvesters .
 A large number of construction workers, some from the same origins, have abandoned the work brigades and have become self-employed workers . Also, a large . number of . construction workers have abandoned . the work . brigades, some of the . same origins .
 The first can be solved, the second has no solution – as some would believe – throwing pesos into the street without their due backing in convertible currency, which would not be dollars anymore but euros and yuans, increasingly expensive, if all together we succeed .
 In case of a direct military attack, the manual work force would be multiplied . Almost 28 years have gone by since the time he first visited Cuba, but since I met him in Nicaragua .
 This time he was the leader of an immense nation whose fate, however, depends on many aspects that are common to all the peoples on this planet . I asked his permission to speak about our conversation freely and at the same time, discreetly .
 He was the man I met in the Sandinista capital, Managua . He was someone who connected closely with our Revolution. He was a key figure in our revolution.
 Brazil's president speaks with pride about what Brazil is today and its great possibilities . Brazil's advances in science, technology, mechanical industry, energy and other areas, bound up with its enormous agricultural potential .
 Brazil's president says he is ready to develop relations with Cuba . He describes the high level of Brazil’s international relations with the island nation .
 Back then time flew by quickly, but now every year is multiplied by ten, at a rate which is difficult to follow . I wanted also to talk to him about that and about many other things. Back then, he said, 'Back then time was flying by quickly'
 It’s hard to tell which one of us had the greater need to communicate ideas . It was a good idea to use the Internet to communicate with the world .
 I supposed that he would be leaving the next day and not early that same evening, according to the flight plan that had been scheduled before we met . As for me, I supposed . He would be flying early that evening .
 "What happened was a kind of contest as to how we would be using the time. What happened was ... a contest," she said . "We were going to have a lot of fun time," she added .
 Lula, astute and quick-witted, took his revenge at a meeting with the press, when, mischievously smiling as you can see in the photos, he told reporters that he had only talked for half an hour and Fidel had talked for two .
 "With the privilege of seniority, I used up more time than he did. Of course, with the privilege . Of course with the . privilege of . seniority," he said. "I used up . more time."
 He left no space for the reflection I had just finished writing the day before his visit . Truly, he left no room for the reflections he had just published on January 16 that I had finished writing .
 I told him how happy I was that he had decided to visit Cuba, even without the assurance that he would be able to see me . He took up the entire space and this is equivalent to his enormous territory, compared to the miniscule land surface of Cuba .
 As soon as I knew that, I decided to sacrifice anything, like my exercises, rehab and recovery, just so I could be with him and talk extensively . I was unaware of the urgency of his departure, he said .
 The health condition of the vice president of Brazil, according to his own statement, urged him to take off so that he could arrive in Brasilia at around dawn the next day, in the middle of spring . Evidently, the health .
 A strong and persistent downpour fell on his residence while Lula waited for the photos and two other bits of material, together with my notes . Yet another long and hectic day for our friend .
 Reducing the costs of these and other products to fulfill our commitments, to satisfy our consumption, is highly commendable . But not even in our wildest dreams can we find easy solutions to our problems, he says .
 I told him that I had seen the ceremony in its entirety and the social commitments made by the newly-elected president . I said he had also seen the social commitment made by Obama .
 Fidel Castro Ruz: "My conversation with Lula was just beginning, and I still have many things to relate"
 "We lost markets and the prices that we had attained for our products in the difficult struggle for our sovereignty, integration and principles," he says . "Not only did this translate into a total cessation of supplies of fuel, materials and foods," he said .
 The Gross Domestic Product progressively plummeted to 35 percent . The empire and the traitors, full of hatred, were sharpening their daggers with those who wanted to put the revolutionaries to the sword and recover the country's riches .
 Many left-wing parties and organizations became discouraged in the wake of the collapse of the USSR after its titanic effort to build socialism during the course of more than 70 years . The reactionaries’ criticisms coming from all platforms and mass media were ferocious .
 We did not add our voices to the chorus of capitalism’s apologists, beating a dead horse . We are not adding our voices . We were not adding their voices to a chorus of . capitalism's apologists .
 Not one statue to the creators or followers of Marxism was demolished in Cuba . Instead, the statue of the creators and followers of Marxist revolutionaries was demolished .
 Nor had we ever practiced personality cults in our country, something that we had taken the initiative to prohibit right from the first days after the triumph . That was what we had promised to do under hypothetical and unbelievable circumstances .
 Che studied the budgets of the big Yankee companies whose managers lived in Cuba, not their owners . Che used to argue with Carlos Rafael Rodríguez about the self-financed or the budgetary method, things we didn't consider that important then .
 He drew from this a clear idea about how imperialism worked and what was happening in our society . This enriched his Marxist ideas and led him to the conclusion that in Cuba we couldn’t use the same methods to build socialism .
 What happened in the USSR later would not have surprised Che, says Che . Che had open exchanges of opinions that were published in a small magazine . But this didn't mean we were dealing with a war of insults .
 "While he held important posts and carried out his duties, he was always careful and respectful," he said . "He was always very careful and always careful," he added .
 He died in Bolivia with a handful of combatants from Cuba and other Latin American countries, fighting for the liberation of Our America . His language grew tougher when he collided with the horrible human reality imposed by imperialism .
 You didn’t know him, I told him. He did not survive to experience the world of today, where problems unknown to us then have since come into play . You didn't know him . He didn't live to experience today's problems .
 I repeat to Lula that time measured in years was now flying by very quickly; each one of them was multiplying . He was modest and selfless, and he set an example both in production centers and in combat .
 When the Revolution triumphed in 1959, the United States was paying for an important part of our sugar production with the preferential price of 5 cents per pound . For almost half a century this would be sent to that country’s traditional marketplace which was always supplied, at critical moments
 When we proclaimed the Agrarian Reform Act, Eisenhower decided what had to be done . We hadn’t yet nationalized their sugar mills – it would have been premature to do so – nor had we yet applied the agrarian law of May 1959 to the large estates .
 The sugar quota was suspended in December 1960, and later redistributed among other producers in this and other regions of the world as punishment . Because of that hasty decision, our sugar quotas were suspended in .
 Our country became blockaded and isolated. The empire's lack of scruples and the methods used by the empire to impose its domination over the world. Our country was blocked and isolated .
 It brought viruses into the country and destroyed the best sugarcane . It attacked coffee, potatoes and also attacked the swine herds. It attacked the coffee and potatoes, also attacked swine herd .
 When due to these problems we couldn’t send to the USSR the sugar shipments under contract with that country, it continued sending us the goods we had agreed upon . We don't know whether they used other viruses – perhaps they didn’T. Perhaps they didn't because they
 The agreements were planned for five years . If at the beginning of the five-year period you were sending X amount of sugar in payment for goods, at the end of that period the value of their products, in international prices, was 20 percent higher .
 The sugar we export, at current prices, would only suffice to import oil that would be used up in 20 days . The sugar would only be enough to import to import .
 The U.S. subsidizes its agriculture with tens of billions every year . We would have to spend about 4 billion dollars per year to buy it. The United States subsidizes agriculture .
 It subsidizes it brutally, thus denying Brazil income for billions of dollars every year . The government denies Brazil income from Brazil, denying it to billions more .
 Lula analyzes figures on Brazilian agricultural products that are of great interest . The wealthy countries do the same with their production of sugar, oleaginous products and cereals for the production of ethanol .
 Italian way of preparing coffee costs around $5 per cup . If in that country then they charged 10 cents a cup, today they charge 5 dollars or more for an espresso .
 In Africa they cannot do what Brazil is doing. That is GDP in the United States. In Africa, they can't do that. Brazil's GDP in Africa is $3 billion .
 A large part of Africa is covered by deserts and tropical and subtropical areas where it is difficult to grow soy or wheat . The majority of Africa's soy and wheat can be grown in areas that are hard to grow .
 Fresh news arrives constantly that demonstrates the need for that constant battle . Fresh news comes constantly that shows the need to be constantly vigilant .
 The worst media of our ideological enemies are bent on spreading throughout the world the opinions of some nasty gusanillos . The media cannot even stand to hear the term “socialism” in our heroic and generous country .
 Anything new that happens in this country, whatever it happens, they should give it another name,"" he declares. "They should give them another name"
 Cuba is no longer a country in a bubble, like it was until the end of the 1980’s . For a start, Cuba is now a country that is not in bubble, as it was in the 1980s .
 The insular viewpoint is changing towards a global vision . The country, especially in the capital, is living through an accelerated mutation towards modernity .
 I think of Africa and its almost one billion population, victim of the principles of that economy . That would create limitless wealth in an idyllic world. That would be possible in the future, he says .