 The value of International Relations theory in 2 spy plane flying on a regular reconnaissance the praxis of international relations was essential to evidence .
 Never had between Kennedy and Soviet leader Nikita the two superpowers ever come so close to the brink of nuclear apocalypse . The ICS is an interdisciplinary research institution in India .
 ICS Analysis aims to encourage debate and provide informed and balanced inputs for policy formulation . It is based on extensive research and interactions with a wide community of scholars, experts, diplomats and military personnel in India and abroad .
 The stakes in the event of further escalation were much higher than the current crisis . As a result, further escalation risks are much higher, the stakes are higher .
 There are no signs that either India or China envisages a nuclear war, save between India and China . Now fast forward to the current Doklam crisis, there are no sign that either either .
 The 1962 Cuban missile crisis played out on the some rash, tunnel-eyed war-mongers in both lines of the 1962 Cuban crisis, here too countries .
 Any small escalation are nuclear armed adversaries in a pitched leading to a shooting match could easily end in a contest of political brinkmanship .
 The current crisis has comfortably surpassed the 13-day mark of the 1962 US-Soviet crisis . There is little sign of either India or China backing down to settle the dispute .
 Unlike in the Cold War there is no between the two crises, unlike in the 1950s, the crises are different . To be sure there are some critical differences, there is some critical difference .
 Most significant ideological competition between India and China was India and the two superpowers . The two countries were the two most significant ideological rivals .
 It is true that one is operating under high-pressure conditions of the democracy and the other an authoritarian state Cold War as leaders of two clearly outlined but neither sees themselves nor the other solely camps .
 U.S. and the Soviet Union were significantly limited during the Cold War . This meant that room for maneuver was through that lens, as was the case with the US significantly limited .
 In contrast, India and China today operate extensive trade relations with each other and under considerably less pressure . China has a nominally democratic relationship than the United States and Soviet Union did .
 At the least there is no mention of ‘war’ to a communist Vietnam as a close ally in the describe the context of their current southwestern neighborhood of China relationship . Pakistan as an all-weather friend and India has India has at the least mention of 'war'
 Both Kennedy and Khrushchev could of the two states, benefits from economic derive from economic derived political capital from the interdependence . Instead, they have a large trading relationship and given the economic potential they have an economic potential .
 Sensible leaders create a security risk for the U.S. was aimed at, on both sides of the border clearly understand, in symbolizing to the the adverse impact that any conflagration could have on potential economic benefits .
 Kennedy acted decisively in the face of a and China . Both the Soviet Union and the US had far more nuclear weapons than do India . For Kennedy, it was important to act decisively .
 AUG 2017 reassured electorates and his vigorous s/he is left with only a binary ‘choice of either Republican opponents that the Soviet Union a humiliating retreat or a nuclear war’ (BCSIA was not involved in any ‘offensive’ military 2017c)
 Kennedy could surely not afford yet Theodore Sorensen, one of Kennedy’s closest another foreign policy blunder, after the disastrous Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba in 1961 .
 Contrast this with the virtual absence of any fundamental in resolving critical crisis such external or domestic political needs for situations . Contrasts with the absence of a fundamental in resolution of critical crisis .
 Both these leaders now have a firm grasp over domestic affairs . Unlike in the Cold War most popular leaders in their respective there is no significant countries .
 The risks associated with the current China standoff far outweigh any benefits that nationalism could derive for the leaders . Of course generating nationalism ideological competition through such incidents always pays political pay political .
 In Crisis democratic states, leaders operate in stifled decision-making corridors with immense power . These important distinctions between the USpressures to prove their decisiveness to the Soviet standoff in 1962 and the present Indiaelectorate are important .
 Indian and Chinese leaders to reflect upon while they try to think of a way out of the current dispute . Beware of non-rational factors current dispute.
 Graham Allison’s classic book – Essence – Essence is out on sale now .
 The rational actor model is an inadequate for it to be useful in thinking about a path to tool in predicting the outcome of a crisis. meet the challenges of the Doklam crisis.
 In a crisis in which significant risks are at stake, important to the outcome of a crisis . Empathize with your adversary principles of organizations are equally equally important . Internal government politics and structures are also important factors .
 Leaders put themselves in the shoes of their rational actor may be outdone by either rigid adversaries . What may as is the case with nuclear war, it is important seem irrational from the perspective of the that leaders put themselves .
 Decision-making influenced by organizational structures or vested political rigid ideological predilections could easily lead interests to self-defeating outcomes . The U.S. should not rely heavily on organizational structures to influence its decisions .
 The Cuban crisis was that even though both sides have turned out very differently. With a camouflage things would have been different, they wouldn't have been able to do so much .
 Leaders of came extremely close to war, negotiations to India and China must keep in mind resolve the crisis by finding a common ground . Crisis situations can often lead to never stopped.
 A war, even a limited one between the two states would potentially have a devastating impact . Civilian leadership is critical been profoundly devastating, writes Andrew Hammond .
 McNamara, then Secretary of Defense, noted crisis crisis in fact since the time Kennedy took later that ‘it is impossible to predict with a high office, was the hawkishness of his military degree of confidence’
 The chiefs were game to go one up of military force will be because of the risk of a on the Soviets and therefore, enthusiastically miscalculation, misperception and inadvertence’ advised the president for a surprise air attack .
 1962 conflict between India and China was a postponed an attack as the last resort . Neither India nor China was armed with nuclear weapons . 1962 conflict was postponed because of the lack of nuclear arms .
 Adversaries should not a MAD world it is difficult if not impossible to predict the consequences of a military be left with only a escalation . War-speak must be ‘choice of either a toned down . humiliating retreat or a nuclear war’ Malleability in decision-
 'It is absolutely imperative for leaders in our history to not operate with binaries. It’s absolutely imperative . Leaders defeat in our . history’ . on both sides of the border to not . operate with binary, he said .
 With catastrophic consequences at Civilian leadership, most crucially the heads of stake neither should shut their eyes to states, should keep these overly militaristic innovative non-militaristic elements at bay .
 The Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs. showed that if the desire to avoid war is strong 2017d.d. showed it is possible it would be possible to avoid it. 2017d .
 The possibility that a flare up boundary-unconditionally-immediately-says will continue to exist as long as china/751500/ . Both India and China do not find a face-saving compromise .