 Aviation Graphic To see more of Mads' aviation art, CLICK: Mads Bangsø Aviation Art--Email him at: Madi Bangsö .
 Capt. VMCJ-2 flew the same aircraft with the same cameras under the command of Capt. Capt. Cm. J-2 . Capt. J. J.-2 was the pilot of the same plane .
 Early Spying & Bay of Pigs . Before the crisis, ""We Were Watching" and VFP-62 . Click to go to The Soviet Perspective .
 Tad Riley and Ken Jack on a two-month endeavor to get the details as historically accurate as possible . Tad Riley: Tad Riley, Ken Jack are working on the details of the Civil War .
 The VMCJ-2 RF-8A wingman and the pursuing Soviet MiG-21 and the rooster-tail of dust created by the supersonic low-level jets over a Cuban field .
 Dave Mueller researched the RF-8A's panels and camera bay locations . He worked with Riley Riley to get the flight control structures correct .
 The high-resolution VFP-62 photography directly contributed to our national security . The high resolution photography directly contributes to national security. The photos were taken at the request of President Obama.
 The memoir was never published and has been expanded to cover all of the military intelligence assets and history of the Cold War's most serious confrontation that could have led to general nuclear war . The memoir has never been published .
 Ecker's death in November 2009, he asked me to co-author a revision of his original manuscript to include more of the squadron and its contribution to world peace in October 1962 .
 Add your comments to the book via the link above or ""Email to Webmaster"" link this page . Add your comment to the comments section of the book .
 Although I've never flown a plane in my life, I'm a great fan of those guys who have, in combat and recon . I never tire of their stories of ""wearing"" a jet fighter and high speed recon .
 Whether the war was hot or cold, you hung it out for us and it's never too late to say, Thank You. Whether it was hot, cold, it was always important to remember you .
 Just a "swabby" on the deck back in '69-'71 . Just a ""swabby"" on the decks back in the '69-71 .
 Introduction Podcast #1 Ken explains how the book was written from Capt. Capt. Ken explains why the book is written from the book .
 Jim Curry's perspective of flying the RF-8A . He explains technical details of the photographic technology . He also explains what participation in the blockade aboard the USS Enterprise .
 Podcast #3 Ken Jack describes VFP-62's culture and role in the Cuban crisis . He gives more detail about the photographic technology in the RF-8A . Descriptions of what it was like working around the Crusader .
 The entire program is broken up into 6 different videos . Longer segment from documentary DEFCON 2 is longer .
 Sergei Khrushchev, son of Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchchev, U-2 pilot Colonel Buddy Brown and VFP-62 F8U-1P Crusader pilot Lt. Lt. Col. Buddy Brown . The panelists will discuss the role of U.S.
 Commander Tad Riley overflew Cuban SA-2 missile sites during the crisis will discuss their mission objectives and recollections . Commander Riley will discuss the mission objectives of the mission .
 Dino Brugioni, author of "Eyeball to Eyeball" who briefed President Kennedy on the photos taken over Cuba, will provide a dramatic first hand account of the behind the scenes activities of the Kennedy administration .
 Sergei Khrushchev, son of Soviet Premier Nikita, will give the keynote address . He is author of a book about the creation of a superpower . He will be the keynote speaker at the panel discussion .
 "VFP-62 -Supersonic Hooligans"" Article written for the National Naval Aviation Museum's FOUNDATION Fall 2011 issue .
 Ecker's Flight Suit worn on first mission over Cuba fifty years ago . Flight suit worn by Ecker .
 Dave Johnson, former F8 pilot, is a resource for the film, and webmaster of Gunfighter's Site Lt. Lt. Johnson .
 Dave Johnson VF-13 received the original copy of the ""Thirteen Days"" storyboard for his help on the real and animated flight scenes . The original storyboard was created by Dave Johnson .
 VFP-62 RF-8A on display at Battleship Memorial Park Mobile, AL . Scene from the movie depicting Capt. Capt. Jack . After many years, he gave the artwork to Ken Jack who contributed it to the park .
 "What a wonderful thought it was to know that they were waiting for us at our exit from the beach," said the author of the book . "They were waiting to be there at the beach"
 "When we did, they would radio to say that our tails were clear. And when we did . We would get our tails clear. They would radio, say that they would be clear. We got our tails out of the hole. We didn't want to get into trouble.
 The U2 flew at very high altitudes and made the first discovery of the missiles . U2 made the discovery of missiles in the early 1960s .
 There is a need for closer to the ground photographs to determine with more detail the nature of this threat . However, there was a need to . closer to . ground photographs .
 VFP-62 flew missions over Cuba and provided the photographic evidence President Kennedy needed to confront and evenutally eliminate the threat . President Kennedy was assassinated in Cuba .
 VFP-62 RF-8s flew photo missions over Russian ships coming towards Cuba to determine the nature of their cargo . The planes were also sent over to Cuba to inspect the cargo they were carrying .
 RF-8s followed the ships back to Russia when Russia decided to pull out the missiles . Russia pulled out of the missiles when it pulled them back .
 RF-8As from Navy reconnaissance squadron VFP-62, operating in several pairs of aircraft with each pair assigned a different target . The film was offloaded and developed, to be rushed north to the Pentagon .
 DFCs for Six VFP-62 Pilots Who Flew the First Cuban Missions . Lt Cdr J Kauflin, Lt CDr Tad Riley, Cdr Tad Riley and Cdr Cdr. DFCS for Six Pilots who flew the first Cuban missions .
 Enlisted & Officers Celebrating the NUC ceremony at NAS Boca Chica, Key West Florida on Nov., 1962---??,?,??Cdr. Cdr. John Sutter .
 JFK Presenting Navy Unit Commendation Award . RF-8s, Squadron, Cdr. W Ecker received the award for their bravery .
 Rare pictures of Unit Commendation ceremony . President Kennedy's Remarks to squadron .
 We only had 2 or 3 with the new 5 inch format Chicago Aerial Cameras installed, that worked . The new 5-inch format Chicago aerial cameras were installed, but they worked .
 I had never seen so many FLASH messages , and near instant supply response . I was amazed by the response to the FLASH message . It was "almost instant"
 The first mission was set for the following Sunday at 8AM, for 8 camera ready birds to take off from Key West . We got the word late Monday, and the first mission is set for 8 cameras ready birds .
 Sunny Jim Curry was a J.O. not yet assigned to a detachment . He flew test hops day and night, checking the latest tweek on camera systems . Curry was one of the first officers to be assigned to the Royal Canadian Air Force .
 Adobe photo shows VFP-62's superior capabilities . Adobe VFP -62 photo shows the capabilities of the weapon . VFP 62 was developed in the 1980s and 1990s .
 JFK presenting Unit Commendation to squadron . Use browser ""back arrow" to return to page of this page .
 Dobbs uses the film to pinpoint the location of Soviet nuclear bunkers in Cuba . Dobbs also recreates several Blue Moon missions over the missile sites in the film .
 The book, ""One Minute to Midnight"" also includes photographs of the missions of Commander William Ecker and Lieutenant Gerald Coffee . The book also includes a detailed account plus photographs .
 Coffee was commended by the Navy for diverting from his planned flight route on October 25, 1962 to take the first photographs of nuclear-capable Soviet FROG missiles . Coffee was the first photographer to take photos of the Soviet nuclear missiles .
 As a result of Coffee's photographs, the Pentagon revised its entire invasion plan for Cuba .
 It was shot on October 25 Blue Moon Mission 5010, from raw intelligence film that I discovered at the National Archives . This is the first time I've seen the film from the National Archive .
 Photos like this were part of the pre-flight testing of cameras and became part of mission film processed upon arrival back at NAS Jacksonville, NAS Jacksonville . Fleet Air Photo Lab.
 Note the film roll sprockets and technical data recorded by the camera . The film roll is rolled out of the camera's rollers . Note the rollers are rolled out and the camera is rolled up .
 Photo taken on October 25, 1962, the first day for VMCJ-2 to fly photo missions .
 USMC VMCJ-2 CMC AUGMENTATION DETACHMENT to VFP-62 EXTERNAL LINK--Interview with Gen. Tim Brown, Senior Fellow, Globalsecurity.org .
 The above photo shows VFP-62 RF-8A Bu No 145645 forward on the flightdeck . The photo was taken during the flight of the VFP62 RF8A .
 Aircraft made two night photo missions over Guantanamo Naval Base to check on Cuban activity around the base .
 Tom Cornelison wrote this insightful article for the June 2007 Jacksonville Magazine . Click on following links to the following links for more information .
 Tom provides comments from former VFP-62 pilots Capt's Ed Feeks and Newby Kelt . Tom provides the latest update on the history of the VFP 62 .
 The Photo that Averted Nuclear War-Additional information on fighter squadron protection of the mission . Additional information on the mission.
 He briefed that if either went down, flight was to return to Cecil Field . Flight was to take off from Cecil Field if both went down .
 "As we continued out over just south of the Bahamas I recognized that we were headed for Cuba," says CNN's John Sutter .
 Skipper had said that we would make some photo runs and they would be done on mike clicks, no voice commands . Skipper said that he would be making photo runs on mikes clicks, not voice commands.
 We landed at Homestead AFB and film was removed by people I had never seen before, nor have ever known again . Film was removed from the base, but film was never allowed to be taken .
 Only a few years ago Lt Hyde was found still in the cockpit in the Gulf . Lt Hyde is still in his cockpit still in Gulf, but he was found in 2010 .
 A few years ago I authorized the VFW to look at my service jacket to verify eligibility . "A few years back I authorized . The VFW will be looking at his service jacket for verification purposes," he says .
 It was only then that I discovered the Naval Expeditionary Medal award . The award was awarded to the U.S. Navy's highest ranking sailor .
 Personal accounts of the depoyment to Cuba; what life was like during the crisis . Good photos and more. Good photos of the trip .
 Voodoo gets most of the attention with no Russian perception of VFP-62's RF-8As doing much of the low-level fly-over fly-overs . Voodoo is a low-flying aircraft with a high-tech radio-raid .
 The 759th mine-and-torpedo aviation regiment on Cuba during the Caribbean crisis of 1962."--Translated into English this personal account of the little known deployment of the nuclear-capable Il-28 .
 The presence of the Il-28 in Cuba in late 1962 was the last diplomatic hurdle that the Kennedy administration had to complete before the crisis was considered over . The removal of the nuclear missiles was the final diplomatic hurdle .
 Lots of photos, a few from Blue Moon Over Cuba makes this memoir a personal historical account . The memoir is a personal account of Cuban exile .
 "When they were near our command post at a low altitude, someone opened automatic fire," says Drexler . "Someone opened automatic gunfire," he says .