 He also presented the scheme as a means of protecting Cuba from another U.S.-sponsored invasion, such as the failed attempt at the Bay of Pigs in 1961 . The scheme was intended to protect Cuba from a United States-sponsored invasion .
 After obtaining Fidel Castro's approval, the Soviet Union worked quickly and secretly to build missile installations in Cuba . The Soviet Union obtained Fidel Castro approval of the project .
 President Kennedy shown reconnaissance photographs of Soviet missile installations under construction in Cuba . President Kennedy was shown the photographs on October 16, 1962 .
 President Kennedy announced the discovery of the installations in Cuba on October 22, 1962 . Kennedy proclaimed that any nuclear missile attack from Cuba would be regarded as an attack by the Soviet Union .
 Cuba imposed a naval quarantine on Cuba to prevent further Soviet shipments of offensive military weapons from arriving there . The Cuban government imposed the quarantine in response to the Soviet invasion .
 Khrushchev sent letters to Kennedy on October 23 and 24 indicating the deterrent nature of the missiles in Cuba and the peaceful intentions of the Soviet Union . The letters were sent to Kennedy in response to the threat posed by the missiles .
 Khrushchev sent Kennedy a long rambling letter seemingly proposing that the missile installations would be dismantled and personnel removed in exchange for U.S. assurances that it or its proxies would not invade Cuba . The letter dated October 26, 1962 .
 Khrushchev suggested that missile installations in Cuba would be dismantled if the U.S. dismantled its missile installation in Turkey . The letter to Kennedy arrived on October 27, suggesting that the United States would dismantle the installations in Turkey if it dismantled them .
 The American administration decided to ignore this second letter and to accept the offer outlined in the letter of October 26 . The U.S. government has accepted the offer .
 Khrushchev then announced on October 28 that he would dismantle the installations and return them to the Soviet Union . He expressed his trust that the U.S. would not invade Cuba, expressing his trust .
 Further negotiations were held to implement the October 28 agreement . U.S. demanded that Soviet light bombers also be removed from Cuba . Further negotiations also were held .