 Kennedy announced a blockade of Cuba on October 22, 1962 . After gaining support from ExComm, Kennedy announced the blockade . The blockade was announced by ExComm .
 Khrushchev and Kennedy negotiated until October &nbsp;28, 1962, when a deal to remove the missiles was agreed upon .
 The weapons were shipped over by the Soviet Union, which had built a strong relationship with Cuba in the last two years . The U.S. had threatened the security of the United States due to their proximity .
 Kennedy responded by blockading Cuba until Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev agreed to remove the missiles . Kennedy responded to the threat with a blockade of Cuba . Kennedy blocked the missiles from Cuba until the Soviet agreed to take them down .
 Khrushchev agreed to remove the missiles on October 28, 1962 . After negotiations, the U.S. agreed to not invade Cuba and to remove their own nuclear missiles from Turkey .
 The deterioration of the relationship between the U.S. and Cuba after Fidel Castro&rsquo;s revolution led Cuba to develop stronger ties with the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union opposed the United States and saw Cuba as a strategic ally .
 Kennedy &rsquo;s decision to invade Cuba in failed Bay of Pigs invasion led to further deterioration of U.S.-Cuba relations . Kennedy&rsqui;s invasion of Cuba led to a further deterioration in relationship with Cuba .
 Communications improved between the two sides, they set up a Moscow-Washington hotline . The test ban treaty was introduced in 1963 . It was introduced by 1963 .
 Formerly, interactions between states were predicated on the balance of power, whether military or economic . Relations between states are now more likely to be based on the strength of a state .
 A state&rsquo;s possession of nuclear weapons changed the game, allowing it to influence others . But now, a state’s possession . of nuclear arms changed the . game, and changed the way others think of others .
 At the beginning of the Cold War, the US&rsquo;s supply of cataclysmic nuclear weapons often meant these negotiations were skewed in their favour .
 Study Materials for Subjects are free & expert-verified explanations . Use these images to help students with reading comprehension and vocabulary . Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on CNN iReport .
 Study Materials Create Study Materials . Create and find the best flashcards to test your knowledge of flashcards . Use these images and videos to help students understand each other's work .
 Cuba’s proximity to the USA meant that the Soviet Union now had a strategic launch pad to attack the other superpower from . The Soviet Union's proximity to Cuba means that the U.S. now has a strategic missile launch pad .
 The United States had already established their own strategic launch pad to attack the Soviet Union in 1954 by establishing a joint base with nuclear weapons in Turkey .
 President John F Kennedy blockaded Cuba on 22 October 1962, and sent a letter to Khrushchev, urging him to remove the missiles . President Kennedy blocked the missiles from Cuba in 1962 .
 Cuba was in ‘America's backyard’ and the range of the missiles shown in the map above explains Kennedy’s concern . The days that followed brought the world to the brink of nuclear war .
 Khrushchev and Kennedy came to an agreement after the Cuban government shot down a U.S. reconnaissance plane in October .
 Khrushchev offered to withdraw the missiles from Cuba in return for an end to the blockade and a U.S. pledge to not invade Cuba . Khrushche offered to pull missiles in exchange for a United States pledge not to invade Cuba.
 As an assurance, the United States also agreed to remove their missiles from Turkey . The U.S. will also remove missiles from the country .
 Khrushchev agreed to remove its missiles from Cuba on October 28 . The agreement was reached in October . The missiles were removed from Cuba .
 The Cuban Revolution took place in 1959 and changed the country forever . To understand how the two countries got to such an acute crisis, we need to look at the events leading up to it .
 Cuba gained independence from Spain in 1898, helped by U.S. intervention . US intervention helped Cuba gain independence in 1898 .
 This marked the start of the U.S.’s long-term political dominance in the region . This was the beginning of the US's long-lasting political dominance .
 From the early 1900s, the U.S. maintained a strong influence in Cuba, controlling its main export, sugar . Cuba's main export was sugar .
 Most Cuban industry was owned by U.S. businesses, and many Americans had bought land in the country .
 From 1940-44, General Fulgencio Batista ruled as the elected President of Cuba . Batista was the Cuban President of the late 1940s-1944 .
 He regained power in 1952 and ran Cuba as a military dictatorship until 1959 . After a US-backed military coup in 1952, he regained his power . He ran Cuba's government until 1959 and ruled the country for decades .
 U.S. profited from Batista being in power due to his leaning towards the United States . Batista was corrupt and oppressive and hated by the Cubans . The United States profited due to Batista's stance on the United Nations .
 During his rule, the U.S. established almost complete domination of Cuba’s economy . The number of American corporations in Cuba increased dramatically .
 In 1956, Che Guevara and Fidel Castro gathered a force of guerrilla fighters to start a revolutionary war against government forces . A seizure and removal of government and its powers by force is carried out by military .
 Cuba entered a state of virtual civil war, with the revolutionaries staging uprisings and attacks . Cuba has been in the throes of a civil war since the revolution began in 1959 .
 In the early hours of 1 January 1959, Batista relinquished his presidency and fled the country . Batista's government was overthrown in 1959 . The former president of Cuba fled his country .
 Castro resented the Americans providing aid to Batista and wanted to rid his country of United States influence . Castro wanted the Cuban economy to benefit poorer Cubans, rather than the corrupt upper classes .
 Eisenhower considered banning the purchase of sugar from Cuba, which would cripple the country . Cuba was heavily reliant on United States sales .
 He was motivated by the Domino Theory, which suggested if one state fell to communism, the neighbouring countries would follow . The theory was based on the theory of communism .
 He felt that Cuba might trigger a domino effect in the rest of Latin America . He said that Cuba could trigger the same effect on Latin American countries .
 The US regarded itself as the protector of South and Central American countries due to the Monroe Doctrine . The Monroe Doctrine, a U.S. policy that opposed European colonialism in the Americas, was a US policy .
 In Eisenhower's opinion, communism would threaten U.S. power and America’s economic interests, he says . Eisenhower: Communism would threaten United States power and economic interests .
 This plan became known as the Bay of Pigs invasion due to the name of the southern coast of Cuba where they landed . This plan was based on the name 'Bay of Pigs' and the location of the invasion .
 The plan was unsuccessful as Kennedy pulled out United States Air Force support at the last minute, resulting in all of the exiles being captured or killed . The plan failed and the exile was captured and killed .
 Cuba looked to the Soviet Union to forge an alliance with the United States . Castro's knowledge of this plan inflamed American-Cuban relations further .
 Cuba looked to set up more trade agreements with the Soviet Union on sugar and other goods . After the U.S. cut quotas on sugar, Cuba sought more trade deals with Soviet Union . Cuba was forced to cut sugar quotas after the United States cut quotas .
 Accepting Cuba’s request for help was a strategic move for Khrushchev, who was losing support at home in Russia . Accepting the request was a move for the Russian prime minister .
 He needed to be seen as supporting an endangered communist state, he says . Cuba offered the opportunity to spread communism in Latin America, he adds .
 The Sino-Soviet split in the late 1950s meant that the USSR had lost one of its valuable allies, weakening its position on the global stage . A policy pursued after 1956 of eradicating the memory of Stalin and Stalinism in most Communist areas .
 Khrushchev’s view of Kennedy as a weak, ineffectual leader meant he felt confident placing ballistic missiles in Cuba . Kennedy's failure in handling the Bay of Pigs invasion of 1961 established him as weak .
 The two leaders had met at the Vienna Summit in 1961 and formed impressions of each other from those discussions . He felt that Kennedy did not have the expertise or power to resist any Soviet military build-up in Cuba .
 Kennedy had not agreed to Khrushchev’s demands on Berlin . The Soviet leader still saw the American president as weak and unable to mount effective military resistance .
 His failure in the Bay of Pigs invasion was overridden in the minds of many . Khrushchev, on the other hand, emerged less than victorious .
 His decisions were seen as reckless, and he was seen to have bowed down to Kennedy’s demands . He was seen as having bowed down .
 This, along with his failed domestic policies in the Soviet Union, provided evidence that he was unable to lead effectively . The Soviet Union was a failed state of state in Soviet Union .
 Eisenhower forced the enemy to the threshold of conflict to gain better negotiating power . This was a foreign policy practice used by Eisenhower, which forced the enemies to the brink of conflict .
 The word originated from a 1956 Life Magazine interview with U.S. secretary of state John Foster Dulles . The word "Dulles" originated from an interview with Dulles in 1956 .
 A state’s possession of nuclear weapons changed the game, allowing it to influence others . Formerly, interactions between states were predicated on the balance of power, whether military or economic, but now a nuclear weapons possession has changed that .
 At the beginning of the Cold War, the US’s supply of cataclysmic nuclear weapons often meant these negotiations were skewed in their favour . The U.S. supply of such weapons often skewed the negotiations in favour .
 Clear communication between the two leaders had prevented the worst possible outcome . Clear communication had prevented a disastrous outcome, says CNN.com .
 In August 1963, Great Britain, the United States, and the Soviet Union signed the Limited Nuclear Test Ban Treaty . Nuclear weapons tests underwater, in the atmosphere or in space were prohibited .
 Khrushchev and Kennedy negotiated until October 28, 1962, when a deal to remove the missiles was agreed upon . The missiles were removed from the Soviet Union in 1962 .
 The crisis was a key event in the Cold War due to how close both sides were to engaging in a nuclear war . Although the crisis only lasted less than a week, it was a major Cold War event in history .
 The deterioration of the relationship between the U.S. and Cuba after Fidel Castro’s revolution led Cuba to develop stronger ties with the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union opposed the United States and saw Cuba as an ally .
 Kennedy’s decision to invade Cuba in the failed Bay of Pigs invasion led to further deterioration of the U.S. relationship with Cuba . The failed invasion of Cuba resulted in a further deterioration in the relationship .
 Khrushchev sent ballistic missiles to the country and built launch pads . Castro asked for support from the Soviet Union . Castro's paranoia about future invasions prompted him to ask for support .
 The event contributed to the ousting of Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev in 1964 . This prohibited some nuclear tests but did not stall the arms race . The event also contributed to ousting the Soviet Premier in 1964, who was seen to be reckless .
 A state's possession of nuclear weapons changed the game, allowing it to influence others . But now a state’s possession of such a weapon changed the way it could influence others, experts say .
 By the time of the Cuban crisis, the USSR had caught up in the arms race, and posed a formidable threat . The Soviet Union was in the midst of an arms race with Russia .
 A joint air base between the USA and Turkey with nuclear weapons with nuclear arms . A joint base between Turkey and the U.S. has nuclear weapons . The base is located in Turkey .
 It was based in Turkey and functioned as a strategic launch pad due to its proximity to the Soviet Union . It functioned in Turkey due to the proximity to Russia .
 He agreed to end the blockade of Cuba, pledged to not invade Cuba, and agreed to remove American missiles from Turkey . Show answer Answer: "He agreed to stop the blockade and end the war."
 Khrushchev agreed to remove the missiles on 28 October . The crisis continued until 20 November, when their removal was officially verified . The missiles were removed officially .
 An elected president from 1940-44, he regained power through a US-backed military coup in 1952 . He was re-elected in 1952 after a US backed military coup .
 Batista's corrupt and oppressive military dictatorship was wildly unpopular with Cubans . Batista’s corrupt and repressive military dictatorship is wildly unpopular .
 President Obama allowed the United States an almost complete domination of Cuba’s economy . He allowed the U.S. to almost completely dominate the Cuban economy . President Obama has been criticized for his policies in Cuba .
 Che Guevara and Fidel Castro created a force of guerilla fighters to try and overthrow him . Popular discontent led to Che's creation of a force to try to overthrow him. Fidel Castro was assassinated in 1961 .
 Eisenhower was concerned that the Cuban Revolution might lead to other states in Latin America falling to communism, like dominos . Eisenhower was worried that other Latin American states would fall to communism .
 This would weaken the position of the United States in the global power balance . It would result in them being essentially surrounded by unfriendly states . This would mean the U.S. would have to rely heavily on the support of other nations .
 Khrushchev was losing support in Russia due to his domestic policies, and had just lost a key alliance with China . The answer to the question was: 'Krushchev'
 Building a relationship with Cuba would be seen as supporting an endangered communist state, and an opportunity to spread communism in Latin America . The relationship would see the U.S. as supporting a communist state and spreading communism .
 The failure of the Bay of Pigs invasion established Kennedy as a weak and ineffective leader in the eyes of Khrushchev . The failure to defeat the Soviet Union in the invasion of the U.S. showed Kennedy as an ineffective leader .
 He felt the U.S. president lacked the expertise or power to resist Soviet desires, and wouldn’t intervene in the military build-up in Cuba .
 Kennedy was praised for his calm and firm stance in the negotiations . Khrushchev was seen as reckless and having bowed down to Kennedy’s demands .
 Khrushchev’s failed domestic policies in the Soviet Union led to his enforced early retirement . This, along with his failed domestic policy, led to him being forced to leave the country .
 Brinkmanship is a foreign policy where one side forces the enemy to the threshold of conflict to gain negotiating power . The question is "Brinkmanship" and the answer is "brinkmanship."
 Kennedy and Khrushchev established a Moscow-Washington hotline to facilitate direct communication between the two . The hotline was established in 1961 to allow direct communication with the two countries .
 Smart Formatting Create the most beautiful study materials using our templates . Use these templates to create your own study materials for the next week's study .
 Join millions of people in learning anywhere, anytime every day . Sign up for free to highlight and take notes. Sign up to highlight, take notes and share your knowledge .