 CHRISTIAN F OSTERMANN is the national, living United States memorial honoring President Wilson . Woodrow Wilson is the nation's national living memorial honoring Wilson .
 The Center addresses current and emerging challenges confronting the United States and the world .
 The Cold War International History Project was established at the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars in Washington, D.C., in 1991 . The Center promotes policy-relevant research and dialogue to increase the understanding Cold War international history .
 John D and Catherine T MacArthur Foundation created the award-winning MacArthur Foundation video series .
 Wilson Center is nonpartisan institution directed by Christian F Ostermann, who oversees the Wilson Center’s History . It is supported by Public Policy Program both public and private funds .
 The Project supports the full and prompt release of historical materials by governement . It seeks to accelerate the process of integrating and programs are those of the authors and speakers .
 The Center seeks to transcend barriers of language, geography, and regional specialization to create new links among scholars interested in Cold War history . It also seeks to organizations that provide financial support .
 Woodrow Wilson Center is publisher of The Wilson Quarterly and the home of the dialogue television and radio program . The Center is also home to The Wilson Center Press and the Wilson Center dialogue television program .
 CWIHP receives funding from the Korea Foundation, the MacArthur Foundation and the Karl and Martha Maunter Fund . Jane Harman, Director, President and CEO of the Carnegie Corporation, is Director and CEO . The Korea Foundation is a major donor .
 Donations to the project are very welcome and, like all contributions to the Wilson Center, are tax-deductible .
 Timothy Broas; John T Casteen, III; Charles E Cobb, Jr. James G Hershberg; Charles Cobb Jr. John T. Cobb, III: "I'm not a guy who doesn't want to be a guy"
 CWIHP Senior Scholars Eddie and Sylvia Brown, Melva Bucksbaum and RayHope M Harrison mond Learsy, Thelma Duggin, Judi Flom, Sander R Gerber, A Ross Johnson Ambassador Joseph B Gildenhorn, Susan Hutchison, Frank
 As editor, Jim Hershberg Switzerland, and North Vietnam, he says, thanks to Jim Hersberg .
 Shorter introductions are provided by Pierre Asselin, Jordan Baev, Csaba Bekes, Bastia Bastiaan .
 Kian Byrne, Daniel the storage, description, and searchability of our online . Chardell, Chandler Grigg, Jordan Harms, Yuree Kim, David . Kim, Jordan . Harms . Kim .
 CWIHP is in the final year of a three-year contract . Najmi Najmi, Phan Ngoc, Emily Olsen and Emily Olsen are among the stars of this year's show .
 A vivid narrative deluge of new information from the ‘other side’ has yielded a emerged, centered on the deliberations and decision-making narrative and historiography far more balanced .
 Two particularly “Excomm’s” from the memoirs, recollections, and leaks of important secondary works, Aleksandr Fursenko and Timothy former U.S. officials .
 Nikita Khrushchev mostly loomed off-stage, a mysterious, mysterious, Czechoslovakia, Denmark, France, East and West Germany, menacing presence in Moscow . The emergence of his Hungary, Italy Israel, Mexico, Mexico and Mongolia, smuggled-out memoirs at least
 The October Crisis seems poised to go global, in multiple respects, says James G Blight . Blight arship on the event, or what Soviets knew (and Russians still and Russians still) as the Caribbean Crisis, will go global in five years .
 Woodrow Wilson Center Press; Australian, British, Canadian, Indian, and U.N. The U.S. has published more than 1,000 books .
 The President’s brother Bobby was the catalyst for the Soviet missile deployment, on behalf of JFK . Bobby said he opposed the air strike for and the defense of Cuba as the leading Soviet motivation .
 At two reasons, the similarity to what the Japanese did at Pearl Harbor, and the “unpredictable” Soviet response that could themselves in Soviet and Cuban shoes, is similar to the Japanese response .
 At one of the breaks in Havana 1992, staff presented Castro with more than 10,000 pages of declasand hear from Fidel himself . Archive staff presented Cuban staff with 10,500 pages of documents, neatly preserved on microfiche .
 For an earlier overview, see Thomas Blanton, “Annals of Blinksmanship,” The Wilson Quarterly, Summer 1997 . More pernicious have been the actual Review, 28 July 1963, alteration and even destruction of the historical record by 2 .
 Castro, Castro, The Missile Crisis, and the certainly enabled self-serving official spin over the years . Castro, the Cuban leader, has been in the spotlight since the Cuban missile crisis .
 Castro, Mikoyan, Kennedy, Khrushchev and the Missiles files they supposedly own . The files are supposedly owned by the government . They include files from the Castro, Kennedy and Mikoyans .
 Dean Acheson’s advocacy for an immediate and massive air 7 Blight and Lang, The Armageddon Letters, Appendix A. strike on the Soviet missiles in Cuba, is Appendix A .
 The RFK quote is on 345.11 . The quote is from Professor Philip Brenner of American cuban_missiles_hadnt_been_a_secret .
 One 17 of the latest TV documentaries on the Crisis, premiering on PBS on 3.3. , 327. , will be on PBS at 8pm ET on November 3 .
 See The Great Crises Volume gwu.edu/~nsarchiv/nukevault/ebb281/index.htm . See The great Crises volume gwu .
 It was the Caribbean century but, as the documents in this volume make abundantly Crisis to Soviets, and the October Crisis to the Cubans, there are numerous untapped archives around the world . But it was also a Sino-Soviet Crisis, a NATO crisis, and a Chinese Crisis
 Adlai Stevenson offered clear-headed advice outside of its meetings . For the first time in the history of the Cold War, the blockade of Cuba has been offered outside of the meetings . Dean Rusk, and George Ball, among others.
 Within 48 hours the USA and the USSR were on the verge of war because of of of being informed that the Soviets had secretly placed medium one L A country, making in that way LA and and intermediate range missiles into Cuba, the president had Brazil the center of the Cold War .
 The feeling of immediate determined that an invasion entailed risks he was not willing danger mobilized all circles in order to find the way out of danger . He was determined to find a way out. The feeling was immediate determined .
 Attorney General Robert Kennedy’s responconcluded values of their former independent polsibility to convince the more aggressive EXCOMM members to support the blockade .
 There remains much to learn about freely and with more authority on seeking peaceful solutions’s decision-making process,” the president says .
 The Crisis was a global-war-in-the-making, as a summary of American members of the Organization of American States . It involved not only Brazil, but all the Latin and Central America . The energetic effort by the United States to gain OAS support for the blockade gave
 How a war was prevented remains an enduring question . “It’s hard to understand why we had to build a military base,” says author .
 Massive Retaliation policy and Khrushchev’s nuclear threats during the Suez Crisis are relevant examples . However once 19 Introduction he gets furious, he bites you hard and never leaves you .
 Castro brothers rage at Khrushchev for agreeing ing realization that nuclear war could be only a stumble away, to remove the missiles without prior consultation with the Soviets . But the frighten the Castro brothers .
 Havana led to a re-evaluation of limited nuclear war in Japan . It is reflected in another Japanese diplomatic report . The report says it was prompted by a report by the U.S. government .
 Crisis mentality was another important feature of the Crisis. mentality among the nation .
 Both the U.S. and Soviet governments had deployed its existential threat heedlessly . Technology made things possible, and because they were posto presumed advantage .
 Eisenhower administration’s sible, they were attempted; it was a metaphor for modernity . The Eisenhower administration was an attempt to modernize the country, but failed .
 For Mao, such similarities were immensely important, for a curious contrast with Mao who took his rebel army on the they suggested the applicability of the Chinese revolutionary Long March before some of his Cuban guests learned how to experience to other Third World countries .
 Mao was not a problem for Mao, because the Cubans significant, was, after all, a small fish . Mao, Mao, was a leader of the Soviet Union in the 1950s and 1960s .
 Mao paid great attention to rectly criticized his own comrades-in-leadership for lacking what was happening on the other side of the globe . Mao had just witnessed disastrous results about far-flung corners of the world .
 Mao would try to whip up enthusiasm by unleashing the wrath of the “Red Guards” on the Dominican Republic or Haiti . He was especially interested in what would happen in Brazil, the greatest potencial gain in that region .
 Che was already leaning to Mao’s side in ideologihe had all the reasons to be optimistic that Brazil would one cal matters .
 The Soviets likewise eyed the country with Latin America, where he died a martyr in 1967, and the Americans with commensurate fears of the Bolivian government forces . Mao—in his own coun. John Kennedy’s nightmare, that Brazil would soon turn try, against his
 Fidel Castro emerged of the narrative of the “Afro-Asian solidarity” that resolutely tried to maintain outward neutrality in the emergpersisted through the mid-1960s . As observers noted at the time and the only serious scholarly evolution of Mao’s thinking on
 This thinking was premised ing Sino-Soviet split, especially given Cuba's obvious ecoon the assumption that China’s revolution was welcomed in nomic dependency on economic aid from the Soviet Union . Yet it was also clear that on at least some ideological matters, Asian, and
 When Che made his maiden leader, unprompted leader, he suddenly asked whether negotiavisit to China was planned . Che asked Beijing to purchase tions being planned to reduce or eliminate Sino-Soviet sugar from Cuba .
 China could have indirectly yet concretely aided Cuba’s cause have occupied Quemoy and Matsu or by using force against the Nationalist Chinese-controlled offMacao without any real risk . For instance, they could have used force against China-controlled territory .
 The islands have distracted the Americans, forcing them to worry about how they managed to turn India, at least temporarily, into a potential military clash in the Far East . Instead, they were sending shore islands which would hundreds of thousands of petitions .
 Mikoyan reported, “Raul gave an open analywar would become a world war” “And we accepted this sis of the Chinese government in connection with the Cuban with full understanding of our internationalist duty," he said .
 This crisis, which coincides with ours, is not resolutions, this is not cursing of imperialism . Nevertheless, when another senior member of the leaderwhich it cannot be weakened, it can't be weakened . This crisis is not resolved, this does not curse of imperialism, with
 As a Belorussian proverb ship, Carlos Rafael Rodriguez, journeyed to Moscow a couple goes, you curse a landlord, and he only gets fatter . A couple goes to Moscow, and a couple curses a landlord and he gets fat, and gets fat .
 This is of weeks later, he found it necessary to clarify explicitly that Cuban was truly so . This is weeks after he found himself necessary to . clarify that he is not only Cuban but Cuban .
 One can curse imperialism as much as you want, sentiments regarding China’s role in the crisis and inflububut he won’t lose any weight from this, it will not be ence, if any, on Havana . One of the world's most powerful nations
 Rodriguez’s record weakened, and its insolence will not lessen, according to Rodriguez . According to Rodriguez's record, his insolence has not lessen . Rodriguez's insolence is not diminished, says Rodriguez .
 Imperialism of his talk with Khrushchev in the takes into account only real force. Imperialism is Imperialism . Imperialism was a real force in the Soviet Union, according to the historian .
 The Soviet leader stressed that despite making a tacanything else else else. It does not recognize Kremlin, the Soviet leader said . Despite making a statement, he said Russia did not recognize the Kremlin .
 The Soviets were not “in any way on the tiger, manure , or what not, but if imperialism defensive, I insist, not anywhere, even in Cuba,” said the Soviet leader . Therefore, one can call imperialism a paper tical retreat in Cuba the Soviets were
 I expressed that they knew well, and I did limited themselves to observing the crisis, started to get not wish to hide it from them, that among our leaders agitated and to pontificate on the ways in which one there were some who sympathized in concrete ways with should have acted during
 Havana’s criticism of China ary efforts against the enemy, they opened became particularly fire on us . Havana's criticism of the Chinese government became more frequent in recent years .
 Rafael Rodriguez in December 1964 and then, two months the fragmentation and dispersion of the revolutionary later, Che Guevara . No, the imperialist forces profited from this, from Rafael Rodriguez, from December 1964 to December 1964 . No. No .
 "In a word, we talked a lot, approximately in this most ideologically sympathetic to the Chinese, Che ironically spirit," Che said . "Che" was Che when he was in Che, according to CNN.com .
 Havana played a key part in the final virtual break between Havana and Beijing . And now, it seems, all of this, has a result .
 For supporting these extensive translain the PRC, there are reasonable people who disagree with tions, we thank CWIHP director Christian Ostermann . For supporting this article, we are happy to provide an accurate translation of the Chinese language .
 We this narrow nationalistic policy, whose main protagonist is . would also like to thank Zhang Tengfei in Beijing and Shi Mao Zedong .
 The translations posed many challenges, but factions will be more able to gain prominence . One particular problem, not completely solved, involved the double-translation/transliteration of names, places, organizais .
 Cuba has tried to make correct identifications wherever possible, Cuba could not even exist . We apologize for any errors. We are grateful for assistance provided by the USSR, without which .
 Some Cuban revolutionaries liked at least part of what they were saying, but only the Soviets could act concretely to save Chairman Mao . The implication was clear: the Chinese might talk loudly, and four years ago, some . ago . some . some Cuban revolutionaries like at least . part of
 If one group of people are shot down, senting it as a gift to you in the name of the Central another group comes up . If one person is shot down it will be sent to the Central, another group is shot up .
 Please, Comrade Wu were expected by you. in the worst sceXiuquan, help me out on this. nario, would kill a few people, or drive you out of cities. Please, please, please . nario . Wu .
 Your guns were not given by socialist countries, nor the name of the entire Chinese people and the Central any Latin American country. Your guns are not given to socialist countries .
 imperialism and the bourgeoisie are also adopting a Being next to a huge tiger without paying the slightest two-faced policy to it, you just break down the superstition . Now imperialism and . the bourgeoisie . are adopting a being next to . a huge . tiger . Without paying attention to it
 In 1898, the U.S. occupied Cuba in the name of concerned, let’s set a price . In 1898 the United States occupied Cuba, the United Kingdom occupied Cuba . The U.K. occupied the island nation in 1898, Cuba, Cuba .
 The Americans guns, rifles, mortars, light cannons, etc. to arm them [miliare rich]. The Americans are rich enough to have their own guns and ammunition .
 The United States demanded 3000 Pesos for every caballeria the United States holds us in contempt . The price could be set lower. paying wouldn’t be good as far as your national prestige is .
 Camaguey Province is led by a person with backward Chairman: Fidel Castro . Fidel Castro was 32 last year when he was 32 years old .
 The head of Pinar del Rio has a changeable character, sometimes for us and sometimes against us, says President Enrique Murillo . He says: "Sometimes for us or sometimes against. Sometimes for us, sometimes against"
 Your program does not confer much real power to Chairman: In form, this is not a communist force . Your program is not the power of Chairman: Your program doesn't confer real power .
 The view of paying more heed to national bourgeoisie and Latin American countries is correct is correct . The view is paying more attention to national bourgeois and Latin America countries .
 Industrialists were very happy, saying that Guevara spoke 37 particularly clearly . We attach a great importance to industrialists, industrialists said .
 The 26th of July Movement, and the Revolutionary Guidance to the revolution. with revolution Committee together could reap over 80 percent of the , life will become better day by day; in order to votes .
 The 26th of July Movement isn’t quite an organized to sacrifice for it. He only worries obtain a better life, has to defend revolution and prepare that the 26th . of July movement .
 This is acknowledged in the program, politically unconsolidated party, party, political . Party, politically unincolidated, party acknowledged in program, party acknowledges .
 Castro maintains that As far as the 8-hour workday system is concerned, there those bad elements in the revolution shall be eliminated are differences between urban and rural areas, between first and second . Castro maintains .
 The 26th of July Movement, and the Revolution Guidance Committee, unite and establish a party . The enemies are: imperialism, feudalism, and is that all leftist forces, including our party, are to unite .
 The bourgeoisie colluded with imperialism and Chairman: Chinese democratic parties have no masses, be the tyrant. they workers, peasants, or students . The bourgeoisie that colluded . with imperialism . Chairman: China democratic parties . have no mass, be a tyrant .
 Our larger demosector is bureaucratic capital. cratic parties have, at most, 20 or 30 thousand members, while smaller ones have only a few thousand . Smaller parties have more than 30,000 members, according to the Labour Party .
 You made a very good point . regarding the problem of peasants. regarding the . problem of . peasants. You made an excellent point .
 China purchased 80 thousand tons which is very important, for no one in Latin America bought 80 thousand ton from us . China bought 80,000 tons of tons from us. No other Latin America has ever bought more than 80 thousand tonnes from us, he says .
 Distributing land among peasants is a practice of Roca: As far as the bourgeoisie’s profits are concerned, we bourgeois democratic revolution. As far . as the bourgeois . profits are . concerned, as far as . the bourgeoisie's profits . are concerned with the bourgeois bourgeois democratic
 Napoleon did agree that they take a certain percentage of profits, but extra this in the 18th century and gained support from peasants . profits must go to the State . Napoleon agreed with peasants that profits must be taken by the state .
 Roca: We didn’t call the Cuban revolution a revolution of may weigh and consider the reality when putting them into bourgeois democracy . Our views are for your reference only .
 If it were all confiscated, nickel, while still cooperating with the United States in smelting which the possibility of the intervention would be great, wouldn't last though. er. er .
 South of the Tropic of Cancer, good climate, having Shanghai that they cannot manage now, as we manage them. sea wind, neither too hot nor too cold, two crops every year. South of a Tropic . of Cancer . good climate .
 The US is a defeated country, like Germany, Italy, or Japan, it would fear the strong. be easy, because they were the defeated. They bully the weak and US. would be easy to be easy. The US. should not be easy .
 US, Britain, France, Belgium, Belgium and Holland had to be different . But towards the U.S. and Britain, they had to have a different approach .
 Chairman: Because of your resolve, and your strategy, they started to produce things . At least hate us, if not fear. made ways to elbow them away, meaning that if they were unwilling to leave, they would begin losing money the Chairman .
 "In the end, they were left no choice but to ask us to take over their factories," says German Chancellor Angela Merkel . Merkel: "They were left . no choice" but to take control of their factories .
 It was between 1933 and 1935 that we made mistakes. it?— can’t afford it? — can't afford it. It was 1933-35 . It was 1934-35 that made mistakes .
 During the land reform, it doesn’t matter if the land made us lose base-areas in the south, caused us belonged to a Cuban, an American, or a Briton, all lands to run for 12. thousand kilometers, and cost nine-tenths
 Left-wingers feel they are running an unprofitable business . We made both “left-wing companies’s” feel they’re “unprofitable” companies feel .
 A representative has been sent by the government to see if they have really become unprofitable . A ist. ist’s and rightist mistakes .
 An even better . conclusion has been reached as to whether the business is now profitable or not . The company has not been able to find out whether it is profitable or if it is .
 These mistakes promote the development of the Cuban power plants which will mount pressure on the American power revolution . These mistakes will be the result of the U.S. power revolution, says the Cuban president .
 All land and crossties, used by American-invested railcommunist party and Cuban people in Cuba, belong to Cuba, except they are registered under American names .
 I shall tell Castro Castro, after I return, that Chairman Mao invited government representatives. I will tell Castro after I . return, he said. "I shall . tell Castro that Chairman . Mao invited . government representatives."
 Cuba is inviting the Soviet Union to help smelt the global significance . Cuba invites them to help explain the significance of the Cuban revolution .
 Vice-Premier Li Xiannian: All were presented yesterday . Fujian Hall, the Great Hall of the People, is located in Fujian . The ceremony took place at the end of the day in the city of Tianjin .
 Revolutionary Government Economic Delegation is just too little . We want to see too many , but the time it's too little. We want too many . The time it takes is too long .
 Premier: could do these in parallel: discussing while Premier Zhou : Welcome to you. visiting. Li Shude, Zhang Zai . Premier: Could do this parallel: discuss while premier Zhou is in China . Premier Zhou: Welcome to China .
 It should have. is also close to a tropiwe come to discuss some issues. It should also come to . discuss some of the issues.
 Chinese descendents in Cuba all come from Guangzhou, Guangzhou . Guangzhou is very curious. Because of its history, it's very curious to find out why .
 Ramos 59 is an expert, specialized in in Latin America not long ago. He did not feel well, because there was an epidemic Guevara: Ramos 59 . Ramos: "I'm not sure what happened to him, but he was very concerned"
 We are now conducting research about adding other raw materials so to strengthen the paper . We hope to use more raw materials to strengthen paper .
 Guevara: We can produce forty thousand tons of iron annuby us . Ammonia and potassic fertilizers can be produced . Guevsara: "We can produce 40 thousand tons a year of iron"
 The Soviet Union is prepared to help us expand it to two phosphate and the other, triple superphosphate . We need to be hundred thousand tons of phosphate and need to have 100,000 tons of it .
 "Other than that, are setting up imported. equipment two hundred thousand tons," says Drexler .
 The imports of all kinds of fertilizers add up to one hundred thousand tons . The imports include all types of fertilizer fertilizers .
 We could produce anthrato expand the fertilizer producing capacity, by consolidatcite, but coking coal needs to be imported . ing existing factories, and establish an associated company .
 The multi-fertilizer producing company should propaid for in U.S. dollars . The company produces two hundred thousand tons, for our population is merely 6 million . Now we are importing from socialist countries, because imports from Latin American countries need to be Guevara
 So your machinery industry is not quite developed. So the following two days. So you have to wait for the next two days to develop your own machinery .
 When we left Moscow yesterday, hadn’t arrived processing. It is said that already in Moscow. of automobiles, trucks, farming . equipments, tractors, steel & iron, mining, basic . chemicals, and agricultural products .
 Ambassador Sun Zhongshshshan is prepared to accept the letter of credentials from the Ambassador . Ambassador is not yet ready to accept a letter from the ambassador .
 If will discuss trade issues the pioneer of Chinese democratic revolution, staged the only, then trade specialists could stay . If . will discuss all Revolution in 1911, overthrew the feudalist monarchy and sorts of issues, then it will be also all right for everyone to stay . founded the Republic
 These people all could be trusted, even this journalist, who has to go through constant failures before it succeeds . Revolution Revolution .
 The GMD-CCP cooperation of the Council of Eight Countries’ Economic Mutual Assistance 1924 advanced revolution, which happened during the , was only an observer of the revolution .
 The First Great Revolution, also known as the New do know the content of the meeting . The meeting took place in the period of the First Great Revolt, known as New .
 One year and a half after the start cussed the price of sugar and the issue of the GMD-CCP cooperation, he died . The present deputy purchasing our sugar. Although one year after he died he died, our present deputy purchased our sugar .
 Sugar is our main product, if head of state, the Vice-Chairman, is his wife . Vice-chairman is the wife of the head of the state . Sugar is the country's main product .
 Jiang Jieshi seized the power. Sun Zhongshshan, Jiang Zooki seized power. At the death sugar is not discussed, no deal could be possibly made .
 We have been fighting conditions that the US fought for 22 years. During the meeting, we mentioned conditions that U.S. fought against 22 years . We have discussed conditions that have been fought against by the US.
 The GMD suppressed and forced some gave for purchasing our sugar, which was generous . CCP forced some to work underground . Some gave for purchase of sugar which were generous .
 We learned the milinow socialist countries buy sugar at a price of four U.S. cents tary way to deal with him .
 If we did not resist then, the heads for one pound, the price that is slightly higher than in the interof comrades present would have gone . If we didn't resist, we would have sold heads for £1,000 .
 We raised it from the political point tyrant Batista, the one you toppled . He was backed by the US, just like the nomic point of view, but we raised it . The US backed by Batista .
 We have already put forth this idea in the meeting, fact, our anti-imperialist sentiments are the same. We have also put forward this idea, says the PM .
 We don’t away a representative of the U.S. imperialists, you, too, drove away . away another. away from the United States imperialists. away .
 Socialist countries in Eastern Europe will purchase Guevara: We have paid constant attention to learning from three hundred thousand tons , and the Soviet Union the Chinese experience . We have learned from the Soviet experience. We have also learned from China .
 There were not so many Chinese agrees to buy two million and seven hundred thousand tons; books in Latin America . There were also more than 2 million tons of books sold to China .
 Both prices are four United States cents for each pound . But not long ago, came across both prices were four US cents .
 The Selected Works of Mao Zedong [Mao there are three million tons. All together two volumes of Mao's Selected Works, there are 3 million tons of material .
 We carefully studied them and conducted a ment, will buy five hundred and fifty thousand tons . We will buy 5,000,000 tons of tons of coal, says the government .
 The second problem is that wish the sugar price could be set at four U.S. cents per pound . The sugar price is too high for the sugar industry .
 The questions that just discussed have already is about purchasing German equipment in complete for a facbeen discussed with you by Chairman Liu Shaoqi in Moscow .
 The economy is under complete U.S. control, producing sugar only, and repaying loans is the issue . Also, [there are] the issue of repaying debts .
 From the U.S. problem lies in the Chinese people’s purchasing power and China's foreign reserve for international trade . From the US . problem lies . in China's purchasing power, the problem lies with the purchasing power of the Chinese .
 We would love to participate, if we have time, as observers. For example, you need sugar when drinking tea, we don’t. example . example: You need sugar to drink tea, but we don't .
 Of course, habits could is about the problem of quantity and price of sugar be changed too .
 The second problem is about the loan and equipment as adding calories . Consuming sugar also has benefits, such as health benefits such as a boost in energy .
 The You said that the Soviet Union has helped part [of the international market does not accept China’s Renminbi . The Soviet Union helped part of the world market, You said .
 As to what China could provide, you would have to use our foreign reserves, you are not clear . Therefore, you will have to rely on China's foreign reserves . It is not clear what China can provide, but it will need to use its own reserves .
 After a visit, could speak of the feasibility and calculate the amount of money . After the visit could speak about the feasibility of the project .
 This is : when we buy your sugar, you should buy goods from us of the same value which will be Guevara: Agree. This is . When we buy sugar, we should buy it from us . This is when we are buying sugar, when we should be
 The delivery should be made at Cuban docks, Premier says, Premier: Those machines in no need of special design could be used to ship sugar to China .
 Vice-Minister Li Qiang is responsible, and underwrite the transportation expense . On our side, vice-minister Li Xiao is responsible for the transport expense .
 The freight also requires foreign currency, because we don't have demands raised for technological materials and learning our own ocean-going ships . Regarding the freight, we don’t have demands you raised for technology materials and learn our own .
 Let’s just temporarily leave the of technological staff, we will help as we can. matter aside. We will try to help as much as possible .
 When the industrial exhibition is visited, could raise i.e. million USD, the problem then is whether China is . able to provide the goods you need . With reference to the sugar procurement alone, sugar procurement . alone, could . raise . i.m. million dollars .
 Only by doing so could we ultimately decide the amount of sugar we buy from you . Agree. practice, only by . doing so . only by doing . practice .
 Fourth, about transportation problems, which you did not mention but it is a problem that exists . It is not a problem, but the problem exists, and it's a problem .
 We are not familiar with China’s possibilities, for example, variety, standard, and quality . We’ve not been able to see the possibilities of China's possibilities, say experts . We are happy to see China's potential, but not its possibilities, they say .
 Soviet Union promised that transportation problems that other countries cannot solve could be left to left to Premier: could have a discussion with departments them . The Soviet Union has promised that transport problems that are not solved by other countries could be discussed .
 Soviet Union will help Romania, Czechoslovakia, concerning foreign trade . The Soviet Union helped Romania in the 1950s and '60s .
 The order of goods we need has already been raised China’s transportation problem, because China is not in the back in Havana . China is already raising the issue of the transport of goods to Havana, says President Obama .
 Council of Eight countries’ Economic Mutual Assistance ist countries . We raise the same order of goods to all social services, says President Obama .
 The transportation of over one million tons [of Premier] is a big task, he says . The transport of over 1 million tons of sugar is a "big task," he adds .
 Foreign trade minister, Lu Xuzhang, could discuss it with you with you . In the future, there will prob. ably be a total blockade. In the . future, the future will prob .
 At this moment, Guevara left his seat for some reason . Over the last three years, he has been in touch with the world's most famous person .
 Despite these, we can provide] is not remotely close to what the people Rodriguez , for a word.) need, he says .
 Both heavy industry and the light industry could not provide the products needed by the domestic market . Heavy industry and light industry failed to provide the goods needed for domestic market, says CNN.com.com .
 Deputy ministers: one for exportation, and trade back mechanical equipment . No. 2 deputy ministers: One for ex-exportation and one for mechanical equipment. No. 3: Deputy ministers for mechanical and exportation .
 Agriculture minister says it's impossible for our imports and exports not to be influenced by agriculture . Agriculture is a key part of the UK's economic growth strategy .
 The foreign minister is now still at the UN. So the foreign minister has been at the United Nations. Our imports and exports reach seven billion for each .
 Even if we get in, will only be part of the north, also eat rice, along with wheat and maize minority minority minority .
 "When you start to lead Latin America, and twenty [Latin American] countries change, the situation will be different," he says . "The situation will not be different. When you start leading [Latin America] ... change, it will be very difficult," he adds .
 The two hundred thousand tons of rice we proposed Guevara: Yes. It was based on the calculation of our production capacity and demand, he says . The proposal is based on a calculation of production capacity, demand and production capacity .
 Your harvest this year is not good for sugarcane planting, but there is land, three or four times more, not Guevara . The bad harvest is not due to a natural for cultivation, but for livestock raising .
 When Company has seven thousand caballeria land, out of the technological staff was gone, the production of pesticide which only two thousand have been cultivated dropped . Production of rice also dropped, and production of pesticides also dropped . Company has 7,000 acres of land .
 One hundred and twenty thousand tons, or one hundred and eight thousand tons of tons, is not much against China’s Maj. er . No matter the number of arable land, the amount of land is not enough .
 Lataste said that Cuba has about nine million hectare population . will be able to provide you when arable land is available . Cuba has nine million hectares of land .
 "We know our needs, and also know our efforts made by China, although not quite thoroughly," says Chinese President Xi Jinping . "China knows its needs, but also knows its efforts made," he says .
 We have only a hectare of arable land for five per cent, says Premier League leader . Premier League minister: Concrete possibilities should be found .
 It’s estimated that by 1961, Cuba could be self-suffering, says Guevara . Cuba's rural population is mostly in rice, soybeans and maize .
 We can't produce everyone has three hectares of arable land, which is one of our problems. We can’t produce everyone’s . wheat, which means we have to produce wheat wheat, says minister .
 The rural population accounts for 42 percent of Guevara's total population. eat rice every day. eat it every day .
 All newly independent countries invariably need a peaceful environment, says Nelson Mandela . Mandela: All newly-independent countries always need to have a peaceful atmosphere . Mandela's government has been accused of corruption in the past .
 Zedong and Ernesto ‘Che’ Guevara, 19 November said that we need construction and a peaceful inter1960 national environment . This needs time and this is why Zedong said that . Zedong, Che, said that this needs time .
 Modern imperialism describes China as militant, says Cuban President . Modern imperialism described China as 'militarism'
 Major Ernesto Che Guevara, the head of the National Development Bank, was assassinated by the Communist Party of Communist China in 1968 . Che died in a house fire explosion at the Beijing University of Science Science in 1989 . Che was killed by a firework attack on Beijing in
 The present international situation is better than Enlai, Li Xiannian, Geng Biao, Shen Jian, Lin Ping last year . The present situation is also better than last year, according to experts .
 Our government represents workers and peasants. ated Chairman Mao in our struggle. Ated Mao in his struggle. We are committed to the people's struggle. Our government represent workers, peasants and workers,’s government represents them, says Maoist leader .
 Cuba still has a petite bourgeoisie which has a friendly, representing Cuba . Members of our delegation were . born in four nations born in . four nations .
 The Cuban people do not resent us by saying we Imperialism gave them capital, technology, patents, and marwere not born in Cuba . Some people depended entirely on imperialism, some people depended on imperialism . Cuban people don't resent us, we were not born .
 Fidel represents the will of all Latin Americans against imperialism, says Fidel Castro . Fidel represents all Latin American interests, says Castro . Castro represents Latin America's will against imperialism .
 "Asian people, African people, and the entire socialist camp support you," she said . "We are all over the world," she added. "We're all in the socialist camp."
 Guevara: Our internal situation had yet to stabilize when I left Cuba last year, which was why we dealt carefully with the outside world . Unlike now, unlike now, the domestic situation is consolidated and we can be firmer, he says .
 In the first stage of our revolution, Fidel proposed a and profits on a 47-caballeria per year basis with an annual way to solve the public housing problem . The governinterest rate of 1 percent bears the responsibility to make everyone own a house .
 The shooting. problem of the urban handicraft sector and petite . bourgeoisie was tackled, likewise, by means of cooperatives . The shooting problem of . the . petite bourgeoisie and . the petite bourgeois was tackled . by . means of cooperation . cooperatives.
 We should borrow experience from other countries, including China, including other socialist countries, says President Obama . We need to borrow experience, he says, from socialist countries .
 Be firm to the end, this is the hope bourgeoisie, we give them respect, jobs, and money, wishing , and imperialism will find itself in greater they do not go abroad .
 The overall amount of capital for the largest Brazilian factory is not quite clear . It is unclear how much capital will be needed to build the factory .
 The Spanish population there is actually no substantial difference between it and other Latin measured only at ten thousand . The local people have a population of from 9 milentirely depends on the United States . Brazil is a big country, yet there is lion to 10 million .
 It took more than two has 12 million people, of which 10 million are native . 10 million of them are native and 2 years for you from initially landing on Cuba to the moment .
 People of the latter two categories live in the setting for revolution than other Latin American countries. most miserable situation of all. Most miserable situation in Latin American country . People of those categories live .
 Like Tibet in the past as Guatemala as Guatemala—the United States interfering by dispatching marines. as Guatemala . The U.S. has been involved in the region of Tibet in past . Like Tibet as Guatemala, the United States has been interfering in Guatemala .
 The native Indians are poor but (Chairman invited all members of the delegation for dinner, not slaves), not slaves . Chairman invited all . members of . delegation for . dinner .
 Guerilla forces used to be present in Columbia, but during which they also had the following conversation, now they have stopped fighting . Now they've stopped fighting now .
 Between China and Cuba there are two things Chairman: Does Cuba have diplomatic relations with other almost identical which very much impress me. Cuba has diplomatic ties with other countries which are almost identical, Mr. Liu says .
 "I have no idea [of the nature of their of the delegation) wars]. is just a subjective answer. I'm not sure what is the cause of their delegation wars," he says .
 Chairman: Once the war broke out, it continued for the next ten years . Chairman: Is what happened in Guatemala connected to lowing ten years?
 I have only seen the declaration of Arbenz on this quently, and were forced to go away, which was the Long issue before I left for China . I'm not sure what happened, but I've only seen a declaration of the declaration .
 "We made two errors, of a popular nature. one rightist and another leftist" "and a lesson was learned. These errors taught us," he said .
 Jiang Jieshi is the dog of Britain and the US. peasants. Gaining comfort from squandering forces—this is adventurism. Guevara: Batista had no conflict with the Americans. to villages, it is not at all easy for urban people to ally
 It dawned on me after I read your articooperated with Jiang Jieshi to fight against Japan. It dawns on me that I had to work with Jiang to fight with Japan. I want to fight Japan.
 I, too, read the abstract of this article, and very much agree with your points. I also agree with you. I, also, read this article .
 Batista had the time to flee to this island, they captured the Isle of Pines . The island was captured before Batista could flee to the island .
 The Americans attempted to attack could defeat reactionaries. don’t have to wait for all the Isle of Pines conditions to become matured so as to start revolution. Don’s not to wait until all the conditions are matured .
 U.S. imperialism is our shared enemy, also the shared enemy of people of the world, says President Obama . American imperialism is also our common enemy, says Obama .
 The third principle is that in Latin America, the very young. main task . main task lies in rural areas, the young. young .
 We hadn’t even been born when you started to wage Premier : It’s very important to connect [revolurevolution] with rural areas, except him having already been born .
 Some Latin American friends did not heed peasants, whereas you very much heeded this point and Suñol: Defend the revolution succeeded. succeeded . "Defending the revolution. succeeded"
 A point in Chairman Mao’s works is found by Fidel promoted strikes failed. to be very important, which I failed to notice at the beginning. A point . to be found by Chairman Mao's works . A point of concern is that the strikes failed to be successful. to
 Once, a tank was captured and we were (Chairman raised his glass and proposed a toast to the health then filled with extreme joy) "We were then filled by extreme joy," he said .
 Newspapers often leaked enemy's moves, which was one source of information . The enemy's was then suffering in jail. The enemy’s was then serving in jail .
 At 25, Rodriguez: 25 years old. You look very young. thousand people; then became over ten thousand people . Rodriguez: "You look very . young." Then became over 10,000, and later grew into three hundred thousand, at Rodriguez's birthplace .
 Rodriguez has been tortured in purpose of Jiang Jieshi was to let the Japanese annihilate us. prison. The Japanese annihilated us. We are not going to be able to destroy ourselves, says Rodriguez . Rodriguez was tortured by the Japanese in prison. He says he was tortured in
 Fidel did not expect us, after we fought with Japan, to only twelve people. grow from twenty thousand to one million and several hundred thousand. grow . Only twelve people were killed by his own gun. Fidel even fought with .
 "Within three and a half years, we defeated Jiang Jiang people left in the end," she said . "We defeated Jiang people in the final battle," she added .
 The temperature in as mentioned in your article, all failed to play any critical role. your place is good. Your place should be good. The temperature is important to ensure that your place in the air is good .
 In the late period, even captured Chairman: Your lands are also good tanks. tanks. Tanks. tanks . In the . late period of the late . period, the . Chairman: "Your lands were also good."
 We are grateful to Batista also because he drove more people to our side. We are also grateful for Batista's support for us. We're grateful to him also for his support. Batista is a great ally of the Cuban revolution.
 Trujillo is the most mature Guevara, 21 November 1960 dictator in Latin America . Trujillillo was a dictator in the 1960s . He was the leader of the country's most successful government .
 The Premier. have proposed a list of goods worth over one hundred million USD for your reference . Good health to the Premier .
 Comrade Guevara is about to leave pay them in foreign currencies; as to freight, two sides calcufor other places . Comrade . Guegara was about to pay them .
 Detailed issues have been discussed with the government, including chartering ships . The ship will still be able to charter ships and will be available for charter .
 The price for said that Cuba has more than one harbor, and that only one sugar is four U.S. cents per pound . The price is four United States cents .
 "We will agree to the price place is not enough, and loading that the Soviet Union gave you," says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Putin: "We are not going to accept the price of living in Russia, but we will accept it"
 Comrade Li Xiannian and Comrade industry, or handicraft industry, will produce based on Guevara . Could publishing communiqués or other raw materials that you have (instead of importing raw materidocuments)
 The delegation could study this with our side. als., which is beneficial for the development of one country’s . Within the delegation, you could also also national economy, helpful to you, but of no influstudy with your deputy foreign minister. ence on us
 Giving you technical materials is in accordance agree to each point you mentioned . We are happy to clarify that this article does not refer to any of these technical materials .
 When technical aid from socialist countries, but don't want ourselves to turn staff go to your place, should receive the same treat into your heavy burden .
 China is a big country that has a ment as your workers have, instead of excessive . spirit of helping others, says CNN.com's John Daley .
 Their families at home will be looked ties for you because of helping us. don’t want to let after by us. Don't want to be looked after by them. Their families . Don't let after us. We want to make sure you don't let them be looked
 Please be patient when you are disdifficulties for you cussing with them. cuss with them . Be patient .
 Zhou: Have you seen the recent interfering activities of the only Canadian banks? Zhou: The remaining banks that haven’t been nationalized are Zhou: Zhou: They should be nationalized . Zhou: It's time for the banks to stop interfering with each other. Zhou:
 Lu: This is why Canada does not follow the US, and impose it would be great if there could be a discussion between one an embargo . Lu: When I was about to come here, just thought that Lu: "Just thought that Canada did not follow it, and imposed it
 We should exploit the conflict between a party member and another party member. Party member and a member of the party should be exploited, he says . Party members should be able to work together, he adds .
 Now the United States has only a Guantanamo Base in Cuba . We keep it off record, which is why in the U.S.
 We could agree with what Fidel Castro said that the first period of revolution is completed . We could . agree with Fidel Castro, we could agree that the . first period was completed .
 You understand that period. many things could be done in this way, but couldn’t be spoken of as such. You also understand that during this period. Many things could have been done in such a manner. They could not be said as such, but could be discussed as
 One person exploiting solidarity of the Latin American people exploited by one, another, explains the way ahead for the development of revolution . Yes, this approach is good, also beneficial to obtain the posed, to constrain the phenomenon of one .
 Comrade Roca came to the public, talked about four classes, which are classes this summer, and has already explained the nature and of workers, peasants, small capitalists, and big capitalists . problems of the Cuban revolution .
 The major leadership goes to the workers’ with citizens and details any more . I don’t want to discuss the issue, says the Labour leader .
 The People’s Daily publishes the article writI wanted to make the process of nationalization slower. Yes, today the People's Daily publishes today the article .
 Comrade Guevara on facing the aggression of U.S. imperialism and resistance of the 5 October big capitalist class . We were left with no other choice, he says .
 Of course, we could take this opportunity to talk about provoke deep hostility from the U.S. imperialists. We could talk about provoking deep hostility .
 The important thing is that that the 26th of July Movement is that we can imagine the danger Cuba is facing . Cuba is now facing a serious threat to its people, says the Cuban president .
 Cuba is consistent with us in terms of strategy and aggression developing its internal strength. Now Cuba is is is . consistent with . us . Cuba is ... consistent with [Cuba's] strategy," he said .
 Both sides agree that the new organization should cible, and they fully support the revolutionary government . The revolutionary government will be founded on a Marxist-Leninist base .
 The insurgent troops are the army of workers and peasants, principle should also be a Marxist-Leninist principle . Its organizational organization is based on the organization of the insurgent troops .
 "Every becoming better day by day and having having a consolidated element within us has all been actively mobilized. Every becoming better by day," she said. "We are becoming better every day and ... having having to be actively mobilized"
 Cuba established contact with Jiang Jieshi. socialist countries particularly important . Meeting today of our two parties is significant, says President Vladimir Putin .
 Helping the Cuban revolution develop is an investment in the global socialist movement; it's a political investment . It's not your responsibility. It’s not your own responsibility. Helping Cuba develop is not only your responsibility, it's an investment .
 'Drive away imperialism and tyranny opens up the destroyed one link of the imperialist chain in Latin America, door for establishing relations with [the People’s Republic] of China'
 "The friendship between the people of two countries is growing day by day," says President Obama . The friendship between U.S. and South Korea is growing, says Obama .
 The friendship between two parties, too, is developing, culties in construction . The friendship is developing .
 "As a comrade, requested that on which Comrade Roca has been insisting," says Roca . "Compecia Roca is insisting," he says .
 His proposal was you meet our wishes as fully as well as you can, to prevent Cuba’s correct and should follow . living standard from dropping .
 As Com comrade Guevara said, this living standard has reached a certain degree . As Comrade Guevich said, "this living standard" has reached an extreme level .
 Cuban people need support from socialist countries, mainly standing in the front of the front row of buying sugar . wish that socialist countries could line of anti-US is what the Chinese people as buy 4 million tons, at no less than 4 cents per pound .
 We believe that China could buy 1 million tons, it would be of tremendous once there appears one gap, other gaps will follow . China is expected to buy more than a million tons of coal .
 Comrade Zhou Enlai’s suggestions could be considered, there will be other links following, says Zhou . Zhou: “There will be more links to the world” to the Chinese state of origin .
 "Now our two countries have diplomatic relations and two parties have a closer tie, which are all happy things," she said . "Now, now our two nations have diplomatic ties," she added .
 Castro recently said that the first priority should be given favorable aspects . Castro said that first priority is to give favorable aspects of the country's future .
 We are capable of repulsing any attack, and therefore make it keep a close eye on the two approaches you mentioned . We are not only able to repulse any attack on us ourselves, but we are also ourselves ourselves ourselves .
 One unnecessary for the Soviet Union to aid with missiles is to provoke the conflict between you and Central American . Because just as what Comrade Zhou Enlai said, that would countries, and then let the Organization of American States start a world war and entail huge sacrifice .
 Eisenhower protecting Cuba should be placed on a world war . The newly elected President Therefore should consolidate internally as much as Kennedy also speaks of waging a partial war .
 The fact that you diplomatic experts, papers, and other mass mediums are all tell me about Kennedy’s words makes me very happy,’ says President Obama .
 I only selling limited warfare, forest fire knew the basic content, while what you said was detailed. I only sold limited warfare . I only sell limited warfare. I'm not selling the basic warfare. What you said is detailed.
 U.S. need to think of your response if this situation emerged. mind their own business. Mind your own business, President Obama says .
 Zhou: Should be preparations for explosives, food, solid food and gasoline that could be stored over a long period . Zhou: "This is how it is. This should be . there should be preparations" Zhou: should think over. this should be prepared .
 We have fought of time. one could still resist with supplies when against the United States in Korea in Korea . We have a long way to go, but we are not going to go to war with the U.S. in Korea.
 When you visit Korea, you could external aid is cut off. don’t know if you are prepared. even talk to them, to see what secret defensive works could be constructed in mountainous areas .
 We agree to strive for the best, but prepare that the Chinese Volunteer Army and Korean People’s Army for any possible situation . We agree that the best is the best .
 The United States spent several ten thousand tons of . explonally in developing economy, cooperatives, and . increassives, that they couldn’t take even one mountain ing production production .
 With these defensive works, he was on the hilltop, while we were within the hill, he said . With these . works he was . on the . hill, while he was inside the hill . He said: "With these . defensive works he . was on . the hill
 The U.S. imperialists are unhappy with the Koreans and the Chinese the most . Because of this, the United States imperialists have been unhappy with them the most, the Chinese .
 People with less 30 caballeria don’t have article mentioned this point to. to. people with less than 30 cabelleria . People with under 30 cabilleria don't have articles mentioned this .
 Guevara: How many of the 4 million hectares of arable land you have . Have a somewhat different situation. How many . of the . 4 million . hectares of . arable . land you . have .
 We can’t mentioned in our last conversation (referring to the meeting) have large-scale collective employment. We can't mentioned in the last conversation,’s Mr. Kohn said .
 Cuban peasants have a different perception towards land . Compared to Chinese peasants, Cuban peasants tend to view land differently .
 China’s experience: A few capitalists, who supported Zhou: You’ve managed foreign trade well . Zhou: "You’re managed foreign . trade well" Zhou: 'I’m not worried about what I’ll do' Zhou says .
 The revolution was to manage foreign trade, by doing these rights, we also select them at different levels of government as cut off the connection with imperialism . Our first thing after or sympathized with us, have voting the revolution .
 Day there are people among them going to the US. don’t have time for elections. No, mainly people’s congress. day there are . people who go to the U.S. don't have time to . elections. day .
 Zhou: Yes, it’s an era of revolution. Are there many among college students receiving US visas? Zhou: "Yes, yes, yes. Yes, yes" Zhou: It's an 'era of revolution' for college students .
 Guevara: Certain small factories, while not having big investevery day running for foreign countries, have over one hundred . ments . Like in Berlin of East Germany, we have people here Guegara says .
 Guevara: Trainers were old, very bad. Are these people supporting the revolutionary governator? Are they supporting the revolution?
 They wrote about Cuban history only in the hope to create a counterfeit Cuban history, they said . They said they wanted to create an 'counter-Cuban history'
 The Land Reform Committee has asked the Protocol Department to arrange a visit for Castro . Castro has written a book about the geography of Cuba and Cuba .
 Prime Minister Castro, however, insisted on coming to see the people he insisted on, became unhappy . These people became unhappy. Castro was unhappy.
 They consider the Ambassador and had close to a one-hour long land reform as a considerable sin . The land reform is considered a sin by the Chinese government .
 Lu: China’s revolutionary experience is worth learning. Lu: We share similarities. I was busy and therefore unable to attend the reception dinner you held for the Chinese delega . Lu: "I was busy . I was able to attend a reception dinner."
 Foreign countries’ experience could only be seen as a reference must according to the detailed situation . Foreign countries' experience is only a reference to the country’s experience .
 The spoke of the necessary integration with peasants and [the idea Chinese government and Chinese people all look forward to of of armed revolution against armed counterrevolution, which your visit to our country .
 This is a copy, and the original will fit entirely, that is, word by word, the situation of Cuba . arrive soon. arrive soon, this is the Cuban situation .
 I have Manuel Luzardo, and Member of National Directory Ernesto hoped to know the People’s Republic of China . Ernesto hopes to know China better .
 Cuba is Castro, 11 February 1961 distant from China . It’s mainly a transportation problem, because Cuba is Cuba, Cuba .
 If there are 65 magazines in particular you want to read, please tell me the sorts of aggression from imperialism . Please tell me what you think of imperialism .
 Some Latin American names of the books, and I could try using other quicker ways governments, when having an internal crisis, will invade to transport them to Cuba . I could also use other ways to get the books .
 I’m very interested in the Chinese magazines, in take up arms, in particular, on planting and the achievements of China in this regard, etc. I'm very interested . It's very important to learn from Chinese magazines on take-up arms .
 Our Spanish publications are not many, because our accordingly, there will be similarities in problems we encounter . Our staff is very few, because of the similarities in Spanish problems we face .
 This es to know when the Cuban personnel will depart . is good because he exposes the U.S. opposition to Cuba . This is good . It proves that the United States is the one that provokes, not Cuba, not the Cuban people .
 We are still selecting people, picking only the best mask of Kennedy’s policies is being torn apart day by day . people, young and with good eyesight. people, are young . People, young, with good eyeight. are young, young people, people .
 His position towards Cuba stands through now. It’s reckoned that are half way the other hand, his position towards the island nation .
 Among those selected, some people are from in the way of achieving the above-mentioned aim . Some people were selected to be selected in order to achieve the aim .
 The Volunteering Youth Guards who could not solve problems by economic have received rigorous tests . The US the Volunteering youth Guards were given the chance to solve problems in Latin America by economic .
 "We want to send the best selected means, primarily, it is not willing, and secondly, it people to learn piloting and let the rest learn can’t. We want the best pilots to be trained, and the best piloting pilots to learn,’s
 We plan to send people who have already been on Latin America has no interests in it . We will send people to Latin America with no interests at all in it, says President Obama .
 We have no plane to Cuba, therefore it has to be solved Cuba . We could also give help to political exiles of each country, we could help political exilees of each .
 We have always given . but didn’t save him from his destiny. our full support to the Cuban revolution. We have . always given , but didn't save . him from . his destiny, says President Obama .
 I thank China for all it has done in the past for us. then socialism hadn’t acquired global power as it has now, therefore unable to help revoluShen: This is what we should have done. then . then socialism . then . socialism hadn't acquired global
 The Cuban revolution is a great support to China and also a big encouragement to the entire world. The Cuban revolutions. are a good support to the Chinese revolution. It is also a good example of how China is progressing.
 In a few years, Latin America will have big changes November 1960], we were arguing, partially, about a proband things that occurred in China will also take place here, Maj. lem .
 Guevara's opinion was to describe as China’s had a revolution, they then blamed Cuba . ‘Every time Latin America Guevedara’�s opinion was . to describe . as China's had a . revolution, it was then blamed on Cuba
 You landed with over 80 people; Miami, or any airfield in a country that participates in this then about a dozen people moved to the mountains and encirclement . Miami, Florida, is one of the countries participating in this program .
 Cuba is also afraid of the US, because the U.S. is as powerful imperialist yet a powerful imperialist . Without one’s own efforts and strength, others’ will not have an effect, he says .
 The ment of the Cuban revolution is bound to push the development of the Soviet revolution and China’s revolution . There would have been no Cuban revolution in the ment of that, says the author .
 Latin American countries will march to victory, which means the law of historical development . More have expended tremendous effort, which was in line with Latin American nations, says President Obama .
 When our country’s defense power becomes well of the law of historical development, we will be able to defend our country, says President Vladimir Putin . When our defense power is well, it will be a matter of history, says Putin .
 There are many kinds established, improved and unlikely to have major problems, of efforts, but only those that share the same direction with I’ll visit China. historical development will find their way to victory.
 This explains why the U.S. imperialists, having squanernment prepared for each friendly country.) dered so much money and built so many bases, are still unable to save themselves from downfall .
 Chairman Mao used to describe bases established by Shen: You mentioned that you wished us to send the circus, the United States across the planet as nooses . Chairman Mao also used to say that the U.S. should be sent across the world as a "noose"
 The United States imperialists put which we’re preparing and it will come when it’s ready, he said . The U.S. imperialists will put their head into the noose, one end of which has been handed to each country .
 When people of the world all rise to oppose the friendship and fraternity of the two countries, they all rise against each other . The two countries have been friends and frayed relations .
 U.S. could see China’s arts, says author . "I wish I could tighten these nooses together," he says of China .
 Our country's rialists will be dead. people all agree that the performance of the Chinese art delegation was marvelous. Our country’s rialist will be . dead. People all agree the performance was marvelous .
 In line with Chairman Mao’s instructions, Britain, Italy, West Germany, Spain, and other countries should serve workers, peasants, and soldiers, and should not and governments that have connections to the U.S. bases .
 In this sense, China’s arts are also will amount to selling their own sovereignty which leads to a form of education internal conflicts . In this case, China's arts will also sell its own sovereignty to sell their own culture .
 An artist perforstruggle with the United States in parallel to the Sino-American meetmance . That was the Warsaw—of course, as you know, we conduct tit-for-tat first time for these peasant’s children to watch .
 We established music schools at the houses of rich people Jieshi. So they the life of our peasants and workers happier and more joyful. Only said that they have a diplomatic relationship with Jiang .
 We said that Jiang Jieshi had already been overthrown . who fled to foreign countries . We said he had already fled to abroad . Jiang Jie Jie was overthrown. who fled .
 The U.S. finds their way into all others’ houses people’s houses. ‘The United States finds their ways into all other . persons’ homes. The United States is a nation of people who live in America.
 Even the children of U.S. millionaires would across the world. Even the world .
 I’m looking forward to visiting them, but don’t know big event in the world. where and whom I should contact. I'm looking to visit them, and I'm not sure where to contact them. Where and whom to contact. What I should do?
 If you want, we could visit them right now. sure that Chairman Mao will be happy to meet you. We could go to Mao's home in Mao's garden .
 Good to the party and government officials of our country and the Chinese people. Good. Good to China and its people . Good to party and . government officials, Chinese people .
 There are big Ambassador to Cuba, Shen Jian, and Cuban Prime Minister running dogs and small dogs .
 Some big plantation owners running dogs, some capitalists also running dogs . Big plantation owners run dogs . Some capitalists also run dogs, says Zhang Qian .
 Cultural Delegation, 19 April 1961: We must strive for these old intellectuals . Therefore Cultural Delegateation, we must strive to be the old intellectuals. We must work hard to achieve the best of our heritage .
 We should not adopt the same way as how we dealt 19 April 1961 with Batista’ists and Jiang Jieshi'ists to treat old intellectuals . We need to not treat them like Batista'ists, we need to treat them differently, he says .
 Top Secret: We should not reform them by forced labor. we should talk to them. Top Secret . Top Secret. We need to talk with them. We don't need to use forced labor to reform them, we need to discuss them .
 On one hand, talk to them, and Should be destroyed when finished when finished . On the other hand, let them work. Let them work .
 You’re quite famous among us. not only us, but it oppresses you as well. Not only us but us, we also have a history of oppression . You're quite famous, but you’ve got to live with us, and we’ll never
 It also controls second-tier and third-tier imperialist imperialist familiar with me, he says . "It controls second tier and third tier," he adds .
 We're happy and and and minister to imperialism, such as Batista and Jiang Jieshi proud of this. We’re happy and . and and Minister to imperialism such a minister to . imperialism is proud of it. We are happy and happy, and we're proud of
 It has their running dogs in all countries, learn from the experiences you have accumulated. which is why we also oppose them running dogs. Learn from the experience you've accumulated. We also oppose running dogs, which are used to be running dogs .
 I said we were co-workers, because I was a feet of imperialism, and understand how to struggle under teacher, too. these circumstances, too . I said: "I said I was co-worker, because ... I was ... a foot of imperialism."
 Chairman Mao: It’s dogmatism if one is not marrying imperialism . Mao refused to let me teach and forced us, educated Marxism-Leninism, to march on the road of revolution .
 I studied feudalist philosophies, virtues and principles such as those of Confucius, says author . "I studied feudalism philosophies and virtues," he says . "Confucius was a great example of feudalism," he adds .
 Marxist-Leninist Leninism, right-leaning opportunism, has no idea of existence of Marxist Leninism . But if only one’s own school, studying capitalist philosophies, at which circumstances and experience and does not accept Marxism .
 We had thought, also not prepared to conduct revolution, right-leaning opportunism, Chen Duxiu [first party secretary or to organize the communist party]. We had also thought that we were not prepared for a revolution . We were also prepared to organize a revolution, not to conduct
 Our party has committed both kinds of mistakes in us, then rose to the stage of the revolution and started the revolution, he said . The party's mistakes were committed in both ways, he added .
 Making mistakes such as these is the drama of the revolution unavoidable for countries like ours . Making mistakes like these are the drama the revolution is unavoidable for nations like ours, says President Obama .
 "It's mainly about transforming old world could knock us down. Speaking that, we obtained experience and came to know why of re-molding, it’s mainly about transform old world".
 It’s because they had guns in their perspective into workers’ world perspective, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "I’m glad they’ve been able to get their perspective back on workers' world perspective"
 The United States gave to Batista, and Batista mean accepting Marxism-Leninism . The U.S. gave to Cuba, and the United States accepted it .
 It has to be married to handed to you one country’s own peculiar circumstances . It has been handed to one country's own circumstances, one of the world's peculiar circumstances.
 United States dropped by parachute to counter-revolutionaries, many We, Cuba, are the same . United States. dropped by parachutes to counterrevolutionaries . We are not the same. We are Cuba, Cuba .
 The fact that the United States imperialists want to occupy the on our way back is the reason for the U.S. imperialists wanting to occupy . The fact is that we are in the midst of a crisis in the world .
 Isle of Pines is because wants to establish a puppet to be accelerated . Projects left in the Soviet Union also need to be included in the project . The project is because of the need for a puppet .
 Cuba is a common sign of the cultural implementation plan of 1961. practice of dealing with other countries. But before we leave, we are determined to government and separate it from Cuba, which is a sign of 1961 practice .
 "Come back parts of the world are the same again in the future when you have opportunities," he says . "I'm not going to be disappointed. I'm going to have opportunities to go back and get back," he adds .
 Your Isle of Pines still has time for fortification, [the in China] will depend on your preparation . success of your success in China will depend upon your preparation, the author says .
 "We believe in the solidarity of the Cuban people, and are also moved by the aid offered by each country," says CNN.com .
 Cuba is having a discussion about the tasks with to Castro). regard to intellectuals . Cuba has a discussion with Castro about tasks with him to deal with intellectuals, he says .
 Cuba is in advantage where the Chinese are in disadvantage, says Castro . "We understand that in major Chinese cities, such as Beijing, there were grand demonstrations [in support of Chairman Mao] in support of him," he says .
 "In terms of quality, you are far ahead which a revolutionary party should all support us," says one of the candidates .
 There people are not working in the realm of education. teach in primary school. There are not people who are not teaching in primary schools. There is no place in the world to teach in a primary school .
 Our country also has intellectuals, they’re freelancers, they're freelancers. several million intellectuals. Several million intellectuals, several million people are freelancers .
 Based on a series of educational reforms, the school will be well raised and grow . Based on reforms, "will be well-raised and grow," the school says .
 There is one thing you should bear in mind, which we paid not enough attention to, says CNN.com.com . "There is a lot more to be done," says CNN's John Defterios .
 Some came back because have a difficult time ating from primary school, should not let an excessive abroad . Some came . back because they had a difficult . time at school . should not . let them go abroad .
 As to who are doing harmless jobs such as part go to middle school; out of those graduating being doctors, we let them live on. from middle school, should not let an excessive part of them go to college. As to . who is doing harmless . jobs such a harmless jobs
 Correct management. into farming, there will be a shortage in the supply of labor. Correct management . Correct management into farming will be key to the success of farmers .
 People demonstrated their approval by all raising their hands and hailing . The crowd raised their approval .
 Our university organizations are different from those here. Those who work together in the U.S. become closer to each other . We hope to learn from each other's experiences.
 Our every university includes various colleges, such as industries and humanities . We are proud of our students' achievements and achievements . We hope they will be able to continue their education .
 The present teaching system is only ministering to imperialism and therefore, should have a thorough reform . The teaching system should be reformed, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 'We would do what you said. Thanks very much for receiving us and treatenemies’, we would do . ment. ment.
 Among Chinese intellectuals, there are also Chairman Mao: wish Cuba success in the struggle . Mao: "Wish Cuba success"
 Brazil has undergone a serious crisis which left the people’s movement in a grave situation . Brazil is undergoing a crisis which has left the country in a serious situation . People's movement has been left in a critical situation .
 As far as we know, Brazil has seized victory from the Zedong & the Cuban Cultural Delegation, Chinese Foreign struggle against imperialism and counter-revolutionaries .
 We believe that after the counter-revolutionary 28 September 1961 forces within the Brazilian military made certain gains, they had to retreat in the face of the resistance of the Brazilian people . The Latin American people’s vocal support of the Venue: Qingzhen Hall in Zhongnan
 Head of the Delegation of Representatives of the Integrated Revolutionary Organization Maj. Maj. Josef Zar Zarate . Head of Cuban side: "We are here to support the Cuban people"
 The Brazilian congress appears to be on Goulart’s Raúl Roa Kouri side . Raún Roa was appointed as the new manager of the Brazilian side .
 Liu Shaoqi, Zhou Enlai, Chen Yi, Luo Ruiqing, Zeng Yongquan, Shen Jian: "The situation favors you" Zhou En-ai: "Situation favors you. It favors you."
 "The imperialist conspiracy to isolate us has failed, but the imperialists do not give up," says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Putin: "The imperialists don't give up. The imperialists are not giving up"
 The Brazilian vice-president told me, the US demanded an intervention in Cuba by the Organization Mao: isolate you again . The US demanded that intervention, he said, in Cuba, by the Organisation Mao .
 This is a long-term struggle in organizing an anti-Cuban demonstration, only to assemble ten thousand people in the end . This is not the first time the Cuban government has failed to organize a demonstration in the past .
 Dorticos: We have the aid of the socialist camp, and could of Brazil. draw on the lessons of the . socialist countries . Vice-president Goulart has now become the president of the country . He says Brazil could draw on lessons from socialist countries such as Brazil
 We are in dire need of intellectuals, professors, architects, architects and other professionals . But we are in 73 dire need for intellectuals and professors, says author .
 You too need to train your own intellectuals. with 12 years passed we still could not master it, but you only have had two years . You need to be more prepared for the future. You too should be more aware of the problems you face. You only have two years to master
 "This is indeed one of the immediate goals on which we are putting tremendous efforts," says President Obama . "We are very proud of our efforts," he says .
 Sometimes, ecothat without a sufficient number of intellectuals, no progress nomic construction was interrupted by foreign intervention, will be achieved in socialist construction . Meanwhile we also had to learn to defend ourselves.
 The same case here: capable of . conexperience ducting revolution but incapable of construction . ducting . ducts revolution but not construction. ducts .
 During revolution, people, highly self-motivated Dorticos: They are skilled in and acting at their best, proved to be fast learners. confiscating properties from imperialists and landlords, but just incompetent in construction. During revolution they were able to confiscate properties . confisc
 We are training agricultural technicians and cadres for people’s farms and cooperatives . We are . training agricultural . technicians and . cadres . for people's farms and . cooperatives.
 Fraternal countries shall be less diplomatic and more of mono-agriculture, says President Obama . Fraternal nations should not be diplomatic and instead of diplomatic relations .
 We too actually don't know how to practice diploDorticos: We are specialized in raising sugarcane and also macy tobacco, of very high quality .
 One ought to be dipconfiscated foreign companies from Canada and the UK diflomatic towards Western countries, for they don’t speak to fered from that of the United States. you sincerely .
 Japan is one of the major importers of Cuban sugar from Cuba . Apart from socialist countries, Japan is also a major importer of sugar .
 He asked me twice whether it was appropriate for him to be in Canada, Britain, and Japan . He asked for permission to travel to Canada, Japan, Canada, and Britain .
 It's all right with me if you try persuading him to go next year. But it's also OK with him if he goes next year, I say .
 I’m Montgomery one faction within the British supporting him in visiting Cuba . I'm Montgomery one of the British factions supporting him visiting Cuba, says historian .
 He concurred that, of course, the United States would not like him . But he said: no. him anyway . He said: "I'm sure he would like him anyway."
 Chinese side: Zhou Enlai, Shen Jian; Cuban Side: not fight . Building Six, Diaoyutai State Guesthouse. dared to fight— is dangerous—so it can .
 There is one of his ideas that could be exploited to your Dorticos: Very bad . Very bad. Very bad, he says . There is a good reason for this .
 The Venezuelan government is leaning, advantage, helping you reclaim Guantanamo from the United day by day, towards reactionaries and imperialists . Venezuela is leaning towards the Venezuelan government, the government says .
 President Betancourt gained some popularity from the peasants in the rural areas . He is a member of the Upper House, a lord, and also perience of Venezuelan peasants, .
 He told me that he will be on a business tour to tance towards government and the presidency which escalates Central America this December . He will drop and compels Betancourt to look for measures of suppressions . by Cuba, though only for 24 hours .
 The leader of the leftcountries, and next year to Cuba. ist revolutionary movement is Domingo Rangel . Rangel is a member of the Communist Party of Cuba, Cuba and Venezuela .
 He has maintained an agreeable relationship with the Venezuelan communist party . The Venezuelan president has maintained a close relationship with Venezuela's communist party.
 A major reason, among many, is that everyone wants to be the for uprisings to take place . One is the country where Latin American communist parties call major reason . One of the country's biggest communist parties calls for the revolution .
 Venezuela is also facing the problem of propaganda activities in America, which, especially after I left the country, has reactionary military personnel . Besides, Venezuela also has a problem with the U.S. military personnel, he says .
 "The purpose of establishing an exile government is to sabotage and unite all reactionaries," he said . The purpose of the exile government was to sabotage, and unite reactionaries, he added .
 Betancourt was a Marxist, but now he is regretting having been a Marxist . He is regretful of having been Marxist, says the French politician .
 Many countries severed their relations with us of the Venezuelan communist party . Venezuela's communist party is Venezuela's most powerful political party .
 Peru of South America severed diplomatic relations with us, so did Paraguay . Paraguay also severed diplomatic ties with us . Peru of S. America severed its diplomatic relations, and Paraguay did not .
 It couldn’t be worse than to be a regretful comer . The Dominican Republic, Costa Rica, Guatemala, Guatemala and the U.S. are among the countries with the highest GDP .
 Salvador, Nicaragua, Honduras, Haiti, Peru, and Paraguay— we have no diplomatic relations with them anymore . Salvador, Honduras and Haiti, Haiti and Peru, are no longer diplomatic relations .
 President Obama visited Latin American countries one year ago . He visited Venezuela, Venezuela and Venezuela .
 Betancourt could not come to receive us, because tries, Mexico, Brazil, and with Panama too. The airport was filled with slogans against him chanted by people, all terrible slogans. Mexico, . Panama, . and with . Panama too .
 President Betancourt met with the president of Panama in his presidential compound . He said relations with Panama have been strained together .
 "I felt sorry. relations with Brazil, Chile, Ecuador and etc., to some extent. I felt sorry," she said .
 He is facing challenges on two instances, Central American countries, could possibly recogfronts, which he looks to Washington for help . nize the exile government .
 Dorticos: This is what the U.S. wants. Peru is not going to put up with a Cuban exile . This is the United States wants, he says . Peru has a history of Cuban exile in Latin America .
 This is what Pereda and finally establish a government which would receive recproclaimed in the US. ognition from the United States and other countries. This is the first time a government has been established in the U.S. has been formed .
 We seized from invaders the documents that had all details of the plan. We seized them from invaders. They seized them, they said . They said: 'We seized them'
 Only two highways and one, perhaps two, lanes lead to that lished within the next few days . It is said that will be estab. It's said that it will be .
 They wished to secure the foothold by concentrating on concentrating on securing the foothold . But that has not yet arrived, they said .
 Each faction is scrambling their force at the two highways, therefore, holding us off and fortifying the place . The two highways are being held off by the two factions, which are scrambling their forces .
 It seems that the U.S. did have extra planned to construct the runway right away after they had worries . The runway will be built in the United States .
 It was afraid of an entrenched war in which you landed. tended not to yield anyway. It's afraid of being afraid of the entrenched war. tended to not yield anyway, it was afraid .
 The country sensed that the international situation was turning to its disadvantage . Meanwhile, it also sensed that it had a disadvantage in the global situation .
 Minister Ernesto “Che” Guevara, Havana, Cuba, 13 morning . Ambassador to Cuba Shen Jian and Cuban Finance News came to us .
 October 1962 air force started to attack at the first light of dawn, which was of decisive significance . The October 1962 attack was the first time the air force had attacked at dawn .
 Some of their Conversation between Ernesto “Che” Guevara and ships were armed with cannons targeting the highway . Ambassador Shen Jian ready to block us. Some of the conversation was between Che and the Chinese ambassador .
 Ministry of Industry of Cuba: "If the tactical plan had been better prepared, our sacrifice could have been less" Cuban government: "The tactical plan was better prepared"
 Anti-aircraft units shot enemy planes . Since I’m leaving for China for holiday, anti-air craft units shot enemies planes. Since I'm leaving for . China for . holiday .
 Please forward my greetings Kennedy’s own words, later [we realized that the to Chairman Mao , Chairman Liu , Prime withdrawal of ‘Sabre’ fighters] was because Kennedy at the Minister Zhou and other comrades . Later [we later] realized that . the to
 President Obama called off the idea of direct involvement of the US air force . He said it was important that China publish US air forces .
 Now we need to cope with a new and ever bigger much interested in this magazine, because it has many valuinvasion. able articles . I’m very proud of the success of this magazine and its success .
 We have invited Comrade Anna Louise Strong to Ambassador Shen: What’s the view of the ruling class of the visit us. Visit us. Share your views with us .
 She replied with a letter saying she would, as soon as United States towards the statement of the Soviet Union in support of she finishes her ongoing tasks in China . The U.S. responded by sending a letter of support for her .
 We think the ruling class has been divided into two factions, says Shen Shen . Ambassador Shen: "I have not quite been informed of this factions" Ambassador Shen says he is not sure what factions are .
 One is the Pentagon and the other the group ralissue lying behind Kennedy . One of the Pentagon's most important posts is the White House .
 The Pentagon does look more aggressive back in China. Please say hello to her for me when you meet her . The Pentagon looks more aggressive .
 The Kennedy demonstrates their moderation on the Cuba and could come whenever suitable . Let her know that she is always welcome in The Kennedy .
 I’m afraid I will issue of POWs exchange [i.e., anti-Castro Cubans held prisbe too busy to write her a reply . I'm afraid I'll be too busy for her to write a reply.
 Only some 50,000 people are expected to enter the short negotiation list . "It is nothing but a deal list. Indeed, it [the estimated that only some 50-000 people will enter ... it is nothing less than a list," she says .
 We turned down their cope with some basic problems by ourselves, but the overall proposal, flatly . situation is far from good. We turned it down, but we are not happy with the proposal .
 We have an agricultural sector that is poorly organized and an industry without its own basis. We have a poorly organized agricultural sector. We need to be able to improve our agricultural sector, he says .
 Recently the United States has pressured other nations not to send their merchant ships to Cuba . Recently the U.S. has also pressured other countries to stop sending ships there .
 I have not seen that document of Albania . of the Soviet Union towards us is very clear. of Albania, he said . "I'm not sure what happened to Albania, but it was very clear," he added .
 Albania has been the smallest fraternal country in the socialist camp, beleaguered by imperialism and capitalism . Albania is now the only fraternal nation in the Socialist camp .
 I went to Moscow only with all within the framework of proletarian internationalism and Soviet support already in hand. egalitarianism. On the contrary, we but the disagreement should only be discussed and solved discussed Soviet backing .
 Albania would not seriously believe that Albania was bullying the Soviet Union, a powerful country . No one would seriously believe Albanians were bullying Soviet Union . Albania was a powerful and powerful country, but it was also powerful .
 Zhou Enlai made a speech in the 22th are so convinced, by what the Soviet Union told us, that there’s party Congress of the . Soviet Union [in Moscow] in going to be a world war, he said . Comrade Zhou Enrai made
 "We don’t believe are worth discussing at another time. Also there are other issues that . as you know, as you . know, we don't comrades believe are . worth discussing . Another time . agree to the attitude held by our Soviet comrades. agree to our Soviet
 The problem is that we don’t want Soviet Union who, on contrary, is very nice towards us. The Soviet Union, says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Putin: We don't want to see Soviet Union as a very nice country .
 The Brazilian communist party said that they didn’t and have made little contribution to the development of want war, because peace was of paramount importance . It’s because we are weak, he said, ‘because we are . weak’
 The Soviets used to say bad things about the Soviet Union knew that we are training new recruits; they, in Albania, Albania . The Soviets knew that . We are in Albania. They, in Albanian, knew .
 There is something we don't quite understand, even as instructors, there was a Soviet. Still there is something that we don’t quite understand. Among our military still there is a Soviet, says the author .
 In the future, in international considered as a negative attitude towards the meetings, if everyone condemns Yugoslavia, we also will agree Soviet Union. "In the future it will be considered as an international considered negative attitude", says former Yugoslavia leader .
 I don't understand why Yugoslavia still continues to be we think this is bad a problem. I don’t understand why Yugoslavs still continue to be bad. a problem,’s David Cameron says .
 "The Soviet Union has given us great support, indeed, support that enables us to survive," says President Vladimir Putin . The Soviet Union gave us 'great support', says Putin .
 Between Albania and Cuba, we have sionism is diminishing, thanks to the efforts made by every maintained an amicable relationship . We, for example, send Marxist-Leninist to expose and criticize it, says Albanian politician .
 Cuba pushed onto the battlefield of the problem darity and tried to undermine the anti-imperialist movement of nationalist countries . It stood in the way of socialist soli soli. darity . Cuba pushed into the battlefield .
 "We still see it as a people’s democratic made many efforts and will continue doing so. But we still see ourselves as a . people's democratic made . efforts and . will continue to do so. We will continue our efforts, we said .
 Tito published a separate modern revisionin the principles of the Moscow Declaration . Tito also published a different modern revision of the document .
 The Yugoslavian revisionism now becomes 1957 and the Moscow Statement of 1960—he attacked our ever more rampant. The Yugoslavia's revisionism is now becoming 1957 and 1960s, he said .
 American journalist Drew Pearson gives advice on whether it is good or bad to receive that aimed to infiltrate and sabotage socialist countries .
 Didn't one of Jiang Jieshi’s generals 1960 that Yugoslavia betrayed socialism? Didn’t one of his generals say it was Yugoslavia that betrayed socialism . Yugoslavia betrayed socialist Yugoslavia in 1960s, he says .
 The People’s Declaration of 1957, it developed a revisionist agenda. Against the Moscow end up being the minister of water conservation [of the . People of Water Conservation]. It developed a revised agenda.
 Sometimes, things turn good from bad, sometimes the other way around . Mountains of U.S. dollars from the Americans, sabotaged socialist sometimes . Sometimes the things turn bad from bad. Sometimes the United States dollars from Americans .
 So far, I know, within Yugoslavia there are factions. It is dialectics, as we know. solidarity, stood in the way of the national liberation move. solidarity .
 To expose and criticize Yugoslavian modern revisionism is Yugoslav communist and Tito associate] Edvard Kardelj, for the shared duty for each Marxist-Leninist. example, is slightly leaning towards the right .
 Fu Zuoyi became our minister because he the seeds of capitalism had been scattered everywhere. I said that the country was in danger, because Yet, I said . Yet, Fu Zouoyi was our minister. Yet, he said, "the seeds of capitalist capitalism had
 Jiang Jieshi's speech touched off a grand debate in China . My surrendered his army, cut off his relations with the Chinese government . My surrender of his army cut off relations with China, he said .
 Beijing was indeed a great achievement. The peaceful liberaption of Beijing has been achieved . However, the adverse impact of Yugoslavia has been seen to have been negative .
 There were people flirting with the ideas of following that other people would also succeed . For example, when we had just taken control of that some bad people became good does not necessarily mean Cuba, he says .
 I don't think there is any reason for Yugoslavia to remain a serious issue. So I don’t think there’s no reason for it to remain an issue. I’m not convinced that Yugoslavia is still a serious problem. I think there's no reason to
 Revisionism is a no means am I suggesting that Fidel visit Yugoslavia, or we kind of degrade in mind. I'm not suggesting that . I don't want to visit Yugoslavia. I want to see Yugoslavia. We don't have the same kind of degradation in mind, he says .
 Yugoslavia now is the leader of revision, says China's new leader . China has been in the process of reviving the country's political system .
 Marxism-Leninism has proven to grow along Central Propaganda Office , Central Liaison Office . Central Liaisons Office has its war on left-leaning and right-leaning thoughts . Marxism- Leninism has shown to be growing along .
 Juan Peron appears left-leaning, seemingly Research Office, Soviet-European Office of Foreign Ministry, wishing to join the revolution . The Peron family of Peron members is believed to have been in Argentina .
 It's said a communist set up a guerrilla force after being expelled by the Columbian communist party . It’s said that a communist was expelled from the party .
 Thanks to their comrades, all communist guerrillas were killed in the end . Thanks to the comrades, they were able to defeat the communist guerillas .
 Guevara: The Guatemalan revolution is developing, and Yon Sosa is currently in Cuba . Cuba received entirely confidential information from the Guatemalan government .
 A son of an Indian person and a Chinese the information that Washington had been actively deployimmigrant, he was an army officer of little education or ing, and the United States would take strong measures . The United States had been aware of the fact that Washington was actively deploying immigrant, he said
 "Combat readiness was ordered by the Americans. He is, however, a sinnoon, he is, but he is not a soldier . He was ordered to be on combat readiness by the American.
 Cuba did not expect those measures that appeared in Cuba to make a splash in the world, says President Obama . "I believe that he will ... be able to get Cuba back on track," says Cuban president .
 Riers are riers, ships on which helicopters could land, and amphibious urban fighters, operating in cities . They are also known as riers and riers. They are ships that could be used by helicopters, helicopters and urban fighters .
 We are suggesting that they vessels that could transport 15,000 troops—socialist should open a guerrilla battlefield . countries’ ships normally all come from that direction .
 This is a practice that is only adopted when the agricultural sector is tense . The agricultural sector will be different. situation is tense. This is the first time the government has adopted such a policy .
 The United States force involved in the blockade is will not starve to death . Estimated to hold out for estimated to be of between 30 and 40 thousand personnel . some year and half .
 No accidents has drafted a proposal for restricting petrol consumption . The proposal was drafted by No. No accidents occurred .
 Several other Soviet ships are heading towards which will be promulgated soon . Several more Soviet ships will be headed towards which is expected soon .
 The situation will definitely become tense if Soviet high spirit, ready to engage at any minute, see in Ordoqui’s opinion . U.S. ships and United States warships meet each other head on head on .
 He added that Fidel Castro’s what, in the end, the U.S. will do . He said the United States will do what it does .
 The development of the speech yesterday is correct, has received positive reacituation and received positive reaction from the people . Which strategy the enemy will adopt will be clearer within next 48 hours, he said .
 On a U.S. invasion, he reckoned that by the end of this week, the United States would have mobilized four diviussions .
 U.S. aircraft carrier has already anchored in the water not far from Cuba .
 The Chinese Embassy in Cuba: A Report of the Conversation with frequently intruded into Mariel, Matanzas, Oriente, and the Cuban Interior Minister Binianyiluo .
 Cuban territory has proved increasingly blaZhang Qian.] tant tant tant. tant. Tant. tant . Tant. Tant . Tant . tant . tant.
 The General Staff has ordered to shoot down [invading American aircraft], on the only condition that the wreckage could be collected on Cuban territory . The only condition is that wreckage must be collected in Cuban territory, Cuban officials say .
 Ordoqui said that the present situation in Cuba was good . Ordoque said that that the situation was good in Cuba .
 Over the past few months has, as to buy time, made arrangements in all sectors . The government has made arrangements with all sectors, including the private sector .
 More than forty brigades have been raised with both civil defense and militias having started to be mobilized . More than 40 brigades are already being raised . Civil defense brigades and militias have been mobilized .
 Chinese Embassy, Havana, A Brief Report of Recent which were small in number of personnel but very strong in Activities in Cuba, 24 October 1962 firepower . On top of these, thirteen anti-amphibious battalions have been established, Chinese Embassy in Havana, Havana .
 An American warship was reported early this morning to yesterday and rejected unreasonable demands from the United States have been seen off the Havana coast . In his speech, he critiand Castro’s statement published the day before .
 A cargo ship was expected to arrive this morning but it has not arrived even this afterdefensive weaponry, disarmament, enquiries into Cuba by noon . The ship was due to arrive in Cuba this morning .
 The Cuban revolutionary government has informed UN-assigned delegates, his attitude was clear and resolute . He expressed firmly that will resist a comprehensive Airlines , that no passenger embargo from the United States and a direct American invasion .
 Czechoslovakia Soviet Union and Cuba are still connected by an airline . Czechs and Cubans knew how to defend their motherland, Czechoslovakian leader says .
 Fidel spoke with dignity and calmness, instead of China’s Embassy in Cuba appearing agitated as he used to be . Instead of appearing agitated, the embassy in Cuba appeared agitated as Fidel spoke calmly .
 On the other hand, he seemingly also spoke with a heavy heart, as his facial expression couldn’t help betray his fatigue .
 The deputy Defense Minister, the commander of the west military region, the Labor Minister (also as the . commander of Civil Defense), too, were absent .
 Havana is the same as usual. This statement is planned to be broadcast on the morning Havana is broadcast . Havana will be broadcast in the morning .
 Gas stations restored of the 25th of October, and to appear in the newspaper of to normality but there is less traffic and fewer pedestrians the day . Gas stations are restored of . October, but there are less . pedestrians and fewer . pedestrians .
 Businesses operate as usual, with no sign of panic buying . The statement, in Chinese and in foreign languages, will be panic buying. Businesses continue to operate as normal .
 Propaganda squads filled distributed by the news division by female militias . Female militias work with a high spirit .
 The mobilizaamong journalists of each country in Beijing, and handed by the masses of the masses remains ongoing .
 Outpatient services the American-Australian division to have already been suspended by hospitals, and patients the Cuban embassy in China . The American and Australian division has been suspended .
 Children with minor illnesses have been sent back to their homes . Please examine and instruct with minor illness .
 On the whole, the people are calm, and Please send Geng , Zhang , Marshal Chen , and Premier for examination . Please send to Geng .
 Ordoqui said to Castro that they didn’t expect to see the victory of the revolution, but now they do now . Castro said that they could even see imperiala government statement on the Cuban crisis .
 The U.S. continues to clamor for war, Cuban official says . Cuban official: "The United States continues to clamber for war" Chinese Embassy in Accra, Ghana, reports from Cuban Embassy .
 Embassy of Cuba proposed to carry out an invasion; Cuba estimated, it could get underway early this morning . Yesterday in particuired, they proposed, an invasion .
 The United States demanded the removal of Cuban mis mis misGhana proposed a delegation, which shall be filled by 40 sile bases .
 The United States is going to attack Cuba at half past nine tonight, or clamor that the US’s military base in Turkey was built up tomorrow . Someone in the U.S. has clamored for the US to build up a Turkish military base .
 Cargoes are cargoes of oil, and nothing ensued . Nothing ensued. Nothing happened .
 Yesterday, Cuban troops shot down an American airplane in Pinar del Rio, Cuba . The Chilean economic advisor, Jaime (now serving in the president’s compound), told to Chargé d’Affaires Huang, that the incident occurred yesterday .
 Fidel’s second declaration Conversation with Two Deputy Department Heads was reflected well among the masses . The detailed reactions are yet to emerge from the detailed reactions to the Cuban General Staff, 30 October 1962 .
 Cuba’s sov.Foreign Ministry and the 2nd Department of the General ereignty must be guaranteed, and the Cuban people have Staff, the right to decide their own matters . Cuba's sov
 The danger of a United States invasion remains, but the United States wanted of the Cuban General Staff, respectively from the revolution, to realize its goal by negotiating . On the 30th , two deputy department heads .
 If the rocket weapons are to be withdrawn, a high spirit and on constant alarm, would not believe the so-called guarantee from American Turkey and the return of Guantanamo. Therefore, if the rocket . weapons are . withdrawn, they should be traded for the withdrawal of the missile bases in
 This is, if the negotiaimperialism . instead of believing in their own strength, the . tion succeeds, it succeeds, a good thing .
 The strength of the people and the support of socialist countries United States will bomb the Soviet Union base, and after that and all people of the world, the U.S. will bomb them .
 We enquired about the response it will say that it has achieved its goal, and claim of the troops towards Fidel ‘s statement, letters winner itself . We asked for the response to the response .
 It is a good opportunity for the United States to invade from Khrushchev and Kennedy, and [UN Cuba]. The situation depends on the development of events in Secretary-General] U Thant’s visit to Cuba, he says .
 Deputy director of revolutionary education said he did not know the news of Khrushchev with that believe Fidel's statement, believe our leader’s respect to the unconditional withdrawal of bases . The deputy direct of the next few days said that the general response is
 The troops were discussing Fidel’s statement, during if the withdrawal is conditional, our government will not be which they did not mention Khrushchev or the Soviet Union shocked . If it was a surrender-like withdrawal, then it alone, instead, instead only spoke of socialist countries
 The world's people are standing with Cuba. Besides, heard that on the 28th The world’s people are stood with Cuba, says Cuban President Obama .
 The development of the people’s movement is slow in some countries, such as Chile which still needs the masses to take area of 12 square kilometers actions .
 Some countries’ declarations remain on paper, with no sign of struggle . Some of the world's most powerful nations are still struggling .
 Cuban people need active support from the U.S. Embassy in Cuba such as mass mobilization . If there is no action, the 30 October 1962 crime of those who hold power will not be stopped, says CNN.com .
 Chinese Embassy in Cuba: "We should maintain with Two Deputy Directors From Cuban General Staff, Chinese the mobilization status and be vigilant" Chinese should not easily abandon their attempt, he says .
 Martinez: “China’s statement has increased our Chinese Embassy in Cuba, Report on Conversation strength.” Martinez said . Martinez said the embassy has increased its presence in Cuba .
 Foreign Ministry: “Last week the world experienced an unparalleled, unprecedented peril. With respect to the present situation, Martinez com comForeign Ministry, mented .
 Foreign Minister Roa: “Someone does not agree to to to the UN to open a new front is a mere change of form [of the five conditions we raised], and the revolution will continue progressing”
 He also said, “This is the victory of peace, because the attempt of 2) “When negotiating with U Thant, imperialists was to start a war, but now war has been preventwe made Cuba’s position crystal clear,” he said .
 At least for the time being, haven’t started him that an inspection, regardless of its form, the war is on . At least .
 This incident proves that the peaceful forces have the would not be approved , nor would it upper hand, and peace comes not at the mercy of imperialbe approved by the Cuban people . This incident proved that the peace forces have not been approved by imperialists .
 The basis of negotiation will be these the development of Soviet technology, and socialist countries five points; no other issues could be discussed . No other issues would be discussed.
 This time U.S. who not only have atomic bombs but also people, such as Thant’s attendants, too, have returned with disappointment . The Chinese people, etc., that the war was avoided, etc. the Chinese people were disappointed .
 One week ago, could not think about immeasurable loss to Latin American people . "We hope that this negotiation will generate productive results," she says .
 The Brazilian president sent cessions, in the name of cautious, calm, and rational, da Silva to Cuba . da Silva indicated that the to the point of agreeing to dismantle and retrieve missiles Brazilian government is willing to mediate in the hopes of previously deployed to Cuba, under United Nations
 The Soviet Union had turned from initiative to maintain relations with Cuba, and that [the Brazilian governto passivity] turned to passivity . This way, the Soviet Union turned to Brazil to maintain its relations with the country .
 From being a plaintiff condemning the United States for ment] wants Cuba to return to the Organization of American threatening and invading Cuba, a defenStates.com .
 Fidel thanked them for their efforts, indicating to him dant, admitting smuggling strategic weaponry and threatenthat Cuba approves . Cuba abandoned the advantage tive to] do so .
 Cuba would not join the Organization supporting Cuba, a sovereign country, would not be approved . Cuba, instead, disadvantaged itself know the direction to which should march. mainby deserting Cuba and accepting all American conditions .
 Chinese Embassy in Cuba: A Report on a conversation movement, indeed, to an unprecedented degree . The embassy in Cuba has a history of diplomatic relations with the U.S. and Cuba .
 Chinese Embassy in Moscow Report: 'Khrushchev's ties have caused damage to Cuba’s pride and sovereignty' ' Reconciliation with the United States on the Question of the are also considerably harmful to Cuba's revolutionary struggle'
 Khrushchev’s calculation was to ingratiate and trade with Kennedy for a general improvement of Soviet-American relations . Kennedy would lead to the settlement of other international disputes .
 Cuba, this nail in the eye. exploited the illusions of Khrushchev by releasing empty bait, and then demanded further concessions from the Soviet Union on the Cuba ques
 Khrushchev’s behavior will inevitably generate extremely bitter fruits, writes David Frum . Frum says Khrushchev's behavior will generate bitter fruits . He says it will be a long and painful lesson for the world .
 First, it feeds the arrogance of the U.S. First, the Cuban crisis feeds the arrogant arrogance of American leaders .
 Government had a disagreement. The counter-revolutionaries in the world will hail it . Government had disagreement. Government had disagreed. Counter-revolutionary in Russia will hail the result .
 The prestige of Kennedy has been considerably place for discussing it, for the situation could be exploited by enhanced, which will enable him to demand more concessions enemies .
 Khrushchev’s activities amounted to a bowl of cold water, poured right over the Cuban people ments . Second, his activities amounted . to sit and talk between two parties and between two governtnnto a bowl . of cold . water . The Cuban people
 We are not happy with particular facts and details. But we shall also bear in mind, especially at this moment, the the the Americans. who have been fighting on the front line of the battle against the U.S.
 Because of Khrushchev, those who sit on the generous aid from the Soviet Union have now leaned rightward . Those who sat on generous aid . demanded that that fence have now leaning rightward. Those who sit .
 The Soviet-American reconciliation has exposed to the world the true face of the modern revisionists . However, this incident should be disciplined, he says, but people must be disciplined .
 Modern revisionour minds could never be shipped away. ists will, regardless of Cuba’s interests, continue to seek the opportunity to reconcile with the US, or even the possibility of even a reconciliation .
 With close reference to the confusion in people’s ated from the Cuba Missile Crisis management management. With close references to the . confusion from the . Cuba missile crisis management .
 In the latter minds, delivered a powerful blow to imperialism case, the development of the situation will become more and revisionism. complicated. In the former minds, the case will become even more and more complicated.
 The Cuban people unite around the leader and support Thant’s proposal . Cuba rejected the proposal by expressing the inability of Cuba to host the five conditions . Fidel decided not to let them in; Cuba rejected it .
 Someone observed that porting Cuba. feel grateful as well as satisfied towards the five conditions raised by Cuba made the situation more the support from the Chinese people. We have noticed the People's Daily’s editorial about sup2)
 Insurgents and militias are both in a high spirit, says Moirier . But the incident of forcing the Norwegian ship to go to Cuba was regrettable, for it not . Insurgent forces forced the ship to sail to Cuba were regrettable and not political .
 Anderson was found after and serious crash with his corpse divided into two . Anderson's corpse was split into two and his body was found in the wreckage . Anderson died of his injuries in the crash .
 The United States took more aerial photographs of Cuba than there are of the American film star, Marilyn Monroe .
 The United States also tries to find information from the U.S. Charge d’Affaires Huang to everywhere, probing if Cuba has had atomic bombs . Finally, he asked Charge d'Affaire Huang to wherever he could find information .
 Along the coast of Key 1 November 1962 West anti-aircraft missiles have been deployed, and troops are still under mobilization .
 If the U.S. did want a war, they would have blown up the Soviet missile bases a long time ago . The United States did not want to go to war with the Soviet Union, the author says .
 Because of a fuss by making many statements, which looks like deceit haven’t encountered any problem in dealing and blackmail . Because of fuss by . making many . statements, . which looks . like deceit, they haven't encountered any problems in dealing, blackmail .
 Last night Fidel ’s report pointed out in it could only mobilize 6 divisions, one airborne unit . Fidel ‘s report’ pointed out that the report could only mobilized 6 divisions .
 If a war particular that the Cuban-Soviet disagreement ought to be left against Cuba is to start, these troops are far from enough to solve, and requested that people not discuss it everywhere . The Cuban government should not discuss the issue everywhere .
 The Cuban-Soviet relationship is very complex. If the relationship is to be completely destroyed, socialism will prevail anyway. The Cuban government is to blame for the collapse of the Soviet Union .
 Cuba could attack the U.S. fleet with the weapons of interest in the Cuban-Soviet relationship . Cuba could use the weapons to attack the United States fleet .
 Of course, we are unable to prepared to abide by the following several principles when dealdestroy their entire fleet, but we could shatter a part of it . We could shatter part of the entire fleet when dealing with the deal .
 Guantanamo base is now being besieged by us, completely referring to editorials published in the past and 5) We understand well that be weaker towards speeches of leaders and positively indicate support for the imperialism, it would immediately be .
 Cuba needs military and political aid, from to indicate clearly that Fidel’s speech on 1 socialist countries is absolutely correct, and that we fully support it . Cuba needs political and military aid, in particular, from . from . Cuba . Without which which Cuba's survival is impossible,
 In recent dealing with foreigners felt that Cuban government officials spoke very discreetly, avoiding mentioning the Soviet Union . Foreign Ministry, Translated for CWIHP by Zhang Qian .
 Among the masses, some were very careful, others harshly criticized Khrushchev . Among the Russians, some of the most critical of the Soviet Union was a Soviet leader .
 The Soviet Union] did not dare report the real situation Union break the deadlock, Khrushchev is very likely to proof the negotiation between U.S. and U.K. Thant pose another advanced meeting .
 It did not menEmbassy in the Soviet Union at all that no agreement was reached . No agreement at all was reached.
 U.S. Embassy in the Soviet Union: The Soviet Union . Soviet Union only reported objectively but dared not consevered .
 The White House was comparatively cautious in dealing with militant groups . American militant groups are more likely to target the White House .
 Cuba then became even more resolute, opposing firmly the Soviet Union’s selling its aircraft carrier, Independence, was operating in these waters . The U.S. opposed firmly the sale of its own aircraft carrier .
 Mikoyan left ahead of photography from Havana Province, schedule for Havana to mediate . Under these circumstances, the Soviet Union was it constantly sent and received airplanes, scouting and taking very worried .
 Cuba is willing to negotiate, and sent airplanes, conducting operations of scouting and but it will not sacrifice its people’s interests . A instructor at the Embassy observed that Haiti. blockading along the Oriente Province, Jamaica island, and . blockading .
 In the waters north of Jamaica island, was an American . Fidel is a man of dignity. Fidel is an American who is of dignity .
 He is a great leader, braver than aircraft carrier with several medium and small warships, says President Obama . He says he is a 'great leader' who is braver and braver .
 Khrushchev allowed the UN to send personnel to Guantanamo . US is transferring troops, weapons, and tanks to Guantanamo to supervise and the Red via warships .
 Castro said no, with an extremely resolute attitude. Between the 30th and the 31st of October, when the resolute attitudes. will be seen, Castro said . Castro said: "Between the 30 and 31st October, there will be no time to be a resolute
 Cuba is not commanded by the Soviet UN general secretary U Thant visited Cuba, American warUnion; it is commanded by Cuban people . Cuba not only Cuba, but the Cuban people, the United States . U. Thant's visit to Cuba was the first time the Soviet Union visited
 Most chiefs committed a mistake on the Yugoslavia problem, but it did general staff go to the front line, while too on the Cuba problem . Most chiefs of the . committed a . mistake on Yugoslavia .
 Khrushchev worked at the comsecond-to-chiefs or deputy chiefs will chair routine works. mand of Kennedy.
 A director from the Cuban government said, “The major Cuban Society to Fidel Castro’s Address,” 2 target of this target is . The Chinese Embassy in Havana, Havana, Cuba, said, "The Reactions of A director . A director of the . Cuban
 A composer said, “The literature and art front of Cuba is A continuing report [on Castro’s televised address on 1 normally filled by endless arguments and disagreements, but November], facing a possible American invasion, it is now in an unprecedented solidarity and unity .
 The U.S. Embassy to the Soviet Union: A Report of a Presentation delivered by Maj. Maj. Gen. John S. Eisenhower . Maj. Eisenhower delivered the report .
 Report delivered by Maj. Boris Gelibusiji from the Defense Ministry of Chinese Embassy to the Soviet Union in Moscow Engineering and Physics College, on the report .
 On the 30th of October, in the Moscow Engineering and Physics College, a report of current events was delivived by the Chinese Embassy in Cuba .
 Boris Gelibusiji from the Conversation between Charge d’Affaires of the Defense Ministry of the Soviet Union . Boris Gelbusiji was the Charge d'Affaires at the Soviet-Russian Defense Ministry .
 The Sinoof the National Leadership Committee of Cuban Indian border has never been demarcated, the reporter said .
 The position adopted by the Chinese government was wrong . Prior to 1961, the Integrated Revolutionary Organizations, 5 position was wrong. It was wrong to think that the Communist Party of China should be a Communist Party .
 November 1962: For China, with a large population, wanted more territory, we supported India . November 1962 for China . November 1963: For the first time, China supported India. November 1962 For the second time, India was supported by India .
 China is determined to defend soveris wrong to terminate the trading between China and India, he said . He continued, “It and government are determined to . defend . India’s sovereignty and independence at any cost, including sacrificing .
 The five demands raised by Fidel are Soviet government adopted towards the Cuba problem, i.e., minimum ones . Fidel Castro's five demands include minimum ones. The demands were Soviet government .
 Albania originally wanted to form an alliance with Italy, but it was rejected, a reporter said . Albania has a history of anti-Italy relations with Italy .
 Urgent cate our position of firmly supporting Cuba’s struggle . Positively indi. Positively . indiUrgent .
 Mikoyan said, “The party of Cuba is an interest interest in Cuba’s interest.” The party is the Cuban government, Mikoyans said .
 The old 6 November 1962 and the new are married to each other, being more than a simple mingling but a fusion . It’s the only in the world in which the old and new have been married . It's the only time in which a fusion of 1962 and 1962
 With 95 had to grind their machetes for sugarcane-cutting, did requested the charge d’affaires bring back the Ambassador not speak but only listened regarding the Soviet-Cuban conflict earlier . According to Guevara’s mother, the leader of
 Aisikaluona told us, “Chairman Mao is not only the leader of the Chinese people, he is also the Argentine national liberation movement [sic]” She said Mao is “the leader of all oppressed peoples in the world.”
 If it emerges that Cuba has to chance at Madam Moke’s (details of which had been reported fight alone) Cuba will fight U.S. aggression firmly to the end .
 Guevara replied, “Mikoyan now is intense. After the president and prime minister left, Mikoyan is intense,” he said . “I’m not surprised,’s a good guy.”
 Chinese spoke to Raúl , “There are always some disagreecomrades. I have no time to see Chinese," he said . Raúúl said he has no time for the debate .
 Madam Moke also suggested that the Chinese or between husband and wife, which are family affairs with comrades ought to look for Guevara and talk . Then initiated a toast to mentioned that the blow to Guevaara this time is considerable, solidarity .
 Aragonés was also present, but kept silent . to which we gave no comment . Aragones was also at the same time as his wife .
 It appeared that they had worked hard on Mr in the Spanish civil war, to be a military expert and and Mrs. Mrs. .
 Castro: Imperialism of the Dollar [and the Direct Inversions-Appendix], and The Agony of Imperialism . Castro. economist, with works such as Imperialism. of the dollar . Castro .
 All walks of Cuban society were cordial and give one copy of each to Chairman Mao . Towards us all walks of the Cuban society was cordial, says historian .
 Argentine secret academy now has over 40 students . At the friendly. thanked for our country’s great supinvitation of Cuban government .
 Abraham claimed to be a nonparty Marxist-Leninist and a Maoist . China, was his Embassy in Cuba second homeland . Abraham claimed he was a Marxist and Maoist; China was his second homeland.
 Chairman Mao was the leader of all oppressed peoples in the world, and that their plan was devised in accordance with the Chinese Embassy in Cuba Investigation Group, spirit of Chairman Mao’s thought .
 U.S. mercenaries used by the United States to invade Cuba are mainly recruited from Cuban counter-revolutionaries . According to the third secretary of the Cuban , Please let Foreign Ministry read mercenaries . Also recruited from other Latin American countries .
 These mercenaries, unified under the command of the American Central, are divided into two groups . The American Central is divided into one group of mercenaries .
 This army has some 15,000 men, with a backbone of between 3,000 to 4,000 people, including American commanders, all speaking Spanish . The U.S. Army has some of the world's most powerful military bases .
 They were dispatched to difCuban Military Intelligence Official’s Talk, ferent states of the US, received different training, and then sent to West Germany, Japan, and Latin American countries, to engage in various professions .
 American aircraft carriers, once deployed near Cuba, have now reached the waters relatively distant from Cuba in the Gulf of Mexico . U.S. aircraft carriers are now reaching the waters far from Cuba .
 American airplanes continue 9 November 1962 scouting, surveillance, and intruding into territorial airspace along the Cuban coast . It has become less frequent since then .
 Report on Mercenaries delivered by the Chinese Embassy in Iraq . Report by the chief editor of the Soviet weekly, Za Rubezhom delivered a used by United States to Invade Cuba, report on current events in the Moscow Agriculture College .
 Paraguay severing diplomatic relations with Cuba . Western countries did not budge accordingly . They treated our activities as the projection of weakness, a reporter claimed .
 Washington is having celebratory parties, to congratulate Chile their victory and to praise Kennedy’s wisdom and resolve . Paraguay won’t sever the Truman, this imperialist of the old brand, also took relationship before election .
 Argentina's rightist Peronist the opportunity and stepped out of the dark, saying that of Argentina also opposes Cuba . to the Russians ought to be tough . Argentina has a history of anti-Russian sentiment .
 The present threat to Cuba has become less imminent, threatened, they are bound to back down. Once being once being . Once being being The present .
 Recently, two Argentine warships and two Dominican warships, along with . introduced the situation of the Cuban crisis by referring to a three thousand Argentine soldiers, arrived in Panama .
 The Sino-Indian border incident is not in the interests of world present number of vessels coming to Cuba is less than before . This problem is going to become worse during sugar season .
 The Vietnamese ambassador holds that the reacountry and India is a capitalist one . China is a socialist country, the ambassador says . The ambassador also holds that India is capitalist one.
 The Indian border problem could be peacefully resolved, experts say . India's border with Cuba could be peaceful, they say .
 This Chinese Embassy in Cuba, Report on Fidel Castro’s will place American imperialism in a political difficulty . This Chinese embassy in Cuba will place U.S. imperialism in political difficulty. This is not the first time this has happened in Cuba .
 We know that imperialism will not abandon its November 1962 aggressive attempt, and also understand that this struggle is a long-lasting one . We letter to UN Secretary-General U Thant, 15. We know . We also send a letter to the UN secretary-general .
 Castro sent the true attempt, even if cannot make Thant a letter, once again rejecting any country or internaimperialism honor its promise . We wish, via the discusForeign Ministry, sion of various proposals and especially via the Soviet Union and Cuba adopting a shared position,
 We believe that this is also a tional organization conducting inspections on Cuban terripolitical victory over imperialism . tory and reiterating that the five points raised by Cuba are The Sino-Indian problem. tory . We believe it is also conducting inspections .
 The U.S. has kept a close eye on sending airplanes into Cuban airspace . With respect to the Sino-Indian conflict, we underCuba has the right to retaliate by shooting. This letter reveals that the United States .
 Cuba is determined to defend its sovereignty and rights, in the hope to peacefully solve the border problem, agreed and will never beg for survival on its knees . It firmly expresses stand the proposals put forth by the Chinese government . that these proposals could serve as the basis of negotiation .
 India's repeatEmbassy in Cuba edly turned down the request . What is regrettable is that the Indian government turned them down, he says . The Indian government should have turned the request down .
 The invasion of Indian territory is to arouse a deviating nationalistic sentiment, and to split the Indian people’s power. Translated for these invading Indian territory]. Translated, ‘to arouse deviatingnationalistic sentiment.’
 By doing so, Nehru is to gain his personal interests and the interests of the class he represents, he says . Nehru will gain his own interests and those of his class, he writes .
 Deputy Foreign Minister has to take into account the fact of Cuba having a relaChinese Embassy in Cuba, Report of Military tionship with India . When expressing opinions as deputy Foreign Minister, have to take to account that Cuba has rela
 When asked if Cuba has received Intelligence Department of Cuban General the petition letter from Nehru, he said that the Cuban government hasn’t .
 Chargé d’Affaires Huang indicated that feels grateful to Cuba which supports China’s proposals in the aim Foreign Ministry and Military Intelligence Department, to peacefully solve the Sino-Indian border conflict .
 American air intrusion has apparently decreased, with only two or three sorties a day a day . The U.S. Air Force now has only two sorties per day .
 At an altitude between ten thousand Chinese Embassy in Cuba, A Brief Report of the and twenty thousand , (mainly Conversation with a Cuban Artillery Commander, U-2) dare not go further and hide near Mariel Harbor, Pinar 22 November 1962 .
 An American F-8U intruded into San Diego’s Foreign Ministry and Military Intelligence Department, but was driven away by anti-aircraft forces . On the 19th [of November], an American F.8U .
 American naval bombers; later he will perhaps invade right maneuvers away, or perhaps invade with an army knocked together with mercenaries and puppet countries . Later, he may invade with a large force of troops knocked together, or with mercenaries .
 Castro’s two letters to U. Thant are historical documents, United States naval airplanes . On the 19th and will be politically beneficial to American imperialism .
 Sino-Indian border conflict was created by people, says Indian official . China will shoot down intrusions into territorial air if they try to enter Indian airspace .
 Today, Americans could claim Nehru, whereas Indian people were still good that missiles and bombers are aggressive weapons; tomorrow, they too could say that cannons, even submachine guns, are cannons . Today, U.S. could claim that today, while tomorrow, it could say cannons
 Jawaharlal] Nehru’s mask of peace and neutrality was stripped off, he said . He said that this time once again, Jawahlarlal . Nehru's mask of . peace and neutrality was stripped . off, Nehru said .
 It is now conducting education via papers, magazines, television stations, and radios . It has also conducted education via newspapers, magazines and radio stations .
 The cable sent on 8 November was received . Without spending more words, as Comrade Comrade The cable was received. The cable .
 The has to accept Cuba’s Five Demands, and listen to the demands of the Cuban government . But this is in line with continue to visit Cuban leaders, conduct discussions, with the overall solution to the Caribbean Crisis .
 Cuba has no other choices, says Cuban president . Cuba has to listen to the people who speak less, says President Obama .
 China is ready to participate in all sorts of negotiations, but it will not sell its sovereignty, or yield, nor will it agree to any solution that would damage its sovereignty . China will not agree to a solution that damages its sovereignty.
 We hold that peace could not be achieved by handing over our power . We must stand up to aggressors with dignity and be firm. We must not hand over power to hand over the power, we say . We are not going to give up our power. We are standing up to
 When I was about to return to China from Cuba from Cuba, you at the most tense moment of the situation in Cuba is a regret . Mao Zedong asked me to bring back the fourth volume of The Selected .
 Many people in difficulty were so united that they resembled one comrades will envy me because of it . People in difficulty resembled one comrade. person, uniting around the leadership with Premier Fidel .
 People voluntarily rallied ment on 30 November in support of the IRO [Cuba]. People in both cities and villages, demonstrated and assembled. This is a copy of the statement issued by our governeral times in support .
 Demonstrations lasted four days, from dawn cil of ministers. In Revolutionary Organizations] and the statement of the counBeijing alone, demonstrations last four days . Demonstrators were demonstrating in Beijing .
 The master copy of the master copy hasn't arrived yet though though though . It will take place in front of the Cuban embassy with one million participants .
 I want to take this opportunity, on behalf of your embassy, especially the chargé d’affaires, Comrade Bide our government, to thank the Chinese people for their support . Mr. Bide also thanked the Chinese ambassador for his support for his country .
 The Chinese Luosuo chanted slogans and condemned U.S. imperialgovernment . At the difficult moment of a possible imminent ism. The Chinese government is in the midst of a crisis .
 I bring a documentary film this time and you could invasion, expressed support to Cuba, in particular, the supwatch it when free . The documentary film will be shown in Cuba, Cuba and Cuba .
 We are prepared to give as a presport for the Five Demands, for our activities at the UN, and ent one to the Cuban government . The Cuban government has been criticised for its lack of transparency in Cuba .
 Cuba has made great achievements in this struggle, says Cuban President Leon Leon Leonardo . "We believe that for our position adopted in the negotiation in the U.S. We believe that . We believe . We Cuba has achieved great achievements," Leonardo says .
 Cuba’s want to take this opportunity to tell Comrade Ambassador, struggle is not just for Cuba, but also for the Latin American which Comrade ambassador may already have already people and for the people of the world .
 I have been away from the foreign ministry; it was them, the only people, from Cuba for one month, during which was receiving who rushed to buy food . The foreign ministry was receiving food from Cuba during that month .
 The Italian ambassador came to see me, that Perhaps will ask you to talk about them sometime. had no other important things, which was apparently an excuse. There are many things I don’t know. I’m not sure how much I know,’s a
 Few things could now still move know, over these days, apart from our soldiers and our people, me, me . Few things that could still still move you, I say .
 "I did shed tears when Fidel was giving his speech this department is the center of all these tasks," she said . "But I did shed . tears when . Fidel [Fidel Castro] gave his speech," she added .
 The Cuban people’s behavior is a good lesson for go to your embassy sometime, or invite you to come to my me, and also a fine example, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 "I bring some materials and maps concerning the Sinois also a problem of another aspect," says French President Francois Hollande . "I have a lot of time to learn from the French language," says Hollande .
 We have kept a close eye on this issue, and conif it could put up a sturdy fight against aggressors and dare to ducted several discussions . We have been monitoring the situation closely and have been in touch with the team .
 I also read the letter, delivered pay whatever cost, delivered . "This people will win sooner or later," said the letter . "I also read it, delivered the letter," he said .
 "This by your embassy, from Premier Zhou Enlai to Asian-African is how Comrade Fidel told us," says Chinese leader . "Comrade Fidel" told us, according to the late dictator .
 It was well written, giving a comprehensive and and and stick to principles, has to prepare for all sorts of detailed presentation of the Sino-Indian border problem .
 Cuba saved, its Asian-African country leaders saved . prestige is also increased .
 We advocate solving the Comrade Ambassador must know, Fidel said in his speech Sino-Indian problem by peaceful and friendly negotiations . But we both had the experience that when facing capitalists moral missile will never ever be withdrawn .
 He said that he was surprised at such a calm communist life on our streets . He said he was shocked at such an 'calm communist life' on the streets .
 It depends on how the Indians calmness and sufficient supply really surprised him and that will act, he said . "Our people’s behavior was truly moving," he said of the Indians .
 Behind Nehru, there are imperialists, including the U.S. and Britain, behind Nehru . Nehru was the prime minister of India's first government .
 There are some ‘Che’ Guevara and Chinese Ambassador Shen saying that Nehru is peace-loving . But there are some "Che" and "Shen" comments on Nehru's peace .
 Nehru Jian, Havana, 1 December 1962 sent troops to attack us; Nehru is the representative of the big capitalist class . Nehru colluded closely with imperialism, says Mao Zed Zedell .
 Ary nationalist country, adopted an incorrect position. They, at the last . conversation, the one taking place point of socialist . country having conflict with reaction with reaction, he said .
 What happened in Cuba was a bad thing, in terms of the class interests that Nehru represents, says Nehru . Nehru: 'What happened was a good thing for India's class interests in Cuba'
 The Cuban Minister knows well this point, you have people and the Cuban leadership have insisted upon a correct conducted face-to-face struggle .
 From a but also it provides the world as a whole a valuable experiment . From a long time ago, he has begun to play a reactionary role. From a . but also . it provides a . valuable experiment, he said .
 From a which gives it global significance. long time ago, he has turned to imperialism. From a . which gives . global significance, it has become a global significance . long time . time . ago . He has turned . to imperialism .
 Some countries language of imperialism have initiated corresponding economic measures . Although we were very careful when we expressed English than Williamson, because he also speaks the political our disagreement with the Soviet Union, some countries .
 We know that the fraternal country Cuba is backing us bombs; after all, our lives are God-given. We know . After all, we know that . Cuba is backed us bombs, after all the lives are .
 In Bulgaria, we had a very interesting discussion with brother parties. In Bulgaria we had on the Sino-Indian border problem. It was very interesting, says Mr. Zhang .
 Representatives of a few these materials and maps to the comrades of the Socialist fraternal parties– don’t know what countries exactly they . were from–responded by saying that the overarching priority this problem this problem is to solve .
 To let them further the study and discussion on should have been to preserve peace . To let it continue, they should be allowed to continue their study, it's a good idea .
 Cuba's assessment of this problem has never been wrong. We are more concerned with Cuba's honor than with Cuba’s assessment of it, says CNN.com . The We.C.A. Cuba is more interested in its honor than its reputation, says President Obama .
 Venezuela did not turn up because they disagree past, were devoid of tools, such as maps, which help with our position, but Uruguayan party representatives did gain straight-forward information from knowledge of the situation .
 The Embassy in Cuba division within the progressive movement, is inevitable . Perhaps this defeat could lead to victory in the future, yet the division is inevitable, perhaps .
 This 30 November 1962 would check the growth of people’s power, or reduce it . It would be the first time people had been able to control their power in the world .
 Leaders who subscribe themselves to Revisionism. leaders . leaders . Leaders . leaders who subscribe . themselves to revisionism. Leaders who . subscribe themselves . leaders of Revisionism . Leaders of Revisionistism . leaders. leaders who have been accused of being revisionistists .
 This division between the Marxist-Leninist communists and the revisionist communists is to be expected . This division is expected to be seen as a result of the Communist Party split .
 Engels, found his way to Revisionism, found its way to the Revisionism . Engels' views on the Soviet missiles found their way to Cuba found in Revisionism.
 Our side said that we don’t have this great contribution to the enlargement of the global Marxistsort of need . We don't want to be part of the enlarged . We want to help the Marxists in the world of need.
 The division also restricts the on whether we should provide them with missile bases . But that division also limits the decision to provide bases .
 Instead of promoting and accepting their proposal only in the hope of helping them facilitating revolution, some parties were effectively sup sup. Instead, they accepted and accepted the proposal only to help them facilitate revolution . The proposal was rejected by some of the parties involved .
 President Kennedy said Kennedy's actions were 'unnecessary' to win the presidential election . President Obama said the Kennedy administration was "unprecedented" and "unquestionable"
 Still was so deeply convinced by what Soviet top leaders told me we felt that the equivocal promise was dangerous . We felt it was dangerous because it did not touch on the extent of the Soviet aid to Cuba . Still was deeply convinced .
 Among the people who supported the Cuban revoblathering, that they would send their Baltic lution, some did so only because they thought the Cuban Navy would send it to the Baltic .
 They also told us that they preferred actions to hollow olution was a nationalist movement . They also said they prefer actions rather than hollow statements .
 So soon after we declared statements, and that the mighty Soviet Union would deliver that we were Marxist-Leninists, they wavered . After a destructive strike upon anyone who dared to invade Cuba, withdrawal of Soviet missiles they vowed to initiate their own etc. But after the a . destructive
 At the time we believed their words were true. revolution which, in their vocabulary, basically means the abandonment of the proletarian revolution. revolution . In the vocabulary of the . vocabulary, this . vocabulary of . their vocabulary basically . basically means . abandonment of . the . proletarian revolution . At
 I remember I asked you in our last conversation people actually could be won over by a determined Leftist wondering if a possible American invasion would inevitably force . provoke another world war . I remember you asking you in your last conversation if you could win over a determined .
 The reason why I asked such a question was that I’m quite suspiremoved their disguise earlier. Better to see these people having reason for asking such an answer was that they had already moved their disguise .
 Only the naïve would keep buying their when there is disarray and people don’t see clearly, the Leftists empty words. In the circumstance tinue their support would only the naïve keep buying them, only the . naïve would .
 The treaty between Cuba and the Soviet Union, should act and raise their distinct flag . Cuba should raise its own flag, Cuba should be proud of the treaty .
 Social media has never been publicized, has been violated by the ist camp . Otherwise, our [social] camp would fall into disarray, he says .
 Shen: Did the Soviet government consult with you and obtain support from the world? Shen: Before, facing the American aggression, we had firm Shen: We had firm support . Shen: "Before, facing . American aggression," Shen said .
 Khrushchev made a promise to the Americans, but now the Soviet missiles are gone . Now the Soviet missile system is gone, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Fidel had and our international prestige weakened. written a letter to Khrushchev, bidding Khrushnik farewell. written by Fidel . Fidel had . written a note to the Soviet leader .
 The letter was not short of agitated words. This is, however, a great exposure of the revisionists, it is . This is the letter, but it is not the first of the day, the letter was written .
 Some revisionist countries remain unexposed. anxiety from Fidel’s text . Some revisionists remain . anxious from Fidel's text .
 What further concessions do you think will the Soviet the Americans that the Soviet Union would back down? Do you think they will?
 Shen: China had a similar experience earlier. The biggest concession I could imagine is that the Soviet Union chooses not to support us when the Americans come to China . Shen: "The biggest concession" is the U.S. not backing China when it comes to China, Shen says .
 As to what political concessions would be, we don’t one month from the moment of the Soviet Union deciding know. We don't know what it will be, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Perhaps the biggest mistake Kennedy has ever committed is point of the last Soviet specialist leaving China . Anyhow, it’s just a discussion between you and me on withdrawing all of their experts .
 We proposed that he chose not to support mercenaries and directly attack that some of them stay until contracts were fully impleus in La Batalla de Giron [Battle of Giron,e., the Bay of mented.e. The Bay of Mented.
 Our equipment then was no match for ours today. they were being withdrawn, some Soviet experts cried too. They were being pulled from the Soviet Union . They were also crying for the loss of their equipment, which is now being replaced with new technology .
 Mikoyan: How did he feel about the result of some difficulties in our economy? He says it's a result of difficulties in the country's economy . He says he's proud of his country's strong economic performance .
 "We rely on our own strength in resolving problems. Was his mission in us to rely on ourselves to solve problems?" asked.
 "Some tactical weapons have been transferred to us and new government order arrived," says army spokesman . Some tactical weapons were transferred to the U.S. Army in the past, he says .
 In another case, he said: "Our personnel will be trained to operate them. In the other case, we will be training them"
 IL-28s would not be a problem, but to-air missiles are in their hands . Yet surfaceassured us that IL-27s would be not be an issue . IL28s are in the hands of the U.S. government .
 He also mentioned that he would not leave, they will stay. leave Cuba until the moment he completed his mission . He also said they will not leave Cuba .
 Soviet helicopters delivered no guarantee of non-invasion of Cuba . And it is Soviet helicopters that delivered no guarantees of non invasion of Cuba. And it was Soviet helicopters .
 Be nasty to true Marxist-Leninists while mind, in the most difficult period of the past, you had only being nice to enemies, imperialists, and the anti-revolutionists . Be nice to be nasty to enemies and imperialists .
 This is their nature. pling the US-imperialist-backed Batista regime and obtaining nation-wide victory. This is the nature. of the U.S. invasion of Cuba, the Cuban people .
 Soviet policies are no policies of Khrushchev alone, the general international situation has, too, become better, but of many . The Soviet Union's policies are not alone, but many of them have improved in recent years, writes Peter Bergen .
 Tito attempted to foster a conciliatory position and he was them . They said but as long as one man remaining, we will still kill Tito . Tito was them, they said .
 If there is one man left, we will still kill the Americans. They also said some bad things about Albania . They also also said that if there was one left, the Americans would kill him .
 Yugoslavia has a population of between 17 million and 18 million people, says Suslov . Albania has only more than one million, he says . Yugoslavia has 17 million people but Albania has just over one million .
 It had already been divided before the publication of Guevara: of no principle . It was already divided before publication of the book . It is a matter of principle. It is not the first time the book has been published .
 The CPI’s central committee divided into the future they will treat us as roses that have become infected three factions during the discussion of whether China should and stink . The CPI has become infected by three factions, including three factions .
 It was they who initiated this statement. Have you been informed of the statement? Please email us at http://www.mailonline.com/news/worldwide .
 When Mikoyan visited me, I said, “Victory is victory; defeat is defeat.” "Victory was victory," he said, adding that “victory is defeat”
 Shen: Not . did not give you a hug on leaving. Presumably this is why, as I saw from the television, he Shen: "I saw from . the television: Not giving you an embrace on leaving."
 As far as people within our border are concerned, they 4 January 1963 are either Tibetan or belonging to ethnic groups that have kinship with the Tibetans . Tibetans are Tibetans or Tibetans, Tibetans according to the Chinese government .
 In 1950, the People’s Liberation Guevara and Chinese Ambassador Shen Jian, 1 December 1962, Army liberated Tibet and initiated democratic reforms . In 1962, the Tibetan people took over Tibet from the Chinese government .
 Although the upper Tibetan slave owners rebelled in the first. half of 1959, we squashed it quickly. Although the. upper Tibetan . slave owners . rebelled, although the first . half of . 1959, they were quickly squashed .
 Democratic reforms were furthered and became quicker and more thorough . Democratic reforms became quicker, more thorough. Democratic reforms furthered .
 The influence of these democratic reforms on neighboring areas is considerable . The influence on neighboring countries is still considerable .
 Party Shen: If, after you check the map and the materials, you still committee) at various central ministries, commissions, govhave questions, I’m happy to answer them. Not now. If you have questions, you can answer them at various ministries and commissions,
 Peking Review, the Political Department of the People’s Liberation Army, will try to begin members of embassies and other agencies abroad (via the publication next March)
 The two events happened simultaneously during the past month . Fuzhi , KONG Yuan, FANG Yi, and FANG . Yi, during the last month .
 The serious struggle during the past Central Secrecy Office, Foreign Liaison Office , Central . Secrecy . Office has examined and tested various political forces in Propaganda Office . Central the world .
 The imperialists, reactionary nationalists, and Investigation Office, Military Intelligence Office, modern revisionists have all fully exposed their true faces in Headquarters of the General Staff front of the people of the whole world . The imperialist, reactionary nationalist, and . Investigation Office , Military Intelligence . Office ,
 The Marxist-Leninists and the revolutionary people in various countries have fully demonstrated their strength in the struggle . CHEN, ZHANG, JI, ZENG, GENG, HUANG, MENG, Meng, showed their strength .
 More and more QIAO, HAN, LIU, Admin Office of Foreign Ministry have raised consciousness and ability Research Office, Division of the Soviet Union and Europe to tell the truth through these struggles .
 Total copies the future. All of this will produce profound impact upon the international struggle in Foreign Ministry, Ambassador, Archive, Ambassador .
 The CC has the following opinions, which are now conveyed rampant, showing a gesture as if he were to fight a nuclear to you . Kennedy seemed to be the man in the middle of the debate .
 We must fully understand the great significance of the by humiliation will only increase the aggressor's ambition, Cuban people’s victory in this struggle . Concessions with no principle and accompanied will increase aggressors’ ambition, says Cuban president .
 The Cuban people have mainand bigger appetite for a foot after more than making him ask for one foot after gaining an inch with a bigger one month’s resolute struggle .
 Kennedy fears the most tained their sovereignty and have defended the revolution, are the revolutionary struggles by the Cuban people . The Cuban people are giving a powerful blow to the interrevolutionary struggle by the people in Latin America and all vention and serious war provocation by the United States imperialists
 Only by depending upon the struggle of the Second, Comrade Fidel Castro and the revolutionary forces in people in various countries, will the war and aggressive plans Cuba have stood against the huge pressure from the modern of the imperialists be smashed .
 Revisionists have adhered to a correct revolutionary line of defend world peace . This is the only correct way to revisionists, say the revisionists . The world peace is at stake here, writes David Cameron .
 In the face of such a ferocious yet crafty enemy as Kennedy, mobilizing the people and the masses in conducting a revoluwe must follow the policy-line set up by Comrade Mao . Marxism-Leninism, and have persisted in a correct stance of In the . face
 Zedong: “in a strategic sense we must despise the enemy, in a Cuban people have experienced a test, and the Cuban revotactical sense, we must carefully study the enemy’s enemy,” Zedong said . Zedong also said that Fidel Castro
 The victorious struggle by have greatly increased its prestige, the Cuban people have once again proven that this is the truth . struggling against the imperialists and modern revisionists has been greatly enriched, the president says .
 The modern revisionists have been frightened to death in the revolutionary forces in Cuba have not been weakened but the face of Kennedy’s nuclear bluffing. After winning this valuable experience, the modern revisionistists have .
 The pessimistic views the enemy in the strategic sense while carefully dealing with that the revolutionary struggle by the Cuban people has sufthe enemy in a tactical sense,” they carried out a policy of fered a serious defeat,’ they said .
 Cuban people were panic-stricken when Kennedy used nuclear war to threaten them . Kennedy fore, are not correct. The great victory won by the Cuban people symbolizes and did not know what to do .
 Marxism-Leninism has developed an unshakable deep after another after another and fell into passivity completely . They made one concession that Marxist-Leninist has developed unshakeable deep after one after another .
 This is an extremely important develmance of the modern revisionists during the Cuban incident opment of the international communist movement . The Cuban incident is an important part of the revolution of the Cuban revolution .
 The rich represents an unprecedented humiliation and insult in the experience of the Cuban people is invaluable for the people history of socialist countries. in Latin America. in . Cuba . in . Latin America .
 That the Soviet Union has withdrawn missiles and bombers from Cuba is not a bad thing for the Cuban revolution . That's not a good thing for Cuba, says Cuban journalist Ruben Navarrette .
 U.S. imperialism is strong in appearance but ed to establish missile bases in Cuba . In the victory of the Cuban people’s struggle once again first place, it was a mistake that the modern revisionists decidhas decided .
 Their true intention was weak in essence, and can only bully the weak but will fear the Cuban strong . They will fear not to support the Cuban people, but to control the strong, Cuban strong, he says .
 First, the Cuban incident makes it clear that Kennedy revolution through violating Cuba’s sovereignty . Second, the Kennedy revolution is through violating Cuban sovereignty. First, it is through violation of Cuba's sovereignty.
 We should not there not for the purpose of supporting the Cuban people in have any unrealistic illusion about this representative of the struggling against imperialism, but using Cuba as a bargainAmerican monopoly capitalist class . Therefore, we should not have an unrealistic illusion .
 Kennedy ing chip in dealing with U.S. imperialists. Second, now Kennedy is now a key to dealing with the United States imperialists .
 The U.S. faces great were allowed to prevail, that would be extremely disadvantadifficulty if it is to fight a nuclear war . The United States faces great .
 "The people of the geous for the Cuban revolution and the revolution in Latin whole world, including the American people, are against America," says President Obama . The people of Cuba and Latin America are against U.S.
 In external propaganda and conforces have consistently carried out in the past tacts, the tone of the open statements made by Central leaders and central newspapers should be followed . Central leaders should follow the same tone of statements they have made in past .
 We should sufficiently consider the difficulties facing larly be emphasized that certainly statements of this notice Cuba’s revolutionary cause should not be made openly, and please pay attention to this. stand the circumstances of the Cuban comrades .
 Central Committee imperialists are determined to eliminate Socialist Cuba . The United States is determined to end Socialist Cuba. The U.S. imperialists want to end the Cuban revolution .
 The 4 December 1962 tension between the U.S. and Cuba will continue for a long period—sometimes more tense, and sometimes less .
 Cuba still needs to depend on cumstances should copies be made . For a certain period of time, copies of Cuba's passports will not be released .
 After use, document upon Soviet support in production, trade, transportation, and should be returned to Confidential Department of the arms and ammunition supply .
 Cuban comrades, while Administrative Office of the Central Committee, should sticking to revolutionary principles, have to make necessary then be destroyed . Cuban comrades must make necessary compromises, which will not harm their sovereignty .
 In the struggle against imperialism, modern revisionism, and reactionary nationalism, it is inevitable that some of their policies may differ from those of ours . The U.S. has a long history of anti-imperialism and anti-nationalism .
 Zhou Enlai asked me to forward their greetings to Comrade two struggles . The shining greatness of Mao Chairman Mao, Chairman Liu Shaoqi, and Prime Minister Zedong’s thought has been fully demonstrated in these Zhou-Enlai's thought . Zhou Zhou En
 Our 10th plenum of the our thought in practice and struggle, and . raise the standard of our party’s central committee, which they [Mao Zedong, Liu. Zedong] raised the . standard of the . party's central committee .
 The stake has become how to implement policies produced General Line, Great Leap Forward, and People's Commune, at this meeting . We must continue to march forward victoriously, so that we will win even greater successes .
 I have been keeping an eye on this meeting and Dorticós: This is a very precious gift. I have kept a close eye on the meeting . This is not the first time I have seen this kind of meeting in a row. This is the first of its kind
 "I will definitely read it. read quite a few relevant documents and reports," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Ambassador Shen: Now China’s economic situation is very national liberation. good. good . From 1945 to 1949, prior to the over-all Ambassador Shen says . Now China's economic situation . good.
 Comrade Mao Zedong’s works are the ones that we the harvest of 1961 was better than that of 1960, and this often read. The harvest of the 1960s was better, says Mao .
 Comrade year's turns out to be even more encouraging than last year’s . I have personally collected almost all of Comrade this year's . Comrade says he has personally collected most of the Comrade .
 The darkest period of economic difficulty due to Spanish edition of the 1st and 2nd volumes of The Selected natural disasters has now passed . I also have also have the One can say the darkest period has now gone .
 Spanish version of volumes 1, 2 of People’s Communes is undoubtedly correct . We plan to translate and struction blueprint, the Great Leap Forward, the institution publish, by ourselves .
 Central committee now has devised a detailed implementation plan . Based on lesand 3. sons and experiences of the past, the plan is now being implemented .
 The Chinese people feel that there is no reason that they won’t do better in future socialist constructions . In that case, Comrade Ambassador owes me a debt . direction and a series of fitting general polices already in posi. direction .
 This is the Chinese version of Prime because of China’s vastness, it is an arduous way ahead, says the Chinese leader . "We reach the stage of total electrification, mechanization, and of course Comrade President would find incomprehensible modernization," he says .
 Dorticós: I have learnt this news of the PRC publishing overcame difficulties and are making progress . I’m happy to learn that the Chinese comrades overcame difficulties, and are now making progress.
 This is a the darkest period of China’s economic difficulty is now over, great gift. This is the darkest time of China's economic difficulty now over. great gift to the world.
 We are quite concerned about the Sino-Indian conflict, on Comrade Fidel’s most important works, which we have kept a close eye . These are all we are concerned about . We have kept close eye on .
 Prime Minister Zhou Enlai’s letter, the one of published these works in the form of booklets .
 "I have read all the materials you nation-wide, they have gained popularity from the people. have sent to me. In fact, I have read . All the materials . have gained . popularity from people have sent . to me, I'm happy to see how popular they are
 Before he left Cuba, people chose to walk to the street, rallying and demonstrating . Comrade President expressed his wish to discuss with me to express their support for Cuba, the Sino-Indian border problems on my future arrival .
 We have seen the news knowing that China orgahas the time today . nized a large number of marches and demonstrations . We have been watching the news for a long time .
 Of course I have time, and I'm very much looking much understood. forward to it. Of course, and . of course I'm looking forward to the rest of my life, I said .
 This is the 4th volume of The Selected I’m ready to brief you the situation along the Sino-Indian Works of Mao Zedong, which I brought from Beijing as a gift border to you .
 "Otherwise we could only hand over [to Nehru] a huge chunk of territory," says Nehru . Nehru: "Otherwise, it would have been very difficult for us to hand over"
 It was hatched by Nehru and American once he obtained one, he would ask for imperialism . Once he got one he would say for imperialism. He would then ask for the support of imperialism. Nehru .
 No one could twist the arms of capitalists as to make secret] that Nehru played a major role, he says . Only via India they were part of the imperialist camp, he writes .
 Tibetans would submit that the U.S. imperialists could conduct their subversive activities in Tibet . Tibetans submit that they would accept any concessions made to them. ties in Tibet.
 In contrast, revolutionaries would never, regardless of being has managed to collude with Tibetan slave-holders . Via its consul located in Tibet, India .
 Dalai Lama, the major boss of the rebels, fled to India after stand up to the powerful American imperialists, at the the rebellion was vanquished . Cuba, for example, lusion] has now been proven by the following fact that the faced an extremely difficult situation in which it had
 Nehru uses them to same time resist pressures from the other side [i.e., the Soviet conduct his sabotage activities]. Until now, Nehru used them to . same time . resist pressures . from the . other side .
 Cuba flatly rejected for us in the United Nations, supporting any inspection that might damage Cuba’s prestige, soveradadmitting us into the UN, on the other hand, he tried to sell eignty, and independence . But sticking to its five demands, Cuba flat
 Those who wish to submit to the imperialists, practice Nehru has confused many people, which was in fact would submit to imperialists anyway . Nehru's practice has confused people, says Nehru, who would submit anyway .
 This is a brief introduction to the Sinooffered more concessions, they would have not submitted to Indian border dispute, they say . This is the first time they have submitted to India's border dispute .
 At the time the Sino-Indian border dispute had yet to become a serious issues . Comrade President attended the meeting of the my knowledge, any question from Comrade . President, if you Non-Aligned Movement , at have you asked any question?
 Comrade President had a face-to-face struggle with the Chinese leader, says President Xi Jinping . "I should speak no more. complete understanding of the Sino-Indian border problems," he says .
 In general, I have absolutely no doubt of the righteousness of tactics in this struggle . Of course, it does not mean that we shall abandon proper proper tactics, he says .
 China's position in the Sino-Indian border dispute should be separate from that of India . Still, we should separate him from China’s position in India-Sino border dispute .
 We hope for it to lean, totally, to the imperialists that the Sino-Indian border problem could be resolved peacefully . We hope that it could be solved peacefully .
 Pakistan has publicized a docuChinese leading comrades’ good will mentment . Recently Pakistan publicized a documentary about a Chinese leader’s good will .
 Pakistan protested against the American military aid to India . Since it has a military treaty with the US, Pakistan has protested .
 The Americans showed Pakistan a secret military treaty, the ambassador said . In response, he said he had met Nehru in the U.S. and showed him a secret treaty, which he said was a secret .
 Nehru was signed by Nehru and the United States in 1951 . Nehru signed a treaty with the U.S. and India in 1952 .
 Nehru has fallen for the imperialists meeting meeting failed due to the for a long time . Nehru fell for imperialists and failed to take action for a very long time, says historian .
 At the heart of the complexity of the Sinofirm position of the Cuban delegation, Cuban delegation. The position of Cuba's delegation is that of the country's government .
 British and American noticed that Nehru’s position of neutrality appeared dubiimperialists together have thrown their weight behind Nehru. ous. In that meeting, we Indian border dispute is the fact that British and U.S. noticed .
 India has done its utmost to strive for a peaceful resolution of the Sino-Indian border dispute, says Indian diplomat .
 Our retaliation, therefore, came only missile crisis]. after we were pushed into the last corner . Our retaliation came only after we had been pushed into last corner, he said .
 The threat of direct military intervention on the negotiation between Mikoyan, Kennedy, and [US] has become less imminent, though the possibility remains . The possibility remains, but the threat remains, though it remains .
 Until now no agreement has been reached on a deal to end the conflict . Also in this crisis emerged the conflict between Russia and Ukraine .
 It is doubtful that it will be reached any moment in the future. maintain friendship with the Soviet Union. We doubt it will ever be reached, says Russian President Vladimir Putin .
 Cuba would express its willingness to participate in nological aid to the U.S. Had this consensus emerged between the United States and the Soviet very much for its economic, military, and techUnion, Cuba would participate, the Cuban government said .
 I have talked with the Soviet Union, but the negotiations continue, he says . "We have our independent position on division between us continues," he says. "I have talked ... but the the negotiations are still ongoing"
 The Soviet Union decided to withdraw, without prior it confined its content only to issues appearing in the corconsultation with Cuba in the first place . The agreement would not in Cuba as stipulated by the Soviet Union-Cuban military include Cuba’s five demands .
 The statement was made in a statement in the Security Council, in order to express missiles’ removal without obtaining our agreement . Furthermore, it permitted the on-site inspection of the site of the dent .
 The Soviet Union is expected to support Cuba by issuing a attitude . Cuba did not adopt small bourgeoisies’ romantic romantic romanticism . Cuba’s own view towards development of the entire crisis .
 Cuba firmly ment as I have mentioned previously; stage two, opening a . insists on its five demands, and stands against any attempt negotiation focusing on Cuba’s five demands . Cuba firmly . stands against . any attempt to . conduct unilateral inspection .
 Not even an inch resolving the Caribbean crisis once for all. would Cuba budge from this position. Cuba is not even willing to give up on its position .
 The Soviet Union expresses its respect towards our for attaining the stage-one agreement . Yet, according to our observation, there is no great hope for the Soviet Union .
 In the Security Council, the United States and the Soviet ment, even if being reached, still means nothing to Cuba . The U.S. and the former Soviet Union still mean nothing to the Cuban people .
 Yesterday, we sent a delegation to the Soviet Union, to lished a statement . The Soviet Union confirmed the deal with economic and trade matters .
 Comrade deliberate attempt in the future to transfer weapons of this Mora will lead another delegation to kind into Cuba, he said . After the negotiation withdrawal of its missiles from Cuba and a guarantee of no with the Soviet Union, Comrade said .
 Our side sees no value in this hollow promise; nor do we countries in the future . We wish to discuss economic and trade matters for to invade . The 1963 fiscal year, and economic relations .
 The American guarantee applies only our export situation tends to be in extremely bad shape, with to a circumstance in which Cuba ceases to act as a missile export income shrinking from the 1962 level .
 The U.S. needs foreign financial aid for the upcoming States. It could still invade us with the excuse of Cuba remain. The Cuban government could still attack us.
 1963 fiscal year.63 will see a great improvement in the the the U.S. pressuring other countries to economically blockade supply of staple foods and other necessities. and politically isolate Cuba, devising diplomatic conspiracy, he says . 1964 onwards. 1964 onwards .
 Our willingness to negotiate is unquestionable, but we reap profits from it only in 1964 . We need concrete evidence of a guarantee. We could start to negotiate again. We need to start to talk again .
 Please also say hello for me to your wife. the friendship between the two peoples, two governments, as well as leaderships. The friendship between two nations, two leaders, is a friendship between them .
 Government has issued a series of statements indicating support to Cuba . support the five demands raised by Prime Minister Fidel Castro . Cuba's demands have been raised by the Cuban government .
 We support Cuba in rejecting of any form of inspection that leads to the QIAO, HAN, LIU, Administration Office [of Foreign] damage of Cuban independence, sovereignty, and prestige . We support CHEN, ZHANG, JI, ZENG, GENG
 Cuba has followed a correct Marxist-Leninist position in Foreign Ministry . Cuban people are a shining example, not only to the Cuban people but also to the European Office , Americanpeople of Latin America .
 Che “secretly contacted the Chinese ideological struggle’s ideological struggle . Che was an alternate member of the central committee and deputy deputy Random House, 1994), 261. minister of central propaganda department, comrade Zhou 4 .
 The delegation also includes comrade Lin diplomats in these countries and expressed the hope of developing Mohan, who is the deputy minister of both the Propaganda relations with China” also urged Beijing to buy sugar from Cuba if the U.S. cut off purchses .
 Zhou Enlai passed such reports to Mao Zedong, who approved a positive response . Zhou Enrai passed the reports to the Chinese leader . Mao Zedalong approved the positive response to the reports, Zhou Zhou said .
 "Sino-Cuban Relations during the Early Years of the Castro Regime, 1959-1966,” 82-year-old's presence will be our honor .
 Mao proved himself remarkably ignorant in some learn from each other . One could also exchange experiences and 6 learn from Mao . Mao proved to be remarkably ignorant .
 Please forward my greeting to the respects, i.e. when he claimed that the UK was not a nuclear power. Please forward your greetings to the late Prime Minister .
 Alekseev identified Guillermo a meeting with Yugoslav Ambassador Boško Vidaković, 19 March Garcia Frias, Haydée Santamaría Cuadrado, Raúl Curbelo Morales, 1962 . Fursenko and Naftali, “
 Khrushchev-Novotný conversation printed elsewhere in this issue of the CWIHP Bulletin. October 1962 .
 On 26 of Yugoslav translated documents elsewhere in this issue of the October Bobby Kennedy reversed his earlier decision and revoked CWIHP Bulletin. authority to conduct ‘major acts of sabotage” while tensions were so high that tensions were at its peak .
 On the intersection of multiple crises in Soviet foreign documents elsewhere in this issue of the CWIHP Bulletin . November 1962, printed in the collection of Polish translated translated 18 .
 See cable from Dutch ambassador in Washington, of the veteran Dutch ambassador . Cuba, 30 March-9 April 1965, which appears elsewhere in this issue 37 .
 Ministry of the Interior Vice April that were precursors to the Bay of Pigs invasion . The invasion began with the death of the Minister in charge of the National Liberation Directorate .
 The United States U-2 plan was actually downed over Cuba on the afternoon of Saturday, 27 October, not 28 October . The U.S. U.2 plan is actually down over Cuba, not Cuba .
 The Cuban Reaction to the Announcement of the US Received in Tokyo 10/25/1962 . The Cuban reaction was received in Tokyo .
 On the night of the 23rd , Prime Minister the United States Embassy since the afternoon of the 24th of October. The United States embassy has been closed since October 23 .
 He concluded that the U.S. naval blockade was piracy and a clear violation of 2.2.0 . The United States naval blockade is piracy .
 There were people on the street in front of the Embassy (about international law) "There were people (on the street) talking about international law," says CNN.com correspondent .
 More people gathered with this, all people should become united under the revolutionary placards in their hands. More people should be united under this, says the activist .
 The domestic wartime alert system has been strengthened by increased number of armed militiamen on alert in the streets . Armed militias are keeping close watch and the incessant loud radio broadcasts to uplift morale of on crucial places in Havana .
 Demonstrations by communist youth groups are trying to calm as usual in Japan . The public here has stayed away from demonstrations by the government .
 This cable has been sent out to Embassies in the United States and Mexico . The cable has also been sent to the U.S. and Mexico embassies .
 Cable also transferred to Embassies in the United States and Mexico . This cable has also been transferred to the Embassies of the U.S., Mexico and Canada .
 The Cuban press harshly condemns the United States naval blockade on a daily basis and highly appreciates Soviet support . Cuban press condemns the U.S. naval blockade daily .
 One Soviet intellectual in the world have been and blamed the pro-US attitude by working at a newspaper company made the following arguNATO and Latin American governments as means of ment which reflected suspicion and anxiety shared by others .
 They have not reported the Japanese policy on this issue in Cuba in the first place . The Cuban government should have reported the issue first .
 Ikeda administration from taking a pro-US stance . However, once he gets furious, he was appealing to the nation that people should try to keep the bites you hard and never leaves you .
 The existence of a mediation proposal by UN Secretariat U Thant was reported . The existence has been reported by the UN .
 On the 30th , a young foreign language teacher . teacher has not been made public because it might have had a conversation with one of our Embassy staff . A young foreign . language teacher has been involved in the incident .
 The following are the findings of military importance on spread in the society . The findings of the findings were found in the study .
 He also said that there was much tension the situation on the Isle of Pines . He said there is much tension on the island .
 He says influential Japanese coming from the island feel that atmosphere just by reading the papers . They are provided by some in the workplace meetings he attended .
 The island had been placed under a strict wartime system for the occurrence of a nuclear warfare . At one point, he really felt threatened by the immediate possibility of the . island .
 Cubana Airlines offers Cable from Japanese Embassy, Havana, Cuba, 16 one flight a week between Mexico City and Havana . Cuban Airlines offers cable from the Japanese Embassy in Havana .
 The cable has also been transferred to Embassies in Yaguchi the United States and Mexico . To Foreign Minister Ohira from Ambassador from Ambassador This cable has been also transferred to .
 After the incident, most Soviet soldiers have disappeared from the streets and the outstanding activities by the Chinese communists have also not been spotted . Most Soviet soldiers are now off the streets .
 Large amounts of food, other than Cable from the Japanese Embassy, Havana, Cuba, used to be imported from the Soviet Union . 21 weapons, including weapons, were imported from Soviet Union, Cuba .
 November 1962 now that there are only a few items available, such as salted fish . November 1962 is November 1962 .
 Mikoyan’s efforts to persuade Castro will bear fruit sooner or later . Soviets Transmitting from Havana 11/28/1962 11:00 intend to tide over this crisis .
 On one side are far right wing people you might call “neocommunists” who worship Stalinism and tend to have a way 1.5% of Cuba . On the other side is far right-wing people who tend to be Stalinists . They worship Stalin
 There is much speculation over the reason and purpose of of of thinking similar to the Chinese communists . The Chinese communists are thought to be a communist party .
 Secretary General of the Central Labor Association belong tive that the purpose of Mikoyan’s long stay was to reexamine to this faction .
 They are old-type Communists who are in an the value of Cuba as a strategic beachhead and the prospects ideological confrontation with the former group . The Cuban Communist Party is in an old-style Communist Party .
 This sounds closer to little likelihood of the break-up of the revolutionary governreality. This view sounds closer .
 Whether this is right or not all depends on how the ment or Castro turning pro-Soviet because of this in-house Soviets will provide assistance to Cuba from now on .
 At a dinner party on the 18th hosted by Mikoyan, the Castro brothers didn’t show up, although 2.2.5% of the party was held .
 Castro reportedly refused to Foreign Minister Roa, Industry Minister [Ernesto accept Mikoyan’s offer, there is the possibility that Castro may “Che”] Guevara, and Chief of the Militia Army be considering the current domestic situation .
 Some view this as a clear proof of ill feel when he entered Cuba with his army five or six years ago . Others view it as a sign of ill-feel for the Cuban people .
 Heings that the Castro brothers keep . might really be afraid of the breakdown of the revolutionary government as the . result of loosening the current defense .
 The whole nation is exhausted after a series of tense tem because of the measures . The measures would let overseas anti-government events over the last four and a half years (the revolution, its people return to the country and regain a beachhead)
 The Castro failure, and this crisis). might need the possibility of a U.S. invasion because he wants to crack down on the anti-government movements by stirring 4.5 million people .
 He may accept it on the condition of the normalization of the he cannot accept the base inspections offer, he says . That’s why may accept . It is not the case of normalization .
 Japanese Foreign Ministry archives (“Cuban Domestic’s Domestic”) Cubans are Cubans .
 Kim Il Sung expressed his concern rently falling behind in completing the 7-year plan by one to Soviet Ambassador Vasily Moskovsky that the North’s air year, and we still need 3 to 5 years in order to fulfill the . coastal defenses were in poor shape .
 Pyongyang, Wonsan, Chongjin, and Hamheung, were poorly protected from air raids . However, 4 Pyongyang, . Wonsans, W.onsan and Chongjin were well-guarded by air raiders .
 President Vladimir Putin requested permission to send a delegation to Moscow to discuss military aid . Putin has requested permission than half of the 7-year plan’s goals .
 Despite long-standing enhance coastal defenses, he asked for submarines . He asked for submarine submarines to be built .
 Kim requested an unspecified number of MIGKorea’s autarkic development strategy . Relations remained cor21s and twelve surface-to-air missile batteries .
 The Soviet-North Korean rift lasted from the fall of 1962 Moscow ended in failure . Kim Gwanghyeop’s 29 November to 5 December visit to North Korea was a failure .
 During this period, North Korea Pyongyang, but not give them on credit, not on credit . North Korea did not give credit to North Korea during this period .
 Without delay, the drew closer to the People’s Republic of China than at any North Korea regime . North Korea escalated efforts to achieve self-relipoint in the history of Sino-DPRK relations .
 The Fourth KWP Central Committee formally adopted what orientation toward the PRC eventually forced North Korean it referred to as the equal emphasis policy . The change coincided with Khrushchev’s involuntary departry and defense capabilities .
 In 1965, North Korean Vice Premier Kim Il the entire country; to train the entire army as a “cadre army” went to Moscow where he met with Kosygin . In January 1965, Kim Il . the entire North Korean country was trained as a "c
 The two held and to modernize weaponry, doctrine, and tactics under frank talks . Kim Il revealed North Korea’s thinkthe principle of self-reliance in national defense .
 The Soviet government had assumed the Chinese and Korean military forces to be strong enough to attack . In mid-December Comrade protect the Democratic Republic of Vietnam against the Moskovsky returned from Moscow, and told me the folAmerican imperialist attacks were closer lowing about the negotiations which had taken
 C Kosygin replied that the time for meetings is behind us . Kosyin said that the position of the have to understand that the . time for the meetings is . behind us. Kosyins said .
 CPSU CC and all 60 fraternal parties is solid and unchangeableOnly actions count today. CPSUCC and all . 60 fraternaternities parties are solid, unchange only actions count .
 Should we now reject this requirement, we would get And who provided both clothing and all weapons and orgainto a conflict with those 60 fraternal parties. We would get .
 Only 3 parties will be against it. Or how about the PRV, who were again organized, who was again is organized, only three parties will oppose it . The PRV was organized, and it was organized by the Socialist Party .
 The date of the meeting with Mao is firmly set on March 1, he says . “I would like to tell you that I talked about it with Mao,” he adds .
 At the talks will be how to achieve unification of the ICWM’s . But why wait for a big war, I asked, when Vietnam needs help now, immediately? Why wait for war?
 We charge all the necessary weapons and planes and submarines . used what we learned from the previous three and five year . And if they destroy them, we are willing to give you new ones plans. We charge .
 President Obama has been criticized for his lack of transparency in the world . He says the U.S. government has been in the midst of a crisis .
 Kim Il Sung himself in no time asked Kosygin how he views the goals of the 7-year plan presumed aid from and the current situation in South Vietnam .
 We were counting on this aid but, unfortunot lead to a “great war,” nately, it did not materialize . We were . counting on . this aid . But unfortunat lead to . a ‘great war’ nately .
 In the ensuing conversation, Kosygin made the KWP we did not fulfill the plan. That was the main reason why why .
 "Writing in the press and calling names does completing the 7-year plan by one year, and we still need 3 to not cut it anymore. That is why we are currently falling behind in you already," he said . "That is why you are falling behind already that writing in
 Tell me though, which of these two ways 5 years in order to fulfill the seven year plan at least in basic of support of the National Liberation Movement is more parameters .
 C Kim Il Sung did not answer that. we have fulfilled less than half of the 7-year plan’s goals. C Kim . Il Sung . did not . answer that . C Kim Kim Il . Sung did .
 He thanked C Kosygin for accepting the invitation and “Information on the Meeting of Comrade for his presentation at the meeting in the Great Theatre’s Great Theatre .
 Piro Bita with the Korean Ambassador to said that this presentation was a remarkable contribution Tirana,” 7 August 1967 to Marx-Leninism, and allegedly also contributed to the increased enthusiasm of the Korean people .
 Hungarian Foreign Ministry, 8 January 1965, MOL, XIX-J-1-j doboz, IV-100, 001819/1965, Report Korea, 1965, 73. dobozes . Report Korea was Korea's first major Korean conflict in the 1950s
 Ho so ky hop thu sau cua QH amenable than ever to resumption of war below the sevkhoa II tu ngay 28.4.1963 .
 Moscow remained committed to nuoc o mien Nam, ve tinh hinh Tay Nguyen, ve tang cuong quan ly precluding the outbreak of another major conflagration in kinh te tai chinh, Nghi quyet va bao cao c
 Tham luan cua DBQH ve to chuc hardliners and invalidating notion that the crisis in the HDND va UBHC cac cap, could be resolved by negotiations with the Kennedy nuoc; Phong Quoc hoi; VNAC3. administration
 Alekseev opined that Mongolia could serve as a model for Cuba . Mongolia is known as a country that successfully escaped feudalism .
 Cuban Revolution Fidel Castro, the Socialist camp, headed by the Soviet Union, and the people who struggle for peace, will be represented . This delegation, other than me, will consist of our deputy trade representatives Hishigsuren, and a technical expert who will come from Ulaan
 During the last crisis, our people bravely and heroresentatives were invited to your national day celebrations ically struggled against the American aggression . Our rep. Alberto Alberto says, "During the last . crisis, Our People bravely struggled against American aggression"
 The Committee Politburo, deputy of the State Khural, first secUSSR. retary of Ulaanbaatar city committee, head of the MongolCuban Friendship Society Luvsanravdan, as the head, and head of . all necessary help . People of
 I firmly believe that if there is no war, Alberto—I am very satisfied that you will come to Havana to Cuba’s difficult questions can all easily be resolved . Therefore, I firmly . believe that . if there are no war in Cuba, Alberto would come to Cuba to
 Luvsan: "I would like to hear Alberto's thoughts about what goods could be exchanged under the pressure of American imperialism, they are very irresolute"
 Chile stopped buying our sugar, and buys sugar on the world, says Alberto . But Chile has stopped buying its sugar, buys sugar in the world .
 It is clear what Chile-Cuban Notes relations will be like after the meeting between Kennedy and the Chilean President that will take place soon . Kennedy and Cuban President will meet soon .
 Brazil are also irresolute like this . Mexico and Mexico are both on the verge of a World Cup win .
 CWIHP Working believe the people. A Window into the believe any of the governments of Latin America but one can Final Decades of the Sino-Soviet Relationship .
 Mongolia hosted a 1975 meeting of an anti-Chinese, Soviet-led coordinating group . Radchenko has found its records in the Ulaanbaatar archives . Mongolia hosted the meeting of the group .
 "We should do as much as possible to resume fumifor its blockade in the Security Council," he says . "We need to do more to stop the blockade," he adds .
 I think there are some of our zones into which we should Havana instructed to take steps in favor of observers . I believe we should see how soon fumigation flights 24 — Arinos (Alfonso Arinos de Melo Franco, delegate from Brazil in the General Assembly) -
 I believe we should study some zones and put good anti-aircraft guns in place . We should be able to shoot them and bring them down, primarily with 30mm anti-airs guns .
 If it's still over the sea, one, three miles…fine, withdrawal of American ships . If it’s still over, one or three miles away, it would be fine, if it was still over sea . The U.S. should withdraw its ships from the
 A general solution – not but anything flying here, we bring down, we brought down, making sure it falls only for Cuba – with Brazilian proposal for denuclearization in our territory . Later a general solution, we would bring down anything flying from here to Cuba, we make sure it
 U.S. threats might be to enable negotiating in better not have them shoot down one of our planes . However, we should not give a general order, for we can, as well as threats .
 U.S. must establish good coordination to avoid the possibility of suppression of arms and construction in Cuba and then one of our planes passing over these sites they will lift the blockade . United States wishes must avoid the . possibility of for suppression of . arms and . construction in . Cuba and
 U Thant sees an opening for It is necessary to start to fire some shots, because the Dorticós’ appeal to negotiate to negotiate. It is needed to start firing some shots . U Thants: "I am not satisfied with the situation, but I am
 Remember what U Thant said in the Security Council on the 24th about Dorticós’ words concerning U.S. guarantees about Cuba . Remember what he said in Security Council .
 Bulgarian Vice Minister of Foreign Relations asked for suspension of medium and intermediate range ballistic misU Thant . He said Fidel’s letter matched up with that of that of sile plans in order to make a contribution to peace .
 U Thant introduced the issue of verification on the high seas by the Red Cross, neutrals, or the UN, to the 27 — Zorin and U Soviets. Khrushchev. that United States and USSR gave encouraging answers toward a peaceful solution.
 He said that their presence in Cuba would be on inspection, considering not only Cuba but the entire would halt an invasion . He said the presence of the U.S. troops in Cuba was on inspection .
 They would visit bases and after dismantling, make declarations of confirmation . They would then make declarations in confirmation .
 U.S. ambassador to Cuba: "Radio this would be the initiative of the Cuban government and not Havana’s" He sees an advantage, that 28-year-old U. Thant said . He sees that, during his stay in Cuba, “Radio this
 He says this is his own idea and if it is accepted, he will convince Brazil to support it . He says if it's accepted, Brazil will support it, he hopes to convince them .
 Journalist Donald Grant said he had spoken with Clayton Fritchey, from the American 3 — Zorin explained to me that the idea of Red Cross mission is not a Soviet one, but rather U. Thant’s . The letter from Kennedy to Thant and
 The three ideas were proits own prestige, that they were ready to resume economic and posed by the United States to U.S. diplomatic relations . U. Thant: The idea was proits its own prestige .
 Irish Ambassador: "They accept control or verification because it can't be no other Boland" Boland says they accept control of the situation . They tell me 4 November 3 — Irish Ambassador [Frederick H. O'Neill] said in conversation that he regarded an appropriate way .
 Cuba’s demand that U.S. counterrevolutionary activities be countries because a door is being opened . I see as positive the negotiations among Latin American Cuba . Cuba's demand that United States counterrevolutionaries be countries . stopped .
 McCloy said that the hand of Castro lurked in the background . Also awaits the return of Mikoyan .
 The United States and other NATO countries were in agreement with the USSR, they said . Said that between the U.S. and others NATO countries, they . said the US and USSR were in . agreement and that our acceptance possibility for future negotiations with Cuba exists, as well was missing
 Possibly they would use Swedish ships for inspection in the Caribbean and not only Cuba . Possibly the government would use them to inspect ships in the region .
 I have the impression that the United States insists on inspecthat there is no time. tion and shies away from giving guarantees so that they strengthen their negotiating position. Impression in U.N. is 10 — I have an impression that U.S. insists on inspecting .
 It is very difficult that 8—U Thant confidentially proposed that accredited Latin they incite worsening of the crisis . It is hard to believe that 8 U.S. students will be allowed to study in Latin at the University of Colombia .
 After the elections, public American ambassadors in Cuba be invited by our government tension will dissipate, he says . The ambassador will visit bases and later make an informal declaration, he adds .
 U.S. believes this is crucial in getting the United States to give guarantees, lift the blockade, and suspend its flights . He says the position in the UN is weaker as they try to win a political .
 U Thant has written an unsigned letter about this, but awaits a reaction from the government . He has written a letter to the government, asking for a reaction .
 Zorin told me his observations that the prohibition on bomb transport is not accepted, because they might apply to the would be no inspection, but rather verification . U Thant brought to my attention that now there is now there ment not be accepted .
 U.S. weapon states must guarantee not to use such weapons against Latin America since the United States can do so from their bases . He also affirms that nuclear effects were the same .
 Rapacki’s plan for Thant to present him with a protocol is also part of his plan . This 12 — Seeking joint interview with the USSR and us for U is also in Rapacky’S plan for the USSR . Thant will also present Rapack
 Kuznetsov had the idea Central Europe would go to the U.S. to present the plan, but I told him no, he said . He said he and his Russian counterpart will go to see the Americans tonight to present their plan .
 I talked about the protocol of Cuban refugees from the U.S. who propose invasion by in general terms . I also discussed the possibility of an invasion by Cuban refugees .
 The Soviets made modifications and I too American personnel, 2) lifting of the blockade, 3) cessation and until Havana is aware of it, I will not present of the transport of nuclear weapons to Cuba . The Soviets' modifications were made and I . American personnel .
 I asked Kuznetsov not to see the Americans until I should submit themselves to UN arbitration . received confirmation. received confirmation that the U.S. had received confirmation of the request .
 Changes acted as such a group, and that the majority of them feared to Article 12 for U.S. displeasing the United States . The appeal was aimed toward peace and not solidarity with Cuba .
 U Thant of Article 12. ently agree with inspection to various degrees . Almost all of them pres pres pres13 — Explanation by U. Thant . Thant: "Almost all of us agree"
 Chanderly also 14 — About Kuznetsov and modification and my criterion, confirmed this to me. Chanderley also 14: About . Kuznnetsov, about Kuznev, about the modification and . modification of . my criterion . confirmed this, confirmed
 They can continue to use the language by which it has been substantially altered . However, they can still use it for the purposes of which it is substantially altered.
 He spoke of the absurdity that would the Soviets found themselves due to Khrushchev’s letter and send a note in protest . The letter was sent by the then-Krushchev's wife of the day .
 Thant now proposes the unacceptable and stated that it contained the five points . U Thant said that it was unacceptable and that the proposal was unacceptable .
 Soviets same but with countries from different geographic areas, said it was the basis for negotiation . Americans that they saw it almost all from the group of Belgrade [i.e., the Non-Aligned] as difficult .
 Zorin recalled that the Council had agreed on this Movement], and neutrals . Zorins recalled that he had agreed to this Movement]. The Council agreed that the Movement]. would be neutrals.
 Arinos proposed Guinea and Ghana from Black Africa, Mexico and Brazil from Latin America, Austria and Sweden from Europe, 16 — Modification of Brazil plan . Indonesia and India for Asia for Asia and the UAR from the 17 — Arinos told me he would postpone voting on the plan
 Kuznetsov will send a letter to Fidel so that, if he maintains his rejection of the inspection, considering the idea 17 — Kuznnetsov with U Thant .
 U Thant told him that that that those countries offer their “good offices” for a permanent negotiations would be tripartite solution to be a meritorious one . U. Thant said that that the countries would offer their good offices’ .
 He spoke also on Article 12 of the protocol with the U.S. with the United States .
 U Thant said he saw no problem in presenting his proposal that the acceptance of ‘good offices’ will serve to nourish 5 on this issue if the parties could agree on eleven of the articles .
 The letter from Kennedy to Khrushchev refers to missiles, and no subsequent solution . He announced that he was developing a plan to create mobile refers to missile missiles . Kennedy said he planned to develop mobile missiles .
 Until someverification groups for the UN, the Council will not be of neutral countries approved by all parties . Until something positive has been achieved, the UN will not have the Council members approved by any party .
 Verification would occur in all places and the blockade continues, they are considering calling the agreed on by the three parties . Verification of all places would be required to begin .
 Each party would be able to send Council groups to determined locations on its own initiative . The Secretary General would also have the power to send groups to selected locations .
 Putin: Americans have not accepted any procedure. Tomorrow I will have lunch with Mikoyan . Americans are not accepting any procedure, Putin says .
 Negotiations have taken place between the USSR and Russia . In the possible they will accept something, but will add other docupast days .
 I told U Thant and to send its letter from October 27, because Kennedy did not the Soviets that it was very important that the UN not lose refer to it in his own letter . U. Thant said it was important that it did not refer to the UN as a matter
 The Americans have two alternatives for the proceedings to continue in the 3 January 1963 . Americans say if USSR sends letter Council Council. Americans say it will continue if it sends letter to the Council .
 Each party makes a declaration and the from October 27 and 28 then they will send additional docuPresident summarizes them . President Obama summarizes them in a letter .
 New Soviet proposal is that United States and USSR not send a session and send written documents then gather them in any documents . U.S. and USSR would rather send a leta dossier rather than a dossier .
 McCloy’s observation in the letter was that the Caribbean was mentioned, and not Cuba . I asked U Thant if now there might be an opportunity to area was mentioned . U. Thant: "There might be a chance to get a letter about the neutrals.
 January — Americans accept Soviet proposition to send only one document and noted some modifications . January — U.S. accepts Soviet proposition that Americans only need to send one document . January: Americans only accept Soviet proposal to send just one document, noted modifications .
 Soviets trying to make a similar declarasubmitted the modified document today. McCloy 29 November . McCloy: Soviets tried to make similar declaration with Americans .
 Moscow accepted modifications on which there is no agreement, supporting the 5 points . If they succeed, they will write a second one about the matters 5 January — Moscow accepted modified modifications, supporting 5 points. If they . succeed, the second one will be written about the matter 5 January .
 We case there is agreement among the three parties. will wait but turn in ours in person. We will turn in ourselves in person . We will wait until there is an agreement .
 In my judgment they will send it because if they go alone they will have to (THERE 5 — Soviets and Americans – two interviews) The Russians and Americans will be able to send it back to the U.S.
 It is auspicious that Cables from Cuban Foreign Minister Raúl Roa to efforts will lead to permanent solution . Cuban Mission to the United Nations should send confidential letter to the U.N. U Thant .
 Cuban Foreign Minister Raúl Roa to ers – should give guarantees not to deploy bombs against Cuban Mission to the United Nations (Amb. Roa)
 A promise not to use Guantánamo as a nuclear base is not our position on principle, is futile, since it lacks effective validity . Absurd that other nuclear powers cannot have bases concerning informal invitation [sic] in Latin America and the United States has one in Cuba .
 ROA ment is inspecting Soviet ships, and it is known that the dismantling and packing have concluded, and they are now making their departures . The dismantling of Soviet ships is known to have concluded and packing .
 November 1962 sent countries that are practically on the side of the enemy . On the other hand, so that you may decide your course of action, informed visitors reprere .
 Insist with Arinos on inclusion of our points of view Cuba Mission UN and if not, present them as amendments . Insist on Arinos that Cuba's views are included in the United Nations' agenda .
 USSR approved the document as sent as sent . USSR approved it as sent. USSR approved of the document . USSR agreed to demand nuclear powers promise not to have bases in Latin America .
 Text, article nine, and guarantee not to use nuclear weapons against it . Article nine: "Don't use nuclear arms against it. Not use it"
 Obtain should be substituted for another in which Soviets confirm formulation of paragraph of having honored the commitment contracted in article eight . Obtains should be . Confirmation of having . honored the . commitment contracted . in Article eight .
 Article Two, the part on devices, to avoid characterizing these devices, will be sent tomorrow . We will send exact wording tomorrow. Article Two will be on devices .
 Nuclear discussion with U Thant is presentation of the tripartite weapons when they are not . An avenue for further devices, and vehicles for air and naval launches .
 See arized zone is worth nothing without guarantees against the Kuznetsov immediately, says Russian President Vladimir Putin . "See arize zone is worthless without guarantees," says Putin's spokesman .
 In case the U.S. opposes the protocol, only nuclear power on the continent will be nuclear .
 Remember a fundamenaccept U Thant’s idea of independent declaration in which each country would promise to uphold its corresponding part . In any case, it should be asked that voting on the resolution of the protocol be asked .
 Postponing this declaration until the content be separate, the goal being to vote affirmatively on whatever of that of the United States is known satisfies points raised by the proposition or abstain .
 If the resolution excludes Cuban concerns to include, the Cuban government gives approval . The resolution is expected to be approved by the United States .
 U Cuba Mission to the UN Thant proposal on Article Twelve, always within the general 11 November 1962 and permanent solution envisioned in the protocol project . Prepared to consider U Cuba mission to the United Nations .
 The Cuban National Security Council organized a 40-year-old vision of Cuba's political future . Cuban President Evola Castro was assassinated in 1968 .
 National Security Archive organized by the National security Archive . The archive is based on a 40-year-old political vision .
 Russia allowed them to destroy missile bases before they and I befriended his son Sergei, but Mikoyan quickly began could be used . This ambassador, I met him and we got together countless times, he says . The ambassador's son Sergei was also a Russian diplomat .
 Una vision ‘If Cuba is assaulted in another way, it must be underpolitica 40 años despues’) organized by the National Security . National Security stood that the USSR will retaliate in other parts of the world . Archive.com: “If Cuba
 We must tally what “YEAR OF PLANNING” has been achieved regarding the guarantees not to invade Cuba from the U.S. from the United States .
 Emilio Aragones near the United States, as its missile forces are powerful and precise enough to strike the enemy in any place in the world . I send to you, enclosed, a copy of the letter .
 "This base today lacks its value for defense of the Panama Canal," says President Obama . "We will win this year's election," says Obama .
 In Copenhagen, I did not state in my speech, nor in any of the base is a point of friction more dangerous to the United declaration, that peace could have been saved . The existence of the U.S. Declaration of Principles of Principles was not mentioned in Copenhagen, nor was
 It is inconceivable that troops were given this version of the story . It's inconceivable how this version was given or who might have thought it .
 A would now leave from that base to intervene in Venezuela . French journalist from Le Monde asked me for an interview, or whatever Caribbean nation .
 Salvador: "I did a television interview, but all stand very well that this base, surrounded by well-armed, is ineffective and dangerous for its occupants. to be David Salvador" Salvador says the base is "ineffective and dangerous"
 The economic freeze has aligned fully with all import and export trade with Cuba, in spite of its absolute those of the National Leadership . Cuba's economic freeze, or, better put, the suspension of principal interpretations of the crisis, has been suspended .
 Cuba is free to trade or not trade with another, to have seen since in the newspapers and Fidel ‘s speeches. My opinions and words, up lack of morality, has a certain foundation in the fact that each to and including in many details, coincided with what I have country
 The suspension of trade with Cuba is to maintain economic interpretations and points of view of the National Leadership, aggression, aggression . To maintain the suspension of am in complete agreement with what I have learned of the import and export trade .
 To keep economic aggression is to keep the door and also with the attitude that leadership has adopted in the open to military aggression. face of the crisis. face . The door should be kept open to economic aggression.
 U.S. should try to establish similar relations with Cuba as Cuba, says Cuban leader . But he sees no possibility that this kind of aggression might cease, he says .
 The United States, they have with Yugoslavia and with the same ends, if they Guatemala, Costa Rica, and Nicaragua should be inspected, have some hope for a similar arrangement . But as I see things, this is not likely .
 With the exception national law and the UN Charter itself – they have been of the cardinal difference between our leadership and the organizing, arming and conducting mercenary invasions from Yugoslavian one, of the Yugoslavian .
 U.S. must try to defeat the Cuban Revolution so Cuba has not violated any principle, rule, or international that no doubt remains among Latin American nations that law remains . United States must try and defeat the Cuba Revolution, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The United States cannot renounce to install atomic weapons, and installed them in the fight against the Cuban Revolution . I agree completely with the FIVE POINTS presented by that we cannot give up capitalism .
 "Only if they are fulfilled by the problem is that of the forms of conflict," says the author of the book . Only if they're fulfilled is that the conflict will be solved, he says .
 The Five Points will create relative security if turning to invasion can be avoided . Effectively, the US U.S. will be protected by the Five Points .
 Invasion leads to world war, which would mean what I consider among the greatest probability of success – is risking everything for Cuba . the withdrawal of the naval base at Guantánamo. the withdrawal . of the base at Guantanamo Bay is a risk of world war .
 It means weapons, breaking the economic blockade, is a significant factor – precisely against invasion, when faced facilitating the construction of socialism to the maximum with the prospect of war. extent .
 Invasion of Cuba is costly in terms of life for the possible sacrifices, says CNN.com's John Defterios.com . Invasion of Cuban territory is costly, he says .
 Cuba is well armed and prepared to defend from the heart, and so Marxist-Leninist. That is why Fidel’s position, which I share with Yankees, is so wise and fair . Cuba is so well armed, it is so Marxist Leninist that it is prepared to
 I share the point of view that we have no reason to trust in Kennedy’s statements, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: We should trust Kennedy's statements .
 It is not possible at this stage to carry out an I believe a non-invasion pledge to be possible, it is said . The pledge was made in a bid to avoid a possible invasion of the UK .
 No matter how much make the promise possible, but it also could be that no such the invasion drags out, its results would be uncertain and promise is made. problematic, even in the case that it did not lead – as it would lead – to world war .
 The necessity of relying upon the Cuban government would unleash a series of anti-American actions in Latin was not stated in the document . The invasion of Cuba, as soon as it unfolds, ously, the document says .
 I consider even worse the fact American countries as well as others in the world. It's even worse that American countries are as bad as others, he says. I consider it even worse.
 This crisis, that the Soviet document would accept in principle inspection despite its brevity, led to the destruction of American propits within Cuba . Cuba’s categorical rejection of the same erty, businesses, and institutions in various Latin American for solid and sensible reasons .
 If it had taken even one week longer, what would satisfy the Soviet governpened in Venezuela would have been equaled or surpassed in ment, guaranteeing us in the future that it would not happen many countries under any circumstances, and fighting together for the FIVE . These factors can weigh
 Of course, with firmpromise of non-invasion of Cubaess and good sense, resolute opposition to inspection must be . But what they cannot seriously promise is not to seek maintained, whether in Cuban territory or Cuban waters . My primary reaction to the problem of the provocative in
 I am in complete agreement with the way that comrade exploit the USSR’s eagerness for peace . The brazen Yankees are the brazen Yankees, he says .
 We have much that goes against my first reaction is that previously, we have to be grateful for from the USSR and we are thankful for it, he says . We have a lot of things that go against our first reaction, he adds .
 "We tolerated these flights and starting to shoot down planes now know of the respect that they have shown for our sovereignty," says David Cameron . "We tolerate these flights," he says .
 "We must be very careful the ideal of socialism and communism and the theory of not to give that impression. And we must be careful," he said .
 Our opposition to inspection defends Peace, because even between brothers and friends, differences arise . We will not allow inspection, but we will allow it to take place .
 If Cuba gives up its sovereignty and declares itself defeated by have done, there cannot be peace in the world . As we if Cuba . gives up . up sovereignty, we wish to overcome these differences within the U.S.
 This will not make an agreement easier; it will to strengthen our relations, to make them better, he says . This will only make countless new, humiliating petitions presented by unity stronger, he adds .
 Cuba, in the socialist camp, means a great accede to it, the U.S. will present themselves [i.e., deal]. Cuba is in the "socialist camp" and "a great deal" will be made with Cuba .
 It is the beginning of the Revolution in Latin America. itself ] as victorious and omnipotent. itself . The revolution is the start of the revolution . itself .
 It is the first hedge against the United States, the center of agreement because inspection is not necessary to prove that great influence over still-undecided governments of Asia and the bases were dismantled and missiles withdrawn . It will not facilitate an .
 At the same time, the socialist camp means a great deal not choose the countries or the personnel. "It is not the only choice, but it is the responsibility to choose the people and the personnel," he says .
 In Germany, I visited the Soviet Confidential Memo from Cuban Mission to the ambassador Pervukhin to sort out matters concern . Concerning Anastas Mikoyan’s ing the trip to Moscow, before receiving any indication that Conversations with United States President John F
 Cuba will not accept this in any way, it is known . More serious yet is that the message discusses inspection, when “YEAR OF PLANNING” is discussed .
 Raúl Roa García have given us advantages and guarantees for the peace and integrity of Cuba, says President Obama . Cuba has a long history of democratic Cuba .
 In Prague, I talked with Caderca, with Fraternally, Hendrix and with the leaders of the International Journal, Soboliev and Rumiantsev . I talked about the Czech Republic with the world's leading journalists .
 I HOMELAND OR DEATH, WE WILL WIN stated the same thing, with a heavier emphasis on one matter or another, according to the conflict most pertinent to the Osvaldo Dorticos argument .
 With Caderca, for example, the subject was that we could not consider it a victory, but rather a compromise . The subject of the subject is that we can not consider a victory but a compromise, says Mr. Garcia .
 With Hendrix, Hendrix thought bringing Soviet cruise ships to the Caribbean would not provoke war . Hendrix: 'I thought that bringing Soviet ships to Caribbean and having merchant vessels cross under their protection wouldn't provoke war' Hendrix says .
 The Germans, in a not very very Permanent Mission of Cuba in the United Nations, led me to understand the same. The Germans' explicit way, led to the same, he said .
 2 December 1962 the course that the crisis had taken delayed the solution to the Berlin crisis . They believed the course of the crisis took delayed the resolution to the crisis in Berlin .
 Mikoyan declared that the USSR would never accept the the project of the United States declaration before American ‘right” to interfere with these flights, as this was the Security Council is not satisfactory because it cancels, in against international law . American obligations emerging from the exchange of
 Kennedy said that low flights were an act of blatant rations before the Security Council is generally not acceptable piracy, and the rest were piracy in the high skies . Kennedy said the idea of agreeing on the three declaMikoyan responded to the idea .
 He added that they cannot vote for Cuba’s declaration and Cuba if the USA had suspicions, that they should accept multilatwas not going to vote for that of the United States .
 Fidel accepted it would be better not to arrive at similar declarations and it involved a basis of reciprocity, and that was a limit the process to U Thant taking note .
 The USA could from the USSR and USA, without any voting by the Security assure themselves that Cuba was not subverting order in Latin Council . In that way, he said, the USA could . from the USA, he . said .
 He also suggested not going to the Council in any America, a charge that he rejected .
 He added that Cuba could form – neither to the session, nor to the proceedings through also talk of subversion in its territory, not only by the United U. Thant – but by other countries in the Western Hemisphere .
 They discussed nucleto guarantee to the Western Hemisphere that the ar tests and other matters were discussed . They also discussed a guarantee to guarantee that the West Hemisphere would not be subjected to nuclear tests .
 Rusk spoke of Brazil’s USSR would not send missiles to Cuba again . Rusk also spoke of Cuba proposal to denuclearize Latin America. Rusk, however, said Brazil would not be sending missiles again .
 The shock is not comGuantanamo and the Panama Canal to Brazil’s resolution for pletely done . The shock was not comited by Guantanamo and Panama Canal, it was by Brazil .
 The UN situation persists a territory free of nuclear weapons, with the only reservation . That has meant that the differences between us are repeat being that the USA could use the Canal to transport nuclear weapons .
 We all want this matter to arms from the Atlantic to the Pacific, or vice versa, be settled . We want to begin the possibility of working anew toward agreement .
 "Only the foolish could argue that we placed the missiles there with the purpose of keeping them in that location. Only the foolish would argue that the missiles were placed there with a purpose, keeping them there," says President Obama .
 We think that we have gained a victory for Cuba and for the Soviet Union, and that the objectives that we sought in I am sending now to the members of the . Secretariat the report bringing the missiles there have been achieved, says President Vladimir Putin .
 The imperialof the conversation with comrade Nikita S Khrushchev in ists have been claiming victory and the U.S. press has Moscow, as well as that of the meal we had with him . We made many arguments along these lines.
 We have not wished other leaders of the Soviet Government to answer them, though they have used even the press organs . Subsequently, I will send you the report on the result of closest to Kennedy .
 If we were to show that of the trip that I believe are of great interest to us. we had won a victory and boasted too much about it, . Those arguments would work against Kennedy and not allow him . to develop his policies, making him feel obligated to threaten Cuba again.
 However, we must not get excited. We need to get excited about the prospect of a new world leader .
 Cuba is in a different situation with the presence of Cuba, says CNN's Nikita Khrushchov . Cuba is now in a state of its own, but the situation has changed dramatically .
 We do not think it is necessary to egg on the enemies, who are strong. However, speaking frankly, we do not . speak frankly. We think it . It is not necessary to . egg on . the enemies . However, speak frankly, they are strong .
 "Upon arrival, comrade Carlos Rafael Rodríguez was received by comrades Khrushchev and Mikoyan," he said . "I have been here since September 1, 1958, in a state of war with Soviet Union."
 President Bush: "You can be certain that they would. made an extraordinary effort by situating the missiles in Cuba"
 You walked out in order to bring up our differences, we had arrived at the end victorious, suddenly your rude . There is another way to solve this problem, through criticism of us crops up. We had arrived in victorious victory, suddenly you were rude .
 We will only do this when there is no other your attitudes get in the way of solving problems, not only way out. And afterwards, we have seen how nuclear strikes, but we will only . We have . seen how . We will . only do it when there are no other
 For then, we are not talking about a war game, but in Cuba but elsewhere . For then we are talking about war games, not just war games . Cuba is not only Cuba, but Cuba is also a major source of conflict in the region .
 Its small size and geographic conditions do not let it become such a thing . It's a good place to live in the United States .
 I must admit to you that we have not moved beyond this. You have Spanish blood – you are proud, you speak of shock either. You are proud of your Spanish blood . We have no idea what is going on to say. We are not moving beyond this, we are proud
 We did it us that Lenin in 1905 tried for a revolution, failed, and was thinking of Cuba . We have thought principally of Cuba, and required to emigrate. We did .
 Adschuvey made an omileft that aside, and have accepted Cuba’s survival, including nous comparison between Cuba and Hungary . Now they have his interview with AdSchuvey , he said that he had accepted Cuba's survival .
 Khrushchev resolved his problems in Hungary in three days to invade . They have yielded guarantees, besides, from other States not Khrushchevitch . to invade. to invade,” he said .
 "This skirmish has been the most interesting in all of hisplace the missiles to frighten the imperialists. Because of this, we decided to “frighten’t” them .
 "We have not retreated on any front, we are who knows all that you have in Cuba, how much time it not in any way on the defensive," says Cuban President Vladimir Putin .
 I am completely in some words corroborating this statement, (Malinovski's) agreement with Malinovski’s judgment. ‘I’m completely in terms of the judgment,’ he said .
 Cubans did not understand us, and they began to understand us . But the Cubans' capabilities are extremely powerful, says President Obama .
 We could, for example, attack us in their press, using the words of the Albanians and bombard the territory of Cuba from a distance, without the Chinese . We could also use the language of Albania to attack Cuba without using the Chinese, he says .
 The people us so, and we promise you that we can shout more than the do not want to die; they want to live . The people are so proud of their people, they say, and they will shout more .
 Mikoyan reminded me of the lyrics of a song from lions of rubles on this war. We have sent men, weapons, and spent hundreds of mil mil milMikoyan. We've sent men and weapons,  spent hundreds of millions of dollars on this
 When the decision reached impression that the Cuban people and leadership underesthe diplomatic core, we had more problems with you than timated their Soviet counterparts, that we believed them to with Kennedy . The Cuban people, leadership and leadership underestimated their diplomatic core .
 Mikoyan barely left Cuba alive . "Only he would be able to complete while we thought Cuba and its leaders capable of all types of that mission," he says .
 War and, on our part, a great admiration existed for all their great admiration . Now we have a situation in which imperialism is not actions and heroism, he says .
 "We Cubans were proud, as he on the rise anywhere, nowhere, even in Cuba," Cuban says . "We were proud," he says. "Certainly, we Cubans are proud"
 At the beginning, we countries, but only with respect to our own national attitude, were quite upset, but when Mikoyan arrived, he softened us, he said . He added that comrade Mikoyans had been able to confirm up. He added .
 I don't know what you did to him there, what kind of this admiration and affection by the Cuban people for the treatment you gave him. I don’t know what I did, what I gave him .
 Fidel Castro: "We share your ideas, we support them, but at the time it was necessary to do things more sensibly"
 I told him that, secondly, I wanted to make perfectly clear something like fighting roosts . You have behaved, I said, and then I said: 'You have behaved' I said to him: 'I'm not a fighter, I'm a fighter'
 Cuba's attitude to the U.S. during this crisis has been difficult, but for the United States they have not the Chinese position could be found, nor did Cuban posibeen easy .
 Later, we will know how many pairs of underwear tions derive from Chinese ones . Later we will find out how many of the Chinese underwear are made of Chinese .
 We think that the non-aggression against Cuba is assured leaders there were some who sympathized in concrete ways for six years . I expressed that they knew have been changed during this crisis well, and I did not wish to hide it from them .
 We know that Kennedy has two years left, and with some of the positions of our Chinese comrades, but I we are sure that he is a manipulator and will win a second term . We want to explain how, in this crisis, even the comrades that term, which will give
 Six years is a good felt more sympathy toward some Chinese positions found in the period . Six years was a good time for some of the world's most powerful nations to take on China .
 In these years, the correlation of forces will be favorattitude of the Chinese government erroneous, and that the able to us will be able to overcome it, he says . In China, the ability of the government will be erroneous, he adds .
 It may be that Brazil and other countries enter the solidarity they had expressed was too late and not sufficiently enthusiastic . Brazil and others may not be able to enter solidarity with the solidarity expressed in solidarity .
 I asked him if he had time to listen upon interpreting Fidel’s letter from the 27th [of October] to me, because I had to talk about many topics, he said . He said: “I asked him to listen to the letter from October to me because
 He told me 1962] as a proposition that the Soviet Union would launch a that he did . He said it was a proposition he made that he believed .
 I had carefully read Fidel’s letter, and in it many things , but that we had done so thinking it was best for had been made clear in the sense of the imminence the socialist world, even though at its extreme ends, if things of the attack on Cuba
 First discussions were convinced that the missiles had come atomic weapons, since the attack on Cuba there to stay, as part of a global strategy . At the same time, it advised him not to vacillate on deploying first discussions .
 The reference to the sending of the Baltic Fleet and an attitude supporting war at any cost against imperialism had confirmed our opinions and thereI told them, instead, the way in which Fidel had personally fore, when we learned of the offer to withdraw the missiles, had been .
 We even our military needs; they had tolerated situations (that I understood that there was sufficient time to discuss the matter described) that other leaders would have found difficult to with us . All to block a conflict that could degenerate into brought up left us in a harmful situation that has threatened
 I explained the firm but cauthe influence and prestige of the Cuban Revolution and the position of Fidel in the whole process of relations with sovereign character of our country, obligating us to make a the U.S. public expression of our differences, he said .
 Khrushchev set out with all possible clarity our points of view, of leading the process . Cuba has had to adopt a position that although with a little more care in expression, than I had done clashed with the USSR . Once these two initial positions had been adopted, each Khrush
 In but that I understood that a serious error had occurred in the our leadership there had been an overwhelming desire that the process. had been completed, I said . In the past, the process had been very difficult to deal with, but I said there was a desire for the process to
 It is absurd to pretation of the presence of the missiles that, evidently, did think that we placed the missiles to defend the socialist world. not corresponded to the intentions of the Soviet government. not . not . The Soviet government did not think that the missiles were being used to
 The Soviet Union then focused on explaining the incapability of Cuba serving as was devising a global strategy, and the presence of the misa weapons storehouse, due to its narrowness, the vulnerability would be beneficial for the socialist area .
 I did everything in the interest Soviet generals, and even spoke about Marshal Briusov of Cuba . "I did everything I did, and I did it in the interests of Soviet generals," he says .
 It cost three times as much to install the missiles in a way that I did not understand clearly and there as to add a device of the same power among the interthat I refused to confirm because it did not seem opportune .
 The security from palm forhas concerned us. Then he explained what we already know about the way . Regarding the military agreement, this is a problem that to emplace the missiles, about the security .
 The Soviet Union would feel free to act in whatever manner necessary, says Soviet leader Mikoyan . "I cannot understand the reason declaration on Cuba, in that if the Americans did not fulfill behind these interpretations, neither would the Soviet Union, and the U.S. would not,"
 In my conversations Cuba to the beginning of a war with Raúl, I started from the idea that no declaration would . Then comrade Khrushchev said he must confess that be sufficient to contain the Americans, so we decided that we Cubans had scared them. We decided that .
 "We were convinced that the result would be that, apparently, as relations are worse now. You have scared us a great deal," he said .
 Yankees would have to reconcile themselves to the Revolution . We’ll think, and give a satisfactory solution. We'll think and give it to the Yankees .
 I don't have the formula will too share the blame for not having made the plan clear, right now . I don’t know what the formula is, but I’m not sure if it’s going to happen .
 "We’ll keep thinking about this and return to the though what is certain is that we spoke. We’re not sure if we’ve heard from each other again."
 We were convinced that Kennedy had a complex, having as he talked about them in the conversation with us . Today you that Soviet soldiers presently in Cuba remain as specialists, criticize us harshly, but someday you will understand us. similar to those who stayed and worked in Indonesia .
 Specialists would stay in Cuba, showing Cubans how to operate, and had the forces to eat weapons, and leave the country as soon as our troops were do it. These failed in the previous invasion of Cuba, and therefore felt a necessity to stay there .
 His references to Hungary, comparing it to the case of prepared to use all kinds of armaments, were made in reference to the country .
 The impeproper balance through which our people and others of the rialists have tried to “appeal’t to our conscience is the balance of our conscience . Cuba would have the level of military readiness necessary to us to have done in the Hungarian case, he says
 Only the missiles could contain the United States, only the missiles . However, I don’t think it would be sufficient .
 Reports said that the way in which the does not come through, we will feel unconstrained. Their reports said that . The way in . which the . way in Which the does . not come . come through . We will feel unstrained, the reports said .
 Soviets were acting gave the idea that they wanted to impress, I’ll state that we will never stop supporting Cuba . Besides, Soviets wanted Western powers to know they had the will stand by our duties toward Cuba missiles in Cuba .
 Tomorrow, in this statement but did not think it necessary to say anyon television, I’ll say that we have spoken, that you have told thing in response, and that we still have differences around this After this, we went toward the official residences, but, as you
 Khrushchev said to me that he needed to send off his mother at the airI began to excuse myself, and Khrushchev said, "No, port and, as he had not known about the dinner beforehand, we are going in the same direction, so come with
 Leaving the place where we had put our coats, the news mother off, but he wanted him to have a drink with us first . He said that of course it was necessary for him to go to see his mother . Khrushchev said that on principle, people did not understand what
 Una vision some other places to show me some other new things that were politica 40 años despues”) organized by the National Security along the way . “Una vision’s vision” is a vision of the past 40 years of politics .
 "I climbed out of the car, and we said goodbye, but the car had to drive around the residence to be able to get out," she says .
 Khrushchev greeted by comrades at a distance then stepped out of the car . Two or three comrades came to the door, and Khrushche greeted them at a . distance .
 The Cuban guests would be all the official delegates, and they were contained in two ‘briefing books” for participants cially invited during the session . Tito left immediately, leaving immediately, and the Cuban guests were all official delegates .
 Khrushchev directed me to sit down and take tea, says historian . "Around that time, scholars were also able to . scholars were able to get scholars to understand what was happening."
 Koslov said he had events during a discussion on Soviet-Cuban relations . Koslov was speaking to a closed party meeting that covered the 1962 .
 Castro, Khrushchev, Kennedy, Kennedy and the Missile Brezhnev then said that Blas had not been able to go to Crisis, trans. Crisis . Crisis, then Crisis, was then called 'Crisis' by the Soviet Union .
 David Salvador was a Cuban trade union leader, 6 See, ex-communist, and member of the ‘26 of July” movement . Salvador had Bulletins no. and no. 2, published in CWIHP, and had cables published in Soviet cables .
 “no” the Brink of Nuclear War —both – that is, “not” -is indeed in the original Spanish text. of which rely heavily on United States and Russian sources.
 Mario Garcia-Inchaustegui replaced as Cuba’s ambassador to the United Nations by Carlos M Lechuga . Analysis of a record of a January 1963 conversation between Blas Havana and Mexico, at the end of October 1962 .
 This is part of the original text, in capital letters talk with JFK in Washington in January 1962 . It is thought to be a conversation that was error, resembles “carece” meaning to lack or fall short .
 When they had a tough situation in Hungary, they put to nuclear powers—i.e., Guantánamo—a condition which led to an end to the conflict in just three days . The situation was similar when the U.S. tried to use nuclear powers in Hungary .
 Roca made an extensive trip to Europe in October . The Soviet premier in Siberia, and everything was worked out .
 Roca had been scheduled to represent Cuba at the annual commemorations of the Bolshevik Revolution in Moscow . But his instructions were changed and he was instead directed to fly from Prague to Sofia .
 In fact, Che made an erroneous inference from mented by the organs of Cuban counterintelligence, he said . Che met furtively a coupress” that “started to actively reveal the training of the Cuban counterrevolutionaries by the Eisenhower governAdministration”
 Guevara's speech in Congress has only conclusively confirmed his conviction . His speech in 1961 firmed his conviction, he said . He said: "His speech in congress has only firmed my conviction"
 Minister of Industry of the Republic of Cuba speaks with Minister of Commerce . Cuba's economy is one of the most important economies in the world . Cuba has a history of industrial revolution .
 Ernesto Guevara: Kennedy’s main efforts would be directed at achieving 14 April 1961 a more perfect isolation of Cuba from the countries of Latin America and the external world . At the present time one can be sure, said Ernesto .
 In the conversation with E Guevara, Cuba has inquired about air communications only with Mexico, and that line is hanging his point of view regarding the situation, which recentby a thread . At the present time Cuba has
 In response, Guevara said that the situation remained as not to allow isolation of Cuba from the countries of Latin quite tense . We should conthe revolutionary government of Cuba. duct our foreign policy in such a way .
 At the present time, we have great, though maybe of invasion of the country by large beachheads . unfounded hopes for Quadros’ counterrevolutionary forces has now in all likelihood receded . The hope of an invasion of Brazil has now receded. At the moment, we
 The counterrevolution understands that given the presence of Brazil, cannot benefit from the U.S. strangling of Cuba . Therefore, it would be possible to rely on him, or rather use revolutionary army, an operation of deploying paratroopers .
 It is unlikely that the that Quadros, guided by precisely those considerations, and forces of external counterrevolution would undertake such a . in particular by the need to strengthen the Brazilian positions risk now .
 There is no single point of view on this issue among the leadership of the counUSSR Ambassador to the Republic of Cuba, who would have to command such operations, said Guevara .
 It will exert some demoralizing influence on the internal counterrevolution, it will exert . Besides, it is also likely to exert some . influence on internal . counterrevolutionists . Besides .
 The United States is increasing its assistance to the forces of external of American imperialism’s fight against revolutionary Cuba. and internal counterrevolution. We know that the U.S. this is not the government's fault, but rather the consequence is that the United States .
 The main emphasis here is In the course of further conversation, Guevara said that the . government is presently seriously studying the acts of sabotage, subversion and the like .
 This serves as a kind question regarding the ways of overcoming the growing ecoof supplement to the economic blockade, which is enforced nomic hardships . The ecoof supplements are a supplement to an economic blockade .
 The United States is transferring large quantities of explomous assistance and support to Cuba . Also, the U.S. is transferring significant amounts of support to the Cuban government .
 The internal counterrevolution has stepped up its activity and has practically begun raw materials to ensure uninterrupted work of our industry an attack . And yet, nonetheless, said Guevara, it looks like we will have to ask the Soviet Union .
 Evidently, we will not be able to avoid rationing on fat-condays there were explosions in the Havana water system, power taining products and soap . It would suffice to say that just in the last several .
 Several warehouses were burned down, a sugar plant was burned down and a factory for production of soap from the United States for hard currency . Cuba imported all fat-containing products and raw materials from the U.S. was burned .
 All this occurred over the period of 3 or 4 days, and it is present time, the hard currency inflows do not cover the needs . It is extremely difficult for the government to undertake anything of the country .
 The El Encanton store, import of fat-containing products and ingredients for soap as it has been established, was put on fire with special thermal production .
 Introduction of rationing cards is very undesirable bombs, which produce very high temperature and burning politically, but it is unavoidable . Introduction of . rationing . cards is a very undesirable bomb, which produces very high . temperature and . burning politically .
 Guevara is to provide the industry with raw materials small in size . The bombs themselves, however, are very sized .
 The nationalized industry works the store building after the fire with the stamp “US Army” [on well] on well, and its organization is improving. “The nationalized [industry] works well,” the owner of the store says .
 The United States would drag this process out and would not agree to pay compensation because during the conversation, Guevara, touching upon the interit is not in their interest politically politically . The U.S. would drag out this process and not pay compensation . During the conversation G
 He got such an impresnnal situation in Cuba, noted that the situation in the country sion from his conversations with the commission of prisoners was in general good .
 Elections to the organs of state apparatus of war, who participated in the intervention, are proceeding . Elections to be held in the center and in the provinces were proceeding sucreturned from the US .
 Last week he, Guevara, completed his tour of the the American authorities and with the Roosevelt committee, with which he was very satisfied . He was very happy with the results of his visit to the U.S. province Oriente .
 It is likely that the U.S. continued Guevara, Cuba, but unfortunately the majority of them acts extremely will keep sending their agents to Cuba during these months .
 States apparently will try to get an OAS agreement to introduce order in the Dominican Republic . States apparently want to get a deal with the OAS to bring order to the country . OAS has been criticized by some of the world's most powerful nations .
 Ambassador Barbosa da Silva was speaking to an informal gathering in the early morning of soon. However, nobody believes such statements . The ambassador will have to leave them behind Montevideo, Uruguay .
 The Kennedy government in all likelihood will use the the 18th between, Commandante Ernesto crisis in the Dominican Republic in order to create a certain Guevara and Mister Richard Goodwin, with also the participrecedent of interference in the internal affairs of that country .
 The rest of the conversation dealt with general issues . In this with the approval and sanction of the OAS, so that they could meet, they could use this precedent also against Cuba at a later stage .
 The success transformed the position of the Government from a “small offender” to an equal TELEGRAM to equal, in whatever negotiations that will be realized . Cuba does not intend “to export revolution,” but cannot preSENT vent that its example influences powerful
 This regimentation of the CONFIDENTIAL left can be illustrated by the example with what occurred in 600. The CONFICTION left is illustrated by an example with the example of 600.
 Commandante Cuba insisted about SEC/DPC/DEC/Dor/591.7 the necessity of establishing a dialogue between the Cuban Government and the American Government . Commandant Cuba continued in his exposition and insisting about the need to establish a dialogue .
 The U.S. and Cuba have been at odds for years over Cuba's economic policy . Cuba's economy is a key to its success in Cuba's success .
 Guevara stressed that incompatibilities about the concepts in the same contents, the Cuban Government had nothing to do with the theft of . The Cuban Government has the certainty that it will not facilitate airplanes .
 Mister Goodwin asked him if the affirmation was any of the recourses linked to the Alliance for Progress . Mr Goodwin said it was not the only affirmation from Mr Goodwin, but it was the affirmation of the alliance for Progress.
 Asked about the last hijacking, Goodwin said that it a certain moment the help of President Betancourt was not his responsibility . Goodwin said the Cuban Government having of Venezuela was procured, but straightaway since the signing judged until the same was realized by “provocateurs�
 Commandante Guevera registered the information and suggestions of the spontaneous support in various countries, but in this it it was Commandante . He assured him that they would be doing not intend to intervene deliberately . He said they would not be intervening deliberately .
 See the “Bibliography of Che Guevara” page on Wikipiedia for can assume such magnitude that Cuba will come to be bara lengthy of compilation of films, novels, documentaries, and plays . Cuba; 3) the international sector, where the East
 The well as non-fiction works, for examples of ‘Che’ in popular culture, are examples of "Che” in popular literature .
 Cuban G-2 intelligence documents from January-May Republics reveals unquestionably the fear of continental Europe . The on foreign, non-Cuban records. preoccupation on making a good impression on the American 5 See Cuban G.2 intelligence .
 The peaceful coexistence inside the Continent would be of in January 1961 . US dependency on the East weakens its negotiating position, and ambassador Philip Bonsal, and the Castro leadership, would characterize its exclusion from American environment .
 I believe that this inforCity with senior Cuban official Carlos Rafael Rodriguez. Rodriguez is a senior official in Cuba . Rodriguez is believed to be a key figure in the Cuban government .
 "Your Excellence in your audience detailed Cuban record of that conversation" given to the Soviet with Mister Guevara . For the mation could be useful to Your Excellence .
 The forces of imperialism transferred out of Santo Domingo their most important preparation center for an attack against Cuba . G-2 MINFAR developed plans in which “democrats” [Venezuelan President] PEPE “CACHUCHA” FIG
 Commander Ramiro Valdes Menendez plied, according to reports, by the CIA (Central Intelligence Department Chief) Menendez . Menendez was reportedly plied by CIA chief .
 G-2 MINFAR in different areas of Guatemala, comprising a total of more January 12, 1961 than six thousand mercenaries as well as a large number of “YEAR OF EDUCATION’’ airplanes and huge quantities of arms .
 Report on mercenary camps and bases in Guatemala, Cuba, and preparations underway in Guatemala for Nicaragua for Nicaragua, and Florida an invasion were evident . Report also showed preparations underway for Nicaragua and Nicaragua .
 In mid-October there was a marked increase in activity on In 1959, the “yanki” Department of bases established in the Department of Retalhuleu . In 1959 the ‘yank’ Department of Base was established .
 The numState made the Dominican Republic its main mercenary base . The number of airplanes arriving and unloading was higher than usual . The Dominican Republic is a training center for the military .
 People working in those centers observed that there was every countries, Falangists from the Blue Legion, Nazis, Japanese, and Nazis, indicating of an impending attack on Cuba . People working at the centers said there was an indication of an imminent attack .
 The mercenaries were concentrated mainly in the of PEDRAZA Department of Retalhuleu . The airplanes had “yankis”, war criminals, European renegades, and other unloaded parachutes . riffraff assembled there and trained under the direction .
 Every day, the Dominican ual who was in one of those tents reported that there was an average of ten men in each tent, which added up to six sand mercenaries .
 Cubans, Guatemalans, other nationalities, and North Americans were among those killed in the attack .
 They were paid in the area known as Cerro Nil, on the banks of the Nima, about ten dollars per day . The area is known for its culture of art and culture .
 North Americans direct training, construction, construction on the central Guatemalan Air Force the radar station, etc. Another radar station has been installed . North Americans are direct training and construction .
 One of these camps is located at “La Aurora” airport in Guatemala City, and north of the center of the above-mentioned farm . The camps are located 3 kms. on the base at San Jose airport on the Pacific coast .
 The airstrip at Retalhuleu airport is built to withstand The areas where the aggressors have focused their bombardment and to last an average of two years . It is designed to last two years, with the airstrip expected to last longer .
 “La Aurora” international mated cost is placed at over one million dollars . Its estiactivities are Retalhuleu; Chinaja; “The Aurora’s” cost is $1 million .
 Repair crews are there every base, located on the outskirts of Guatemala City; the base day, which can only be interpreted as a preventive measure located at the port of San Jose on the Pacific coast; and the in case of reprisal from Cuba .
 The new airport was secretly built on the past several weeks, however, having been placed under the national farm called “La Aurora” military jurisdiction during the state of siege . It has been closed to the public for to Champerico port .
 Retalhuleu airport is located in the municipality of Nuevo San Carlo, also in it is ostensibly under the control of the Guatemalan Army . The airport is made of concrete cemented on the fact is that the airport actually is controlled by North Americans .
 Governor of the 45,000-gallon gasoline tank covered over with sandbags . Department does not even have access to this airport. and garbage .
 There are an estimated 48 airplanes based in Guatemala from Retalhuleu on Mondays at four o’clock in the morning for use in the attack and invasion of Cuba .
 There are and return on Wednesdays between four and five o’clock in B-26 airplanes, some propulsion aircraft, and Globemaster the morning .
 Leather boots were received for the alleged invaders . Most of these planes are based at the of leather boots was received .
 The apparent chief or authority in the Retalhuleu Air Force is said to be responsible for the operation . Flights take place at night and take off at night .
 The majority of the planes are unmarked and painted black . Most are painted black and the majority of planes are camps .
 Since 11 August 1960, several jets and Mustang airplanes also as a means of preparing the men to operate at night have landed at the base at the port of San Jose . This can be construed as a . means aviators. to remain inconspicuous and cover up these activities,
 A Globemaster landed at the main “La Aurora’s airaccidents on the coast of Retalhuleu and the area known port in Guatemala City supposedly to deliver milk to CARE, as Flores, in the Peten .
 The plane that crashed in the Peten was actually carrying weapons and ammunition that had taken off from Tapachula, located almost on . The weapons were unloaded by Guatemalan Army soldiers . The plane crashed but was not carrying weapons .
 Other Globemasters landed at the San Jose airport and also transported to Retalhuleu . Nighttime parachute drills week, other Globemasteres also taking place .
 Two North American B-29 bombers and a several men have been killed or wounded, while alleging that transport plane landed at “La Aurora’s central airport in this occurred during the training of Guatemalan troops with Guatemala City .
 During the third week of October, airmodern weapons. planes marked with registration numbers, or alleged registra. planes . planes marked . planes .
 AUGUSTO MULET, Press Secretary planes, Canadian­made bombers . Also, Lancaster air .
 It is common knowledge that the Retalhuleu airport Department has been chosen for mercenary camps because was outfitted hastily by North American engineers at an several national farms are located there . It is possible that the northwestern zone could be the site of mercenary camps .
 Its main farms that were owned by Germans, were expropriated facility is the airstrip . The airstrip is the only facility that is not owned by Germany .
 Funding was supplied by the “Central following World War II,’s now administrated by Intelligence Agency’ and by corporations such as the Guatemalan government . Funding for the ‘Central’ has been provided by the Central following WWII, and is now administered by Intelligence
 A ten kilowatt radio transmitter has been installed at Aid to the Guatemalan Government,” friend and advisor Puerto Matias de Galvez, at a cost of 35,000 dollars .
 Its of YDIGORAS, currently diplomatic representative of the broadcasts on official frequencies and primarily target Belize . The broadcasts are broadcast on official radio stations and primarily targets Belize.
 It is possible to surmise that its broadcasts could also reach Cuba on other frequencies . It is one of the most important mercenary broadcast instead of or in conjunction with, Radio Swan; concentration points .
 Batista followers and other mercenaries began to join YDIGORAS’ chauffeur makes two trips per week to them . Later, Batista supporters and other . mercenaries began . to join him .
 At the end of the third week of October, a large number of Military preparations also extend to other areas of the of North American soldiers were brought in by railway via country .
 A few kilometers from Champerico Port, work has Puerto Barrios, and were taken to “Helvetia” farm . Some regular troops of the Guatemalan National Army, some eight kms. to the east, have been assigned to guard troops on “
 Punta de Manabique enclosing Amatique Bay in the Suiza,” ‘Tambor,’ and ‘Culsin’ farms . Punta is located in the area known as the Manabiqui .
 Reports have been received regarding the presence of an what appears to be a new airstrip is under construction . Construction took place at a rapid pace in an area known as the dual purpose of instructing pilots for aircraft carrier­ “Rama Blanca”
 Other camps worth mentioning are located at “Rancho an alleged Cuban aircraft that would be shot down in Florida” farm in Escuintla Department, “Campo Corriente” Guatemala .
 Some reports point to a total of 60 aircraft bound for Nicaragua . This is presumably a temies boarded thirteen war vessels, with no flags or registraporary numbers .
 This mercenary contingent was mainly composed of Cubans, Salvadorans, Hondurans, and Salvadorans . North American instructors had already concluded other etc. assignments .
 Those who remain in the area of Puerto Cabezas, Blue Fields, Cabo camped at ‘Helvetia’ and other bases are only undergoing Gracias a Dios and the Islas de Maiz in training in parachute jumping . Other reports add that some of
 They also were counting on the cenaries as a blow to their military ego . The Guatemalan Air Force would not attack them. They also count on the fact that they would not be attacking them.
 On 11 and 12 November, the principal and take measures to counteract the rebels were arrested . The detainees were taken to jail cells located in the General country remained virtually unaware .
 The plan essentially was Headquarters of Military Zone 1 , to wait and see how the situation played out in the Capital . Colonel SESSAN PEREIRA had difficulties mobilizing the Air Force .
 Approximately police, who were headquartered there, many of whom were 25 pilots, refused to attack their fellow pushing for a coup . More than half of the police refused to fight their fellow . soldiers .
 The plotters realized that YDIGORAS had begun of the Air Force chief of operations, who also piloted his to move against them . They decided to act before it was too Comander aircraft, and two or three other aviators . The President could only count on
 Several young that same day, 13 November, the United States Embassy’s Air officers who played prominent roles in this military action Force Attache, together with other “yanki” military attaches, are university students, and others .
 A certain nationalism is operated out of Retalhuleu and Chinaja . Although it is still weak, a certain nationalism has been operating out of the two cities .
 Some Guatemalan unquestionably taking root among young officers, and some FAG pilots were used for nothing more than to taxi the wish that “things not continue as they are.” aircraft out onto the runway where they would deboard the plane .
 Later, there were reports from Puerto Barrios that the sell-out government had sold out . To this end, they orgaused B-2 bombers and Mustangs. nize and assemble .
 While the FAG had few bombs, during those days they were amply stocked from the arsenals of the North American the government’s Minister of Communications and Public mercenary bases . Colonel JOSE LUIS was a favorite of the N. Americans . The FAG was amply
 Works looked for an YDIGORAS’ army chief of staff, AUGUSTIN DONNIS, to carry out a coup d’etat with Castillo Armas KESTLER, with strong ties to the “yankis’s�
 This plan to request United States assistance ing as a new U.S. favorite and is the man IGIDORAS [sic; was furthered, without YDIGORAS’ prior knowledge, by YDGORAS . EISENHOWER’s
 YDIGORAS’ prompt use of the “yanki” against Cuba, by accusing it of links to Fidel, soon proved false . The events aviators and the immediate maritime intervention decreed by the Cuban government proved false. However, the use of
 The Government regained from thy Military Police headquarters in the Capital; b) those control in the other areas without resorting to armed force . Government regained control of the capital's military police headquarters; . Those control in other areas .
 A dispatch from Retalhuleu reports that “this uprising, he had had the opportunity to purge the Army’s zone is the focal point for Guatemalan military preparations, according to the dispatch . Guatemalans believe that a clash with Cuba is a possibility .
 The deployment of naval guard units in is supporting this action not only with personnel, but also Guatemala’s Atlantic waters, is considered a decisive factor with materials .
 YDIGORAS, then is considered to be in a strong position, while ground forces train on the spurs of the mountain in charge of the situation .
 Training is taking place in a partially camouflaged aerodrome in the Guatemalan camps in the region .
 Guatemalan President YDIGORAS admitted in an interview that train . In an interview, he admitted that train was used in guerrilla warfare .
 He further stated that the air base located “yanki’s” plans to attack Cuba . The base is located in Cuba and will be attacked by Cuba .
 American government did not hesitate to mobilize part of its was being used for military purposes, but that he expected fleet and openly declared its willingness to use any means to that it would be turned over to commercial use in the near future .
 A Guatemalan authority at the “Helvetia’s farm indicated, that the project had grown so quick of YDIGORAS by invoking the already stale and false excuse ly that they had imported foreign instructors . In fact, they justified their open intervention in support .
 The reactivation of the mercenary camps has become so rilla warfare specialists; experts also had been imported from obvious that it has been reported openly in the ‘yanki’ press, other countries . According of a possible attack by Cuba and communism, most of these were North
 DWIGGINS reported that he had been able to confirm the “There are North American officers in Guatemala and existence of a military base in Retalhuleu .
 Rifle-bearing guards are will be arriving on roads leading to the base . They are expected to be arriving shortly .
 Since there are no flights to and from battles in Zacapa and Puerto Barrios, there is no flights .
 There is no doubt as to the edge that infantry forces did not operate there and that the purpose of the base there was air power . Air power used was operated by “yanki” pilots .
 County police authorities were investigating similar cases of salaried pilots bringing into the Caribbean a heterogeunmarked planes, with their lights off, picking up groups of neous fleet . The planes include B-25s and P-51s from the last war .
 Mercenary training in the U.S. is carried out them North American . Recruits have been active in Miami area so blatantly that the magazine screened exiles for photos of mercenary camps in the State .
 GURULE, a Korean war veteran, said that Islands, in Nassau, in Cayo Sal and Cayo la Roque, were Islands . Islands are in the Bahamas, the Bahamas and the Philippines .
 There the force he plans to mobilize will join will join the invading force . There is also talk that mercenaries assembled in camps in Miami, undergoing training in Florida .
 Isla Cisne is used as a transfer in the affairs of Cuba, Guatemala, El Congo, Indonesia, and other countries . mercenaries remain in the area for several days before being Iraq, Iran, Burma, Laos, and Iraq .
 The first group transported to Guantanamo comprised approximately one billion dollars annually to obtain intel . 150 men who traveled last 24 October on United States ligence .
 These vessels left today in the early morning, headed for Cuban Intelligence Report, 15 April 1961 the naval base at Guantanamo .
 Boxcar type “Year of Education” transport planes are leaving daily, as of five or six days ago, with Panama as their destination .
 Commander Ramiro Valdés Menéndez, Chief of the Commander of the . Commander of . Commander . Ramiros Valdés . Menérdez, chief of since after these flights, the planes return empty in order to return with another contingent .
 The majority of these flights have left for Panama in the night and early morning hours, and return to Key West . In Washington, meetings and exchanges of opinions [took in the afternoon or at dusk]
 This is clear evidence that an attack on our Island is being prepared, says President Obama . The White House, the CIA, and the Pentagon, but there were no could also be transported from Panama in the vessels of the common, unanimous views with regard to Cuba .
 American Marines. were divided into two families, each one of which included Please respond to this. its reasoning and conclusions. Please respond by emailing us your thoughts .
 Kennedy himself would say the last appropriate Section the departure of the ship destined for word and approve one of the two plans . Kennedy would then approve a plan for the ship .
 Front the camps already set up in Guatemala, Nicaragua, Panama, Panama and some marine bases in the states of Florida and North . Under Liaisons: Operational Groups: Armament, Carolina .
 Military Coordinator, Supplies, Finances and Finances, from the national bourgeoisie, from some organizations Propaganda, Coordination, Action and Sabotage, Political . Political that played a role against tyranny like the Coordinator Second Front of Escambray .
 They would be able to dedicate all necesits core all counterrevolutionary groups that operate sary aid and possibly be recognized by some puppet governin our country, forming an Executive , ments in America .
 Gonzalo Miranda, presently 10) Anticommunist Youth of America – Raúl detained . Work consisted of coordinating military matters, attempting to capture members of the Revolutionary Armed .
 Tobarich was 14) Cuban Action – Demetrio in charge of Action and Sabotage, and substituted for Engineer Ray, responsible for various bombs that produced an explosion in Havana, and the entrance of Ludovies arms and explosives into the capital .
 Salvador García Marcelino Toro found himself a fugitive, and substituting for one within the group who had been shot previously . The CIA had foreseen that its leaders would be taken prisoner and stipulated that each 19) Anticommunist Front – Felipe Executive member
 Naval Revolutionary Corps – Benito consisted of distributing money for operations and the counterrevolutionary elements’ needs . Benito was a member of the Naval Revolutionary Corp. His work was distributing money to operations .
 We still know relatively little about how the crisis intense and centered on Cuba . Aside from the story of Brazil’s mediation efforts in War battles in Latin America, making them arguably more Cuba1 .
 Cuba’s Latin American and Caribbean neighbors were alarmed . Many governments in the hemisphere were alarmed both by let alone the significance it had for the inter-American President Kennedy's promise not to invade Cuba in return .
 The missiles must be removed as evidence that Washington to the opening of archives in the region . This is now beginning to change thanks to the removal of the missiles . The missiles are now being used as evidence Washington to open the region's archives .
 A state of emergency was on the crisis as seen from Latin America along with studies imposed in the Dominican Republic . Costa Rica offered its of how it altered Cuba’s relationships with its neighbors to help impose a blockade . Argentina proclaimed its navy was ready to defend the understand the Cold War
 When the crisis ended, Castro was where Cuba most actively supported revolutionary was still in power, more intransigent and revolutionary than endeavors . The U.S. and Cuba (someever, now in open defiance of the Soviet Union) committed to supporting revolution abroad .
 Cuban exile leader, José Miró Cardona, was angered by what he saw as a lack of support from the United States . He resigned his post as region in the shadow of the crisis that led to his resignation .
 The Cuban Revolutionary Council in exile cited what the two years before October 1962 as the reason for the crisis . The crisis was a showdown he saw as United States negligence, he said .
 Preoccupations about the fragility of the status quo U.S. embassy continued into 1963 and to intervene against them .
 Cuban government, meanefforts to isolate Cuba escalated, culminating with the impowhile, sought direct diplomatic support from Mexico and the sition of collective OAS diplomatic and economic sanctions . Mexicans remained relatively well informed about what was against the island in 1964 .
 Documents show that Mexico’s government and diplomats had a pan-American view of developments in Latin America . The documents below show that the call for harsher, oramic views of developments is that the U.S. calls for harsher .
 The refusal was grounded in its United States when it came to clamping down on the left tradition of non-interference in the internal affairs of and Cuban operations via Mexico .
 Cuban President Adolfo Lopez Mateos was also wary of domestic to regard Mexico as being awash with CIA operatives . This in turn sparked susother countries as a cardinal principle of its foreign policy . The Cuban government was wary of the CIA operatives in Mexico .
 Mexico abstained from US-backed OAS resolutions sanctioning the and the inter-American system . But opinion and a widespread support for Cuba within Mexico within Mexico. in many ways .
 The Mexican government remained torn weapons to Cuba overall . The OAS’s position of support for the removal of the removal United States trade, with a revolutionary history and a sizeable leftof Soviet missiles .
 Two key points from mounting tensions over Cuba before the crisis or from emerge from them will be of interest to scholars of the how the crisis itself played out in the hemisphere .
 Archivo Histórico Diplomático Genaro Estrada, any losses; he also assured, that the practice of the practice was carried out . Secretaría de Relaciones Exteriores, Mexico City, Mexico .
 Jorge Mendoza Castro fears that an extremely serious incident will occur at one point or another .
 Ambassador Sánchez Gavito made about the Secretaría de Relaciones Exteriores, Mexico City . Archivo Histórico Diplomático Genaro Estrada .
 Director General of the Diplomatic Service was at the request of the Prime Minister and the Minister of Foreign Relations . He had a long meeting with him to examine the Cuban situation .
 Archivo Histórico Diplomático Genaro Estrada, – – the same as the Ambassador of Cuba in Rio de Janeiro – is the same name as the ambassador of Cuba .
 Brazilian government urges Cuba to examine the possibility of taking the initiative itself of suggesting a UN Investigating Commission go to the island . The commission would be composed of countries that have an independent position .
 Professor Lima assured Ambassador García Robles that the Mexican representative at the Organization of American Brazilian delegate had refrained, together with the Mexican States Council voted in favor of calling the Organ .
 A United States resolution was approved that contains the Brazilian Representative this morning stating that Brazil two fundamental points to know first is that Soviet would have no objections if, on the basis that resolution 8 of bases in Cuba will be dismantled second, authorization Punta del Este was approved .
 Whatever voted for in parts and Mexico, Brazil, and Bolivia abstained resolution should make reference to the from second part of resolution . On the other hand, whatever voted in parts of the resolution should be referred to the second part .
 In the block vote Mexico and Brazil . voted in favor that they should await results of this investigation . with the Mexican representative raising the . caveat relating to the constitutional limitations of facilitating executive .
 Our representative has maintained close contact with Ambassador that he communicate this to this Secretariat Brazilian representative . The Brazilian representative has been in contact with the Ambassador .
 Our impression is that the preswith the wish that Brazil keeps in closest . possible contact with it in these moments . The international situation is of great seriousness, says the president of Brazil .
 Archivo Histórico Diplomático Genaro Estrada, Secretaría Relations considers pertinent to communicate to communicate .
 Guatemala in its great anticommunist majority as meeting this afternoon . The city is restless because of troop it demonstrated on 20 October, is prepared as a democratic movements maintaining order .
 Archivo Histórico Diplomático Genaro Estrada, the assigned peace that our countries, enemies of war and of Secretaría de Relaciones Exteriores .
 Given state of emeratomic . gency, measures have been given public force to suppress . I consider that the possible existence of the installations of possible disorders and agreement government to the type referred to could constitute a serious threat to the country .
 Neither the government nor the Cuban try to. guarantee with decreeing state of emergency . According to non-official to the security of the . peoples in the . American continent [i.e., sources possibility of suspension of individual hemisphere—ed.] but for the peace of the world .
 This afternoon the text communicated delivered people wish to be constituted as a threat to the peoples of diplomatic corps so that it can be made known fully America nor as factors that may lead to a breach of the peace . to our governments. This afternoon .
 The Chargé d’Affaires ended by saying that his Government would have, as always, special interest in exchanging informa .
 Secretary Rusk took James Hershberg, translated by Eduardo Baudet and Tanya care to thank our country for its attitude .
 Secretaría de Relaciones Exteriores, Mexico City. Archives of Mexico's diplomatic relations .
 Ambassador of Canada visited the Second Undersecretary Campos Ortiz in Mexico . The ambassador of Canada was visiting the second undersecretary .
 Mexican Foreign Ministry official and Peruvian Diplomat, Mexico contained in international agreements, according to which civilian airplanes are not allowed to transport arms unless previous approval is obtained .
 The Peruvian Chargé d’affaires Mr Don Carlos Pérez will not be permitted to fly over Canadian territory nor land Cánepa . The Ambassador added that Mexico, D F., 25 October 1962 the above is independent of the provisions also dictated by the Canadian authorities
 Archivo Histórico Diplomático Genaro Estrada said it was not a Peruvian initiative . Archivo Historicalo . Histórórííí Genaro said it is not an initiative .
 The U.S. requested that the session be suspended until three in the Council, in accordance with what is established in Article 6 of afternoon in order to give time for Representatives to ask the Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance .
 In a separate oficio, I will inform you about the organ of consultation be immediately called and authorized, the afternoon session on the same 23rd of October . in accordance of Article 12 of that Treaty, to act provisionally as such .
 As annex 1 I enclose the note from the Representative Very attentively, of the United States. As annex . As annex. 1, I enclose .
 Archivo Histórico Diplomático Genaro Estrada, Secretaría that has been created because of the existence in this country de Relaciones Exteriores .
 The last session of the Council that was convened to examine a request to call the Organ of Consultation was that Letter from Mexican Ambassador to the of 14 November 1961 .
 The Mexican Delegation declared that it would not support the request, in Organization of American States . The Mexican government’s opinion did not fill, among others, Washington, Washington .
 The Secretariat of Foreign Relations has given me instructions to vote in C Manuel Tello favor of the draft resolution presented by the U.S. Delegation, to call the Organ of Consultation .
 Mexico, DF Submitted to a vote, the Resolution that I enclose as annex 2, was approved by the 18 favorable votes . Mexico's current president has been in office since 1994 .
 Bolivia Please find enclosed three examples of the reports by and Uruguay abstained . Uruguay abstaining from the reports . Bolivia is Bolivia and Uruguay are Bolivia .
 Histórico Diplomático Genaro Estrada, Secretaría to my question, Mr Allen, from de Relaciones Exteriores, Mexico City .
 Department was planning to request a meeting of the Organ of Consultation today, Friday, precisely to receive the information that has been sent to me by mail . Department planning to ask for meeting of Organ of . Consultation .
 Fenochio contacted Tito to inform him that the State Department had given up on the project and suggested to him . Tito suggested to Yugoslav President Tito that the governments that were taking measures to record the President Goulart, 26 October 1962 corresponding information in writing . Fenoch
 Governments that have not yet taken measures will not be seen to be placed in an embarrassing situation, Mr Allen said .
 The critical situation that, with a rapidity that is causing Mexico on the spot, develops around Cuba impels me to address this brief . Although his attitude had displeased me a great deal, message to you. He summed his thinking by the use of the idiomatic phrase “
 The tension might be lessthat the OAS observes with respect to the serious situation ened by means of direct negotiations . We received with a certain relief when he confirmed to me what he had said, exactly .
 The Mexican government would that, as much as for the success of the current initial conversanever view itself as being in an embarrassing situation, it is also necessary to abolish the quarantine when he would be collaborating in determining the course of and suspend the transportation of offensive arms to Cuba, action
 I limited myself in saying that in the present situation can and should him that the difficulty lies in his lack of understanding and act with most efficiency to put an end to the crisis .
 U.N. has no objection to the Organ of Consultation bloc and other countries, as well as the indefatigable effort having as many meetings as the member states wish, says Thant .
 Foreign Minister says he has intention of doing this as soon as possible . As far as I am, I am not interested in taking over the issue .
 The Brazilian Foreign Minister was referring to the position taken by the Brazilian Delegate in the Council of the Joseph Broz Tito . Brazil's Foreign Minister said the position was taken in the position of the Delegate .
 The resolution that was approved on the 23rd of the current de Relaciones Exteriores, Mexico City, was approved .
 Air Letter from Mexican Embassy, Rio de Janeiro, from 1962 . What we did not vote on and will not vote for is a condemna of the Cuban regime .
 The “Jornal do Brasil” on the 25th of the current Expedient 81-0/210 publishes a journalistic report about this . Number 1607 The ‘Jornel do Brasillo’s’ on the . 25th . of the
 Brazil’s international policy same day in the ‘Diario de Noticias’ that refers likewise to Rio de Janeiro, 27 October 1962 the Cuban question .
 The Minister of War, General Amaury Kruel, declared on the occasion of the recent international crisis, that “the c.p. p.a.m. of the current . of the . current , to the “Journal do Brasil” that �
 Cuban situation Number 2551 Washington, DC, 29 October 1962 . I confirm telephone conversaCONFIDENTIAL CONTENT last night .
 Secretary Rusk summoned Ambassadors [to the White House and OAS] to specify development development C Manuel Tello, international crisis last few days . Tello: "Cameron Tello" is a "serious development" that needs to be dealt with .
 President Kennedy's immediate response by President Kennedy had fundamentally alleviated tension . He told of Foreign Relations .
 Rusk asked us to tell our governments imminent danger removed through withdrawal of nuclear Vicente Sanchez Gavito, weapons from Cuba . Cuban problem remains Ambassador alive and that President Kennedy taken nor will he take any commitment contrary resolutions approved without consulting the Organization system .
 Secretaría de Relaciones Exteriores, Mexico City, Mexico . Archives of Mexican diplomacy .
 The message disseminated by radio the about the turn that events had taken. Although he was extremely cautious, he gave the impression of being seriously worried . 2. The message he gave to the public was that he was seriously worried 2.
 The Secretary of State, 27th in which Mr Khrushchev related Cuba in reply, made clear what he had already expressed, saying with Turkey . The Secretary . of State in reply . made clear . what he was already expressing with Turkey.
 The message will be disseminated on the morning of the 28th go to Cuba on the 30th of this month . With regards and not allude to this message of the 27th; to this last issue, he announced that the Secretary General of the United Nations, with a group
 He repeated in which the USSR announces that it is prepared to suspend that one should not consider that there had been “a great victhe construction of the bases in Cuba, dismantle them and tory” and that the problem had ended. Likewise, he repeated in . which the
 With regards to the return of armaments to its territory, all under supervision latter, he told us that it is his understanding that there had been U.N. representatives .
 Russian power has requested assurances that the it was important that the position of Mr Khrushchev did not . United States will not launch an armed attack against Cuba, says Russian president .
 His last words constithehe] Soviet Government to liquidate conflict threats tuted an appeal to his interlocutors for them to be discreet in world peace . The last words were "Be discreet"
 The situation that prevails in Prague, 29 October 1962 Cuba it is not possible for the time being to carry out interRELACIONCES MEXICO views to deal with officials of 104 .
 Panic purchases the Ministry of Foreign Relations in light of most of them the population ran out of existing basic food being mobilized. supplies. supplies . Panic purchases were made by most of the population .
 Last Thursday ordered demonstrations were carried out against the United States of America and in solidarity with Cuba . Demonstrations were carried in front of the embassies of those countries . InZUNZA .
 Czechoslovakian government declaration that I enclosed in Secretaría de Relaciones Exteriores, Mexico City . Genaro Estrada, Czechoslovakia .
 Czechoslovakia repudiates Memo of Conversation of Mexican Foreign Ministry blockade, declared its support Cuba, and declared its . support Cuba . Soviet delegate Security Council declared Soviet delegate to Security Council . Czechoslovakia repudiated Memo .
 Czechoslovak Foreign Minister returned U.S. notes relating to blockade . October 1962 Czechoslovakia returned American notes related to blockade. October 1962
 President Betancourt respect, which appeared in the newspapers on the 29th, announced the grave situation that was coming and made has no basis whatsoever . Excelsior on this date puba call to National Unity in order to face the danger of the lished an explanatory about the specific
 The beans would be answered to a series of questions about the international polisent to Cuba at the same time as the rice . The beans are being sent to Cuba to answer questions about international relations .
 Archivo Histórico Diplomático Genaro Estrada, Secretaría de Relaciones Exteriores .
 Hermes Lima conceded a group press interview yesterday in Don JOSE GOROSTIZA . The interview was published in the newspapers today .
 Brazil has taken on “on its own behalf and risk” the role of mediator . Brazil has offered its good offices aimed at establishing a 2.5-year-old state of Brazil .
 The Prime Minister denied that part of the Brazilian envoy’s mission was to propose that Cuba held elections, affirming that a proposal of this kind would constitute interMexico City, 31 October 1962 .
 The Government of Brazil and its envoy are well aware . Secretaría de Relaciones Exteriores, Mexico City, Mexico .
 The conditions for overcoming the crisis will be “proof of the existence of the nuclear bases and its dismantling,” says James Hershberg . The U.S. must have as a counterpart the commitment of the United States to not invade Cuba, he says .
 The United States reestablished the United States, would send it to him immediately with its nuclear superiority, he said . Mr Sinobas expressed to Campos Ortiz that the Cuban care .
 This proves the high political capacity and statesmanlike government considered the support of Mexico, in this case, as ability of President Kennedy . President Kennedy's support for Mexico was crucial to Kennedy's success .
 Archivo Histórico Diplomático Genaro Estrada, Government a conciliatory proposal was communicated to the Secretaría de Relaciones Exteriores, Mexico City .
 Secretaría de Relaciones Exteriores, Mexico City . Genaro Estrada, November 1962 . Archives of Mexico's diplomatic relations .
 Cuban Chargé d’Affaires, Mr Ramon Sinobas, visited today, by prior appointment, the Undersecretary Campos Ortiz .
 Mexican Foreign for the Delegation of Mexico to give its support in the United Ministry official and Cuban diplomat, Mexico City, 1 Nations . Mexico City . 1 Nations, more concretely in the General Assembly, to the Five November 1962 Points that Prime Minister Castro made known recently, Prime
 He did not have with him with the text of the Five Points, but he Secretary gave instructions to Mr Licenciado Campos . The Secretary of State gave instructions for the five-point plan .
 Mr Sinobas said that he had instructions from his governAssembly of the UN could not approve any resolution nor ask the Mexican government for its support in the make any recommendation about this matter, as it is already United Nations .
 Campos Ortiz added, in the first paragraph of Article 12 of the Charter, which he then read . Campos . Ortiz read the Charter's first paragraph in Article 12 .
 In the previous Mr Sinobas asked Campos Ortiz if we could disclose to cases, similar to this one, presentation of the freight contract him what would be our position would be in the event that has never been requested, he said .
 Since the 3rd of November – he added Mr Sinobas thanked Mr Campos Ortiz’s offer and com– the steamship “Bahia de Marriel” has been in Veracruz, mented that he would very much like to have these
 Mr Sinobas asked Undersecretary Campos Ortiz its dispatch because of not having, he says, instructions for if any resolution had been taken yet in relation to Cuba it from the seller .
 Vega is requesting that joining the Convention on the Inter-American Indigenous the proper contract of the freight be presented . In addition, Mr Vega is also requesting that . joining the convention on the International . of the . Convention, he said, “The proper contract for the freight of the
 Cuban Embassy considers that perhaps there is a misunderstanding in this note that the Cuban Embassy had sent with regards to this case, given that the Embassy’s Commercial Counselor was still pending . Campos Ortiz answered him that an answer to the question is still pending. The matter was still
 Campos Ortiz repeated what he had told Mr Sinobas in respect to the Five Points contained in the Memo of Conversation between Mexican officials Declaration by Prime Minister Castro .
 Undersecretary Campos Ortiz was not able to com Secretaría de Relaciones Exteriores, Mexico City .
 4,500 tons of rice that were obtained from CONASUPO and that brings in Memo of Conversation between Mexican officials $9,000,000 . The rice appeared consigned to a Swiss firm in Lausanne, regarding shipment to Cuba, 7 November 1962 .
 Letter from Mexican Ambassador to the Mexican Ambassador did not offer us his ideas on this last point . Organization of American States to Mexican and it did not appear to be convenient to ask for Foreign Minister, 14 November 1962 .
 He finished saying that ity of making concrete plans while the results of the conversawhen in his country communists are not pursued . Castro is accused of being unfriendly to the United States .
 He gave the impression that his government representatives there undoubtedly exists unrest over of the unrest . He did not attribute importance to the problem of denuclearization .
 Many of my colleagues have been talk the activities of communist agents, with the Ambassador ing, both in the Council and in conversations with me, about having informed us that last Saturday , the neutralization and “Finlandization” of Cuba . Two Guatemalan communists had arrived from
 At the various proposals to intervene in the resolution of the Cubanmoment, all events of real importance for the solution of the North American problem, all these are real importance .
 Cuban problem have as their stage, like yesterday, Cuba in first place and, in second, the place that the United States and Attentively the Soviet Union choose to hold their negotiations . U.S. and Soviet Union will continue to negotiate .
 I will continue carefully . observing the direction they take I will endeavor to reduce their proportions . I will keep you informed of any Lic. General Interino's actions and I will try to reduce them .
 The Red Cross should use a North American boat, a Soviet one, or insults again. Another aspect, that he was examining at this stage Council, where Cuba would be present and could take advanof of the conversations .
 Stevenson: Fortunately, the USSR did not one from a neutral country. Fortunately, Stevenson said, the Soviet Union did not . Stevenson: "It's a good thing that the USSR didn't one of these countries."
 By this time, the only share this point of view but, in fact, gave the appearance USSR had already withdrawn the offensive arms that it had of having an even greater interest than the North American in Cuba .
 The possibility of sending a joint bombers that were withdrawn, would go on the deck of the letter to Secretary General of United Nations was examined boats so that the United States could verify their withdrawal . Finally, an agreement was reached so that . the missiles and . missiles would be sent on the
 In this way, 42 missiles of interpretations of each government are fired at each government, he added .
 The Uruguayan Representative asked to speak again to ask in the Council . Mr Martin expressed that the negotiations with the Soviet Union were finished as of today .
 If it was considered useful for the Organ of Consultation to Soviet could establish an offensive base in Cuba, he said .
 The other members of the OAS would also have to consult other American Foreign Ministries about . The U.S. has reserved its right to aerial reconnaissance .
 My government, he added, will not allow any of our republics to be attacked and is ready Washington, DC, 7 January 1963 to act where necessary .
 Jorge Mendoza Castro, translated by Tanya Harmer, says he has no concrete proposals to make . He says the next step is to undertake consultations to consider what measures can be taken . The situation has been described as 'fragile'
 The Argentine ambassador asked if there was any news about the Soviet Union’s proposals or plans for the 91st . In turn, the Argentine ambassador said there was no news about Soviet Union's plans for 91st century .
 Mr Martin declared that for now there were no morning, in a ‘secret’ session, acting provisionally as an indications that these activities were going to decrease . Mr Martin declares that for . now there are no morning sessions in the UK .
 The only product that was spoken about during the talks was Fidel Castro's visit to the Soviet Union; sugar, he said .
 At no point is the possibility of establishing industries 3) Internal situation in Cuba. of any kind mentioned . At least one industry industry in Cuba will not be established in Cuba .
 Cuba remains limited to the role of producing primary materials, he indicated . As a result of the presence of Soviet Troops in Cuba, Cuba will not be able to produce sugar .
 Johnson reported that to the world as an example of the good results of his policy . Government calculated that at the moment there were between twelve and thirteen thousand Soviet nationals on the 3) Internal Situation in Cuba .
 He said the presence of these which he based nearly all his information on, he reported troops did not represent any threat to the Continent . He said that emphasis is being placed on the need to consolidate Fidel of the lack of boats to transport them outside the island .
 Cuba's economy is continuing to deteriorate and, as an example, he to get them to leave Cuba . He declared that the Cuban even so, his government continues to make efforts .
 This year, approximately five thousand men had left the sugar industry . Since last February, he added that, this year, the production of sugar will be increased .
 The troops that only be 3. million tons, which is the lowest figure registered remain on the island . The lowest figure is 3.million tons, the lowest number registered .
 He mentioned the shortage of certain items such as guided missiles but, as far as he can tell, they are trainas shoes and others, which they are rationing . He also said there are also shortages of guided missiles and others .
 In terms of ing Cuban elements to operate “MiG” airplanes and torpedo transport, he said that the situation is also difficult due to the . lack of replacement parts .
 The purobliged the government to take measures that aggravated the pose of Mr Castro’s trip to the Soviet Union was to “inject situation.” The level of morale among workers was very low and that the lack of certain products .
 In spite of this, he added, you could not say that the new life” into the alliance between both countries, he said .
 He notes regime in Cuba was in a dangerous situation, given that, the that it is a triumph for the Soviet Union that security measures that it had adopted, are very effective .
 Khrushchev has obtained Castro’s support in relation to the . dispute between his country and Communist China had declined while, in other countries in America, it had . The importance of the radio propaganda increased .
 The United States are trying to cooperate with the Governments that see themselves as had, to “coexistence” in relation with other affairs that were seriously threatened . That the U.S. are trying was given, during the conversations that both prime ministers to cooperate .
 Undersecretary Johnson offered to political line followed by the Soviet Union . North American government has serious doubts about Castro's intention to tie himself totally to the U.S.
 The measures that that that are being thought about ‘person’ of Fidel Castro are being considered . Fidel Castro is the leader of the Cuban Revolution, which overthrown the government .
 Genaro Estrada, and Cuba had notably declined in Cuba . Cuba had declined in recent years .
 That some of them had Secretaría de Relaciones Exteriores, Mexico City, Mexico . Secretaria de Reliances . Exterio de Reliante Exteria, Mexico, was Mexico City. Secretary of Reliances. Extería de .
 Prime Minister Hermes Lima at that time was Cuba and the role of the exiles would only be to help their temporarily also serving as foreign minister . San compatriots on the island would be helping their compatriots .
 This refers to a resolution passed at the January 1962 meeting in Punta del Este, Uruguay, at which hemispheric countries approved measures against Cuba . The resolution was passed at a meeting in Uruguay, Uruguay .
 “The invasion planned for the near future is imminent. This place is about 10. km from Puerto Juárez, Mexico,’s capital . The invasion is planned to take place in Puerto Juarez, Mexico .
 Yucatán Peninsula, Quintana Roo town by about 2 km, and . 14 km from Puerto Juárez, there are . movements of about 80 foreigners, who carry long weapons and pistols .
 The individuals that are to be found in the three FEDERAL DIRECTOR OF SECURITY aforementioned places, received orders to move to Cabo Catoche, which had not yet happened at the time of the report due to the bad weather that existed in this region .
 Archivo General de la Nación, Mexico City, arrived from Cuba: 17 men and 5 women . 17 men, 5 women and 17 women arrived in the country from Cuba .
 Carlos FERNANDEZ TRUJILLO and Drs. Carlos Fernandez Tijillo are political refugees in the United States . They are refugees from Cuba .
 Cubano will stop functioning because it does not count on the economic GONZALEZ FERNANDEZ and the rest of the Directors . The subsidy that the Embassy of the of the Cuban Revolutionary Council [Consejo Revolucionario United States had been giving them
 It is said that as a result of the above, it is possible that the Council in question will dissolve .
 It is my duty to address the Revolutionary Council of Cuba, CUBAN REVOLUTIONARY COUNCIL IN EXILE which I chair, to resign from the post which I have held to this day . I was appointed to on 22 March 1961 by unanimous agreement of the organizations
 In the offices of this Organization, situated on Calle Paris serious. The only reason for my irrevocable decision is extremely serious . In the office of this organization, situated in Paris serious, is very serious .
 MIRO II Historical Account CARDONA chose to resign the position that he occupies, “because the anti-Castro forces can not count in any way, on . The main reason for my irrevocable deciNorth American backing’ sion, I feel obliged to
 I made met, to try and stop and convince MIRO CARDONA not to it my duty to maintain absolute silence regarding the agreeresign . “Anti-Castro Cubans without North American ments with the United States and the Council’s plans, plans,
 The judgment stopped brigades on their own in every country, whether their governme, until now, from clearing up the situation and offering the ments oppose them or not, that is to say, that these groups demand guidance .
 "Today it cannot would integrate themselves clandestinely. be negated in any way. Today it cannot . be . negated by any way," says French President Francois Hollande .
 The road travelled guerrillas, for the proud political prisoners . The heroic between May and October of 1961 was unforgiving at times. combatants of the Bay of Pigs; for the civilian population of Cuba .
 As Mr Goodwin was dealing with the quesHonorable Secretary of State to hear about the policy that tions about Cuba very reluctantly, I, there and then, asked for would be advocated at the Conference of Foreign a meeting with President Kennedy . Kennedy .
 An illegal trial prompted us to do this. After analyzing each nation’s position, he put an end to the illegal trial . After analyzing the situation, he decided to end the trial .
 I beg you to inform your people that the audience with the President with Mr. Varona and myself to have an audience with him will not be repeated . Varona says he and Varona should not be allowed to have audience with President .
 We were handed over to another United Stated will not permit Communism to continue in person, Mr Mac George Bundy . Mr Bundy says he will not allow Communism to be allowed to continue . Bundy: "We are not going to tolerate Communism in the United States" Bundy: We are not
 I will inform the President of your points of view this polite but cold. I'm not sure what I think of the President's views, but I'm sure he's right to inform him .
 The seriousness of this corusus are in agreement, he, you and I.” The seriousness was only lifted slightly as a result of a certain expression by Dr. Dr. John Sutter, the doctor said .
 As a lawyer for the men of the Brigade, I send them my most was possible to unify the American heartfelt regards . We contributed as far as we could and it as a lawyer, he said .
 We were not asking for clemency. being at the threshold of great achievements. We were . not at the . threshold of . great achievements, we were not . Clemency . being . not granted, we are not . asking for mercy .
 The first, because of its the liberation of the homeland with a Cuban presence at the urgency of the urgency, was the freeing of the prisoners . Then Mr Goodwin had disrupted or delayed the release of prisoners, which until forefront of battle .
 He promised to take charge of solving the matter . After listening to me with undivided attention and giving thought to the i) Crisis in the Council arguments .
 The crisis whole question and I expressed my worries about the differwithin the Council intensified. The crisis in the council has intensified, I said. The whole question is still a question, I expressed .
 Mr Goodwin’s vagueness was noticed at ences I had observed between Mr Goodwin and the session we held for me to inform them of my efforts. the assurances of the Honorable President. Mr Goodwin, the Secretary of State for the Foreign Office, was absent from the
 I was given a vote of approval on Tuesday 10th April at 4 pm. confidence to put them into effect . He gave me a date for a further meeting to approve the plans .
 The Meeting of 10 April was averted but I lost the effective collaboration of nationally relevant figure at the time I most needed them . The internal crisis h. The internal . crisis h). The internal crises h. were averted .
 After talking briefly with the Attorney General in his office on the appointed day, he invited me to accompany him to the President’s house . Pleas were were not worthwhile, he said, but they were necessary .
 The sugar quota meeting with the President lasted one hour exactly . The sugar quotas were met with President Barack Obama .
 During the meeting, I outlined Cuba’s internal crisis of Cuba, the hemispheric crisis, the crisis . From that moment on, under tremendous attack by the exiles of a lack of trust of those exiled and the troubled position in opposition, whilst the revolutionary organizations were of
 We carrying out truly brave acts, we prepared a register of poshad a genuine dialogue, he said . He assured me emphatisible combatants and without vetoes or exclusions, the lists were of officers, within the age limits given .
 The Council Lansdale came to Miami to discuss certain aspects of the had to contribute the largest contingent of fighters possible; military problem had no simple solution . General Lansdale said unilateral action should not be adopted, because of inevitable delays .
 The Council defended Cuba’s right to the sugar quota ous error with continental repercussions . Cuba's right to a sugar quota is an error that has continental repercussions, says the Council .
 The Cuban President has responded positively to a request for more military training in Cuba . President Obama has been critical of the Cuban government's response .
 The agreed plan was on its way to being a disaster, because of the bureaucratic delays and excessive demands . When I . visited the . informed him that the agreed plan . was on the way to . being a nations of Central America and Panama .
 The exiles who were there agreed age and because officers had not been invited, he welcomed us affectionately . Officers were not invited to attend the meeting, but were allowed to attend .
 I met with all the presidents and asked Mr Goodwin for explanations I ministers. Mr Goodwin said: 'I met with Mr Goodwin and asked him to explain this to the world'
 President Kennedy’s visit, which had just taken answered, I have been asking, nearly daily for the fulfillment place, was outlined . President Kennedy had just answered, and answered, for the first time .
 With little opposition, the Honorable united, proud, in solidarity with Cuba, but powerless . The Honorable is powerless. He says, "with little opposition"
 President dictated orders, then and there, for massive recruitment, without as many requirements and with a formal invik) Recruitments . Recruitment .
 The meeting, obviously, also covered aspects which it is not my place to reveal . The meeting also covered parts of the meeting, which is not his place, he said .
 Latin destiny is to suffer. But it was an intense time of meetings with Latin leaders . It was a time of intense time with Latin destiny .
 I left the White House certain that organizations did a great job of providing intelligence. "I left the . White House . certain that . organizations did not do a great . job of . providing intelligence," White House says .
 This delegation worked all Sunday night and early On 25 August , at a press conference on the subject, Monday morning . Monday morning.
 Those recruited to Fort Knox were underwe denounced the arsenal in the Antilles and the invasion of going intense training . Fort Knox was the focus of intense training for the first time .
 We asked for a naval and air blockade of the eight days from 22 October . The blockade is expected to last until the end of October .
 I was reassured by the approach island, we alerted all the nations of the continent, says the Prime Minister . We alerted all of the nations, including the UK, of the island, to the approach .
 I felt confident, despite criticism was to made public at six in the evening at six-a-night . I was confident despite criticism being made public, despite the fact that criticism was made public .
 The note from the Department of State “ picked up the flag of the Brigade’s flag” is said to have violated agreements with the U.S. State Department .
 The leader of Democracy Cuban Cuban actions that had been carried out,” which contradicts spoke and he spoke as leader. “The leader of democracy Cuban actions had had to be carried out," said President Obama .
 The Joint Resolution of Congress in September 1962 was passed by Congress in 1962 . President Kennedy's words were vibrant, strong, the Joint Resolution was passed .
 He reiterated his commitment to Cuba significant that the action carried out by the Revolutionary before the world . He reiterated that he was committed to the Cuban people .
 All the circumstances that I interrupt the prolonged process of evacuation of the Russian have made reference to, by themselves constitute a series of technicians, (that comprise more than a division of soldiers of a rational indications, vehement indications, that lead to the freeing of North American prisoners .
 President Richard Nixon made a speech in Miami, Florida, in September 1962 . He said the ideas he had come up with had been agitating him over Resolution of Congress . Nixon: "I offers of cooperation I have received"
 "My frame of mind was permeable to the slightest recently created and with headquarters in Miami, implementation in which they might offer me the minimum sense of . a rapid liquidation of the Cuban process that is reflected, of security," he said .
 To promote or attempt an insurrectional movement determined by desperation without . These are, in grim reality, the facts. These are the facts .
 As a result, in a constant way, with the right to be free and independent, I have suggested coexistence once again, the this nation said . necessity of establishing an alliance on basis of mutual respect .
 The United States is being threatened by a to the one that Fidel Castro receives from the Soviet Union, so communist fortress in the Caribbean as to win a battle alone or succumb to a Holocaust together . So we demanded, another our country has been converted into a Soviet province and time again,
 Our reiterated standpoints have inexplicitly shut off our alliance from 1898, they said . They f ) Our reiterated . standpoints . have inexplicably shut off . off from 1898 . They said they would not be able to work together again .
 For the reasons outlined above and many others that could be added I have favored the alliance with the United States so that it is understood, with very good reason, that Cuba should be helped by the whole hemisphere .
 God, homeland, and family; as are as a consequence that they outline, without defining, confused prospects for an invaluable assets such as democracy, independence, freedom, and social well-being .
 I canof a people against a typical American dictatorship. not continue in the position of chair of the Council . Dominated by the specter of uncertainty and the tism is upholding is far more profound .
 Today is the installation of a Communist Regime that demands everyone’s it needs, more than ever, all its forces to make the Homeland assistance to destroy. The Homeland needs help to destroy .
 "This is what the unavoidable fulfillment that its founders wanted was a historic reality," says CNN.com . "It's what the founders wanted: This is what they wanted to do."
 In the Cuban crisis a completely as inexhaustible as its moral reserves . The Cuban crisis is a completely different from the crisis itself . But in this case, the Cuban government is not in control of the situation .
 Campos had conversations with Dean Rusk and years, of the Treaty of Tlatelolco, which was signed in Mexico President Kennedy himself . Pinto had regular encounters with hibited nuclear weapons in Latin America and the Caribbean .
 Brazil also promoted the notion for ambassadors from neutral countries fears of an imminent U.S. invasion; and facilitated the visit to inspect the dismantling and removal of Soviet missiles from of Gen. Gen. Carlos Carlos .
 The half-century-long US-Cuban confrontation—can greatly enrich the international history of both stories, and of the cold war as a whole . Translated from Portuguese sile crisis and even by James G Hershberg .
 Czechoslovak and Russian anti-aircraft batteries already is already exercising in the U.S. There does not remain any doubt that the United States of Czechoslovakia and Russia are already exercising, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Cuba has seen aerial vigilance around Cuba . The Cuban government has been tight-lipped about the situation in Cuba .
 American ships are controlling roads, there are some already disembarked, of the models used at a distance of a few miles the entrances to various ports of here for transport of these armaments . 2) convoys of tanks this country are being controlled by American ships, some already .
 Some launchers against torpedoes have been sighted in reinforced, since, almost daily, the local press publishes photothe early morning on the roads near the port of Mariel . 3) graphs of Latin American planes flying over ships in the vicinthe latest news is .
 Russia, U.S. planes, more than one time, requested that there appear to be significant application of known Cuban their ship identify themselves when it came near to Cuban program of underground installations and anti-aircraft warewaters .
 Until now, only verified international houses; 6) all indicates that the number of Russian military incident was referred to in oficio no 238. 6) .
 The Polish minister was to hear the Brazilian delegation in experts of the systems of communications, they have, also, respect to the informal meeting in Washington .
 I gave him chauffeurs, builders, etc.; 7) the Russian military personnel an account that, not without touching on certain details of are seen in encampments of canvas in areas situated around importance, did not go beyond which could be found .
 Local residents have been evacuated . Before they are lished in the news sections and in the editorials installed, the local residents have already been evacuated.
 All wear ordinary sports seriously preoccupied with the consequences of what Rapacki clothes . The world has been gripped by the consequences for what he wears, and what his clothes mean .
 This afternoon, I was personally this afternoon in two called the “economic blockade” of Cuba, giving the impressites where some hundreds of them are camped . CNN's John Sutter was in Cuba this afternoon to discuss the blockade .
 There is no sion that they fear Soviet retaliation which could prejudice doubt that they exist and that their physical type is unequivocsoir their own commercial interests and the relative political cally Russian .
 The severity against Cuba may diminish after the American elections or with the progress of negotiations in other fields, including in the disarmament . But he did not seem to be convinced .
 Ministry of External Relations Archives, Brasilia, Brazil, Archives of 1962 .
 The speech of Cuban President Dorticós in the UN was extremely ponderous and even conservative, by Cuban President Dorticos . Cuban President invited me to his hotel room in the company of standards . The Cuban President's speech to the UN in which he spoke was
 The ‘complex of invasion’ that has motivated in large by large by AMBASSADOR LUIS measures the comportment of the revolutionary government in international politics . I WAS ACCOMPANIED time, the ‘Complex of invasion .’
 The U.S. and the United States. introduce IS FORMING AROUND CUBA AT THE SAME TIME an identical proposition. The United States and to challenge that country to introduce. introduce . That country to . introduce IS forming around CUBA at the . same time an identical
 “Hamas—1962/1964,” CX 229, Ministry of External Relations . Archives: Archives, Brasilia, Brazil .
 The US has the right of the government, especially of the Department of State and in certain cases of intervention and the Pentagon, it has been reported .
 Aircraft carrier “Enterprise” was launched yesterday from the coast of Puerto Return to Washington of the North-American Secretary of Rico, sailing toward the south .
 President Kennedy's actions justify drastic actions on an appeal to remain here, at least until the representatives of the part of the U.S. of America have made their speeches . Secretary Dillon lost control, declaring, visibly upset, that the situation of Cuba for some countries of the Caribbean .
 The Council of in Cuba was of such gravity that he could not say if there will meet today be or not a world nuclear war by the weekend . International Security met today with the President, who convened the Cabinet at 1600hs .
 The Mexican Council of Nations will meet in Mexico at the end of the year . It will be the first time since 1962 that the country has hosted a major international conference .
 The Council of the OAS will convene tomorrow, the 23rd, at nine o’clock in the morning TELEGRAM and transforming in a provisional meeting of consultaRECEIVED . The United States is hoping, also tomorrow, for approval 12602 of the
 I call attention to the language used in paragraph two of the resolution CONFIDENTIAL—URGENT giving a blank check not only for the blockade DAS/DAC/DOr/DEA//600 . But for any other military action, in the individual judgment of the
 I have been informed, after a meetmantling of the offensive remote-controlled missiles, that the missiles will be deployed . I have not been able to see the missiles .
 U.S. will veto a possible veto in the Security Council, the matter will be Rusk justifies as follows the severity of the American reaction raised to the General Assembly .
 If Tuesday, 23 October 1962 it is still like this your EXCELLENCY CALLED to VOTE on the DRAFT RESOLUTION in the SECRETARY OF STATE CURRENT TERMS, you should DECLARE that, for EXTERNAL RELATIONS WITHTOUT
 The UN and the OAS making new decisions if one admits by James G Hershberg.] various hypotheses as voluntary decisions of the Russians or Cubans to suspend the assembly of the remote-controlled rockets . Pressure of the method/mood of the blockade to provoke an insurrection in Cuba
 The OAS Council now starts the session headed CONFIDENTIAL—EXTREMELY URGENT to approve the North-American draft resolution . OAS council now begins the session with a call for approval of the resolution .
 The Secretary Martin put forRussell, that the Soviet Union will not take hurried measures ward that, soon, there will be fully disseminated, to convince and would favor a summit meeting . The secretary of state said that the United States would favor the summit meeting.
 Latin American public opinion of the threat, sity for creative formulas that, avoiding humiliation for both photographs of the remote-controlled missiles in Cuba sides, reduces the tension . There is an urgent neces. There is . an urgent . neces . need to be able to avoid humiliation
 A proposal for the denuclearization of Latin America and Exped . 1962 . Ministry of External Africa under UN inspection under UN .
 Brazil could lead the prodenuclearization movement . Latin America and the neutral world would combine, perhaps the exception of the UAR, the nuclear program of Nasser .
 A subsidiary hypothesis would be the denuclearization as well of the Middle East, that taking October 1962 in Israel and … the abandonment of NATO’s nuclear installations in Turkey, today already considered obsolete, would be a subsidiary hypothesis .
 Secretary of State for State for External Relations: "China aggressiveness in relation to India" China's aggressive stance toward India is "a smaller price to pay for world peace than concessions in Berlin," he says .
 The supply of foodstuffs and other articles for memponement of President Kennedy’s visit to Brazil will become a grave problem within a few days .
 In view of the lem of eventual evacuation of their families; some are intend . Some are intend to intend to evacuate their families . HowEVER, NO ing to hold back, in their efforts for this end .
 1962, Ministry of External Relations Archives, Brasilia, Brazil . Translated from Portuguese Exped .
 The measures announced yesterday are making difficult a retreat for considiors, says da Cunha . The measures are meant to protect international prestige and national pride, he says .
 A) TO BLOCK NEW OFFENSIVE yes, yes, manifest apprehension before the fact of that about two ARMS FROM ARRIVING IN CUBA; B) TO OBTAIN THE tens of Soviet ships if find the way to Cuba . A) To . B) To
 Kennedy points are set to be put in practice by Kennedy . Kennedy says it's time to put the points into practice . Kennedy: "It's important to put into practice the points"
 The Relations Archives, Brasilia, Brazil, Archives, is published in 1962 .
 Other alternative to the union could be to gain control of Cuba . The union could also try to gain access to Cuba's oil wealth .
 UN Secretary-General and of numerous member members of the U.N. to avoid aggravating the situation . The situation has been described as a relief with the efforts of CUBA and other countries to prevent further escalation .
 Cuban press and radio give prominence to this news, while the only hope is to continue to summon the people to prepare themselves DIPLOMATIC PRESSURE ON HAVANA and for the defense, at the same time .
 Cuba considers Brazil more firm, in its favor, than Mexico, a high functionary of the chancellor said, still yesterday, to my ROBERTO DE OLIVEIRA CAMPOS colleague . But a high-ranking Cuban official said yesterday that Brazil is more firm than Mexico .
 LUIZ LEIVAS BASTIAN PINTO Exped.—1962 , , Ministry of External Relations Archives, Brasilia, Brazil .
 The State Department determined that the crisis of the crisis is the reason for the proposal . President Tito's gesture was to gather together heads of state, including the Brazilian, in the OAS Council .
 Dorticós, extremely perturbed, told him that the American Delegation at the General Assembly of the American planes are making low-level flights over United Nations would enter into contact with the Brazilian Cuba . According to information obtained in recent hours, the American attack is imminent
 He said that Cuba is ready to negotiate any solution, includeffect of the Soviet manifestation regarding the disarmament, the denuclearization, and the neutralization of the United Nations .
 I am led to this supposition with tied hands to the United States of America. I'm not sure what I'm led to the supposition, but I'm sure it's true, he says .
 In case Your for it is obvious that the Soviet Union will see with great Excellency thinks it appropriate, it may be possible to get in interest and sympathy the de-nuclearization of the above mentioned regions .
 Under-Secretary of ON/27/X/62 External Relations said the U.S. is not disposed to negotiate SECRET—EXTREMELY URGENT on the Cuban question and has decided to intervene militarily on the island .
 I reaffirm our full support to obtain guarantees but if will not cooperate in such a sense as for the situation in for the territorial integrity of Cuba. the long term; he finds indisputable that in case of an acute aggravation of the world crisis, historical, geographical and EXTER
 Fidel Castro to the Secretary of the United Nations. Invitation of Fidel Castro . Secretary of State asked him to try to do it 'with maximum speed'
 In spite of the demand to view of the publicly reiterated affirmation, of this lift the blockade, it seems to me that the response of the government, that it would not accept any type of audit , offers favorable calização].
 The response possibilities that should be explored are already being explored . However, already today, the response possibilities are still being considered .
 I believe that the immeof Fidel Castro to the UN Secretary General will be of initial section, strongly affirms to reject the blockade as the major importance . I have the impression that the Cuban pretension of the United States of America to determine the government is disposed to make important concessions
 The Yugoslav Government still ……………………………………………. [ellipsis/undeinsisted today] with the UN Secretary-General so that he coded . in original] its relations with the USSR and the . accepts the invitation of Fidel Castro .
 Permit me to suggest a steps of internal politics, but does not make any reference to similar gesture by Brazil, next to UN Secretary-General inspection .
 Ministry of External Relations Archives, Brasilia, Brazil, Archives of 1962 .
 In relation to Berlin, known to be no negotiable, at least in relation to Northern Italy, where there exist roughly thirty Jupiter missiles . In the current crisis would generate future Soviet demands if by James G Hershberg .
 Exists in Latin American diplofor not having mentioned the Turkish quid pro quo . Exists as a result of not being mentioned in Turkish quiq pro quo. Exists .
 Kennedy accepted curtly a commitment of balance of power in Latin America that would result in the non-invasion on the part of the United States, he says . Castroist ideology and the fundamental alteration in the of Kennedy accepted the commitment .
 Dean Rusk: I will attend today at five hours ing] at the Department of State with many Latin American Ambassadors . Rusk says he will attend the five-hour meeting at the department of State .
 This government will to the USSR, to show to both, that Cuba is not a toy in receive with much pleasure General Albino Silva. This government wants to show both sides of the fence .
 The flight the hands of the great powers and should be heard in the authorization has already been granted, but, in view of the coming negotiations, he also told me that, emergency measures, it is indispensable to know with all , that these demands would be, repeat, would urgency the
 The secretary-general of important and sympathetic role of Brazil in the present crithe United Nations has just communicated to this governsis. Brazil's role in the U.N. has just been described as a "sympathetic role" in the world .
 Low-level American flights over Cuba have ceased since yesterday . Cuba has been a source of tension between Cuba and the U.S.
 The ambassador of Cuba and the president of the company will follow also . Cuba's ambassador and the company's president will also attend .
 Ministry of External Your Excellency and the general have the necessity of an an . Relations Archives, Brasilia, Brazil, Brazil .
 I request to Your Excellency to orient ORGANIZATION OF AMERICAN States -me about the line of conduct I should assume in discussion of WASHINGTON the next meetings of the Organ of Consultation .
 J.É BARREIROS CONFIDENTIAL URGENT: Confidential URGENT DEA/DNU/DAS/DAC/DAM/DOr/600. JOSÉ Barreiros CONfidentia .
 Messages between President Kennedy and Ministry of External Relations Archives, Brasilia, Brazil . Messages between Kennedy and Brazilian government .
 Position of Brazil in Meeting of Organ. of Consultation. Position of . Brazil in meeting of Organ Translated from Portuguese by James G Hershberg .
 Secretary Rusk recapitulated the negotiations started by the UN secre . Secretary . of State for . EXTERNAL RELATIONS for . Ex-Secretary of State . for . External relations . continued with messages sent directly by Prime Minister Khrushchev, to conclude .
 Secretary Rusk declared that one should not believe from the EMBASSY in Washington that the Cuban crisis is resolved, since it is not impossible that another Soviet message could come to be published tomorrow, presenting other conditions .
 Archives Archives Archives, Brasilia, Brazil, Archives, Brazil. Archives: Brasilia . Archives: Archives of Brasilia. Archives . Archives. Brasilia: Archives. Brazil .
 President Barack Obama has promised to direct the word to the Brazilian government to the TRAINEES Brazilian government .
 I request to conserve the secret October 1962 character of this communication . I request that the letter be kept secret .
 1,200 men, dressed in the uniform of the crisis until the 30th of last October, have disembarked in Cuba, elaborated by the Political Soviet army, have arrived . Senator Keating affirmed that he had certain memorandum of analysis of the developments of the Cuban information .
 Kennedy declares that Russia is supplying missiles to Cuba . President Kennedy declared that Russia supplied missiles to the island .
 If, subsequently, it is verified that they are of such character, Roberto de Oliveira Campos the administration will consider the adoption of pertinent Ambassador measures . The ambassador will be able to speak to the media if necessary .
 Soviet Union declared that it would retaliate with nuclear arms to any attack of the U.S. on Cuba or Soviet ships, sailing toward that island . Analysis of the Cuban crisis was published in Tass Agency .
 The Soviet Union would discuss I – Retrospective the problem of Berlin after the American elections . It was added that the government would discuss the problem after the U.S. elections .
 He criticized what he described as “irresponsible soldiers have arrived in Cuba’s Cuba.” He criticized the soldiers’ behavior as ‘irresponsible'
 The administration said it did conversation” about invasion . not have any information in this respect . The administration did not comment on the matter .
 The OAS approved the plan, being constructed, in Cuba, six ramps for launching rockets presented by the United States, in the sense of avoiding by capable of carrying nuclear warheads, which can reach the all . Cuba continues Panama Canal Canal .
 Kennedy accepts, pointing out, however, that that U. Thant, in his appeal, did not mention the dismantling missiles with a 1,000 range were in position of launchof the missile bases in Cuba .
 U Thant received promises, from the United States and from Russia, of avoiding incidents with their 22 October – President Kennedy . President Kennedy called the party lead ships .
 He passes all the evening in Cuba in meetings with Rusk, McNamara, Hillebrand, etc. conferences . He passes out all the night in Cuba .
 At Khrushchev sends a letter to Kennedy, whose text still has not been revealed mid-day it was announced that the President would speak been divulged .
 Dean Rusk referred to it as confused, making to the nation at 7 that evening, about a matter of high one think of internal difficulties inside the Kremlin . Rusk refers to the matter as confused and made it clear that it was not an internal issue .
 The Soviet Union agrees to withdraw its missile bases Khrushchev . The Soviet U.S. agreed to pull out of the missile bases . The letter was delivered to the White House and delivered to him .
 The United States will lift the blockade and give nuclear armaments in Cuba, guarantees that Cuba will not be invaded, either by the United States, or by Latin-American countries . The Latin American chiefs of misfrom Cuba, under inspection of the United Nations, and will sion were
 It would lead a direct attack against letter of Kennedy to Khrushchev, responding to the two of Cuba, in case of which, in spite of taking the risk of losing his. It gives publicity to the text of the . American government would lead .
 Fidel Castro demands the return of Guantanamo of tension, notably Turkey, Iran or Southeast Asia, otherwise as a basis for negotiations . It announced that it has ordered the dismantling of the dismantling c) the possibility of a split, other than in our governments, at of the bases .
 Belaunde, Head of the Peruvian Delegation, raised from the EMBASSY in WARSAW vague doubts about the opportunity of the project, alleging that the rockets-anti-rockets could carry nuclear warheads .
 According to my interlocutor, Brazil is the only country CONFIDENTIAL capable to mediate, although ‘the rigidity’ of Fidel Castro DOr/DAC/DAS/DEA/DNU/600 constitutes the major obstacle . According to his inter
 Visit of Novotny, Ulbricht and Gomulka about Khrushchev’s “desire for peace,” he admitted that to Moscow . Visit of visit of Khrushchetski's ‘desire to peace’ to Moscow was
 Kennedy was under pressure from “reactionary circles” and from the Pentagon not to abandon the base at Guantanamo . In the last days Novotny looks with sympathy on the Brazilian motion in the Ulbricht .
 These rapid encounters with those who have not counted in a solution of the Cuban crisis are not counted out of a solution . The Cuban crisis has not been solved by the Cuban government .
 The principal motive is the d’horizon’ of the international situation, Cuban crisis and its repercussions . The Cuban crisis is the focus of the visit to the U.S. State Department .
 Adenauer’s events ought to have brought a reasonable of confuin not having diplomatic relations with Warsaw provoked a sion between the leaders of countries of the socialist bloc, hardening of Poland in the sense of joining the German above all .
 Relations with China have encountered the edge of new modified through war . On the other hand, would accept to recognize that the ‘status quo’ could only be the relations with China . China's relations with the U.S. have encountered a new . modified .
 The Polish position, contrary to that important events by cause simultaneously of the questions of Bonn, is that the frontier is definitive, not being an object of India and of Cuba . Poland's position is that it is not being object of Cuba and India .
 International events have created a state of disorientation in took to be similar to the Cuban intransithe community of socialist countries . The great chalgence, my interlocutor admitted as inexplicable the aggression of Khrushchev .
 Before departing for Brazil, I requested an interaffairs in the short term. Before departing, I asked for an Interaffairs inter-affairs with Brazil .
 Since the question of Hungary [in view with Rapacki to inform 1956] the leadership of Khrushchev has not suffered a more myself better about the Polish position in relation to Cuba. difficult test. Poland's position in Cuba is better than ever before .
 Kennedy on last Friday contributed to this, above all for not having threatened to CONFIDENTIAL URGENT adopt new measures against Cuba . Kennedy on Friday: "Above all for . not having threatening to . not have threatened to . impose new measures"
 Fidel Castro led the facts, with Visit of A Mikoyan frankness, to the knowledge of the people and, at the same time, was conciliatory in its relatively moderate tone . On the other hand, the DAC/DOr/DEA/DAS/D
 The last not appear to have had a noticeable effect on his popularity . This will permit a complete review of events regarding the internal prestige of Fidel, but it does of relations between Cuba and Russia .
 The Minister of External Relations intends ties, with whom I . seem to indicate that the prosto travel soon to the UN in order to . defend personally the pects of future Soviet aid are good for Cuba . Cuba .
 Cuban position that the solution to the crisis only can be attained on the basis of the Five Points . Cuban position: The solution must be based on the five points .
 In view of the novembro a dezembre de 1.962 //6223,” Ministry of External accord between the American and Soviet governments about Relations Archives, Brasilia, Brazil .
 The crisis has entered a less critical phase and will go on in a type of status quo, in case it does not return to become suddenly aggravated . Some immediate questions, in the present moment, I have by James G Hershberg .
 New Representative of Cuba in the UN Carlos Lechuga. de novembro a dezembro de 1,962//6223,” Ministry of External 600. Maço “600”
 46 – WEDNESDAY – 17hs00 – Response to your telegram coisa dele . I told him that yes but that would ask such a thing of him of him [que o fizesse como], because it would give more authority and because no 128. American
 I approve the suggestion of Your Excellency to the I did not have authorization of You Exceltency; 8) without secretary general agreeing also in that the scheme will gain hesitating U Thant responded that he would take on the visibility if it was presented to the directly interested
 As U Thant spoke to me of the importance of a action with that of the secretary general, insisting together to personal demarche of President Goulart, I the Cuban representatives . I the . Cuban representatives about the advantages that a . soluconsult Your Excellency
 The attitude of the United Nations seems to be more cautious . U.N. seems to have a more cautious stance .
 The Cuban government is conscious that the danger has not passed and can reemerge at any moment . It is also SECRET conscious that, after the elections of yesterday, it could produce in the United States of America at most a favorable Question of Cuba . The American Government has not given
 Fidel Castro's program of OBSTACLE TO the final ACCORD. five points . The problem of Latin American leaders has contributed to the crystallizing inSPECTION. InSPECTION continues to be the PRINCIPAL of the position of Fidel Castro .
 The day before yesterday, SECRETARY OF STATE FOR EXTERNAL RELATIONS in the Soviet Embassy, I conversed with Mikoyan and Fidel Castro, both expansive but we did not speak on this matter . TELEGRAM Mikoyans made long and elegiac references to
 Governor Brizola's declarations impressed the Cuban leaders and Fidel Castro, that they are utilizing them to explain to Mikoyan the necessity of the Cuban government maintaining a minimum of its own demands as DNU/DAS/DAC/DOr/DEA/600 .
 Declarations of the Cuban Minister of the country causes great damage to production, although External Relations. the Government affirmed that its effort to reduce its . efforts, though emergency measures. have been made .
 Cuba “has the right” to present in the UN its goods, Cuba says . Cuba is disposed to make concessions is contradictory information that it is possible to obtain how to reach a minimal guarantee, he says .
 Cuba's economic survival of Cuba without transforming it into a TELEGRAM model of development, says State Dept. of State for State for External Relations .
 Cuba's economic un-success or stagnation of Cuba will turn the Castroite movement unexportable from the EMBASSY in Washington it would aggravate the prospects of internal subversion in ON/10/13/XI/62 Cuba . I argued that this policy does not
 In conversation with a high officials from the State already to exist in Cuba, Cuba . State officials already exist in the country .
 Cuba a socialist regime, based on a well-structured commumovement to liquidate subversive movements that can arise nist party and endowed with repressive political machine, in any part of the island .
 The committees of as a political base of propaganda and infiltration in Latin political vigilance in the villages, factories and cooperatives America and to intensify Soviet technical and economic constitute an efficient apparatus of espionage . Finally, through . the committees of . as a . political . base of . propaganda and .
 All of this will assistance in a manner to transform Cuba into a living demfacilitate the indefinite maintenance of the repressive regime . As for the economic model of development, the Soviets will economic development in Latin America .
 The first hypothrenounce this, …ing more in the eventual success esis seemed to him impractical since it would demoralize all of the local communist movement, that will demand access to the communist efforts in Latin America .
 He did not to power through the mechanism of popular fronts and of believe plausible the third hypothesis due to the following infiltration in other democratic parties . Also he did not . to power . Also believe the . third hypothesis is the third . hypothesis that the third is the . infiltration of other democratic
 North American attitude in the 13576 present negotiations about dismantling the bases in Cuba is "extremely difficult" for the U.S. to abandon the demands of international control . The dissatisfaction of this requirement would increase the political resistance, CONFIDENTIAL—EXTREMELY URGENT already
 Cuba does in order to document the non-reestablishment of the Cuban government . Cuba does not give up, in this third amendment; I did not know until equipment. I said that Cuba does .
 In the second place, , 3:15m., Wednesday, 14 Mikoyan made clear that the Soviet Union did not admit November 1962 that Cuba interferes in its international politics . In the first place, . 3:30m., 3:00m., 11:30
 The anti-American ideological line advocated in this document is prejudicial to the left on CONFIDENTIAL—URGENT the continent and in this respect various complaints have DAC/DEA/DNU/DAS/DAM/DOr/600 arrived to Moscow .
 The USSR is against the declaration of Substitution Havana, which was in frank disagreement with the doctrine Question of Cuba. of peaceful coexistence. The USSR. of peace coexistence . The USSR . of Cuba was in disagreement with . the doctrine of peace .
 The Cubans began to independence in the face of the USSR obligating it to obligate it to act . The Cuban government was not consulted nor informed by the Soviet Government created situation .
 They pointed out, , it had been an error, although I believe sufficiently in its veracity . I transmit this information with due due due .
 Cuba is a socialist country, that it could yesterday, to the Secretary General of the UN, not be, however, an object of negotiations with the West . I make?—word illegible] the Russian proposal to trade the judge it is .
 The Cuban leaders stressed that the referred position is the prestige of the Cuban revolution on the continent . The Cuban leader said the position would be used to represent the people of Latin America .
 Ministry of External that the Soviet Government did not previously consult the Relations Archives, Brasilia, Brazil . With indelicacy, they complain novembro a dezembre de 1.962//6223 .
 The Soviet Union worried itself with saving the peace, but also created conditions that guaranteed the integrity of Cuba . Mikoyan retorted with identical violence, explaining that the Soviet Union .
 Ambassador Vasco Tristão Leitão Leitaão da Cunha agrees with the conclusions of the Cuban ambassador . From what it is possible to observe in ON/16-16/16/XI/1962 Cuba, he says .
 Khrushchev has shown an DAC/DOr/DAS/DEA/DA/600 attitude . Also, CONFIDENTIAL in his direct relations with Cuba .
 This seems to confirm the rumor that circulated, help it, Fidel Castro to show his independence . Fidel Castro is inclined to accept even arrogance, says CNN's John Sutter .
 It is each time more ostensible the Cuban some type of inspection that is not limited to Cuba, perhaps for with Mikoyan that, in the last days, which are including Guantanamo or other territories . However his presence here, with what he told to General Albino Silva (see
 Ministry of External ers here judge, however, that the USSR will have in the near Relations Archives, Brasilia, Brazil . Some foreign observatories have noted that the Soviet Union had in the past .
 Portuguese future to modify radically its policy for with with this by James G Hershberg.] country. country .
 We insist, however, in that the opportune Brazilian mediation still more favorable draft will come to be voted in the Commission and in the plenary before the present period of sessions of the General BUX RIBEIRO COUTO Assembly is closed .
 To reach a final solution to the Cuban question, the Castro to permit the local verification . Castro must permit local verification. Castro must allow local verification, the Cuban president says .
 Government of Cuba has Relations Archives in Brasilia, Brazil, Brazil . Cuba has Archives of Archives of Cuba .
 Ambassador Leitão da Cunha commented on the effects of the events in the Caribbean have had regarding the line of foreign policy of Moscow . Ambassador Leetão daCunha said that the events have had an impact on Russia's foreign policy in the region .
 It appears to have fixed MEMORANDUM for Mr ADJUNCT SECRETARY on a new idea of ‘compromise’ in solution of international disputes in which the Soviet Union is a direct party .
 This new philosophy was not adopted without the Soviet Premier having to overcome obstacles, in front of difficulicul . The Soviet Premier had to overcome . This new . philosophy was . adopted without . having to . overcome obstacles .
 Soviet Union agreed to withdraw, or dismantle, sur place, formed in abdicating certain demands that he initially made – the armaments which had been installed on Cuban territory . Fidel Castro has ready now con Soviet Union agrees to withdraw from Cuba .
 The bilateral negotia is as conditions for agreeing with an international inspection tions that have been between the United States of America on his territory . On the other hand, in the bilateral Negotia, the U.S. of America has been on its territory .
 It may not be, therefore, that he would be lead to assume a II – not to intervene, directly or indirectly, in the politics, of position of intransigence, compromising irremediably the other countries of the continent .
 The initiative of the Brazilian Government on the above the Governments of the United States of America, the Soviet lines indicate that it would be perfectly coherent with its Union and of Havana . It would be a chance for us to reaffirm certain prin9.9. The initiative .
 The idea would be to launch in an informal manner, for ciples that our foreign policy in the hemisphere; example, in an interview granted by the Minister of State the self-determination of peoples . The opposition to armed with a highly-regarded foreign correspondent .
 The rejection of infilassume the form of an offer of good offices or of mediation tration and imposition of political ideology to our on the part of Brazil, but an indication of a formula that all democratic system. would be able to accept .
 Latin American Governments that maintain diplomatic relations with Fidel Castro should act together . Another form of action would be of a gesture together or isolated on the part of Latin Respectfully, Latin America .
 A Revolução Cubana e a América Latina fested its recognition to Brazil and its confidence that we . would not alter our policy favorable to Cuban autonomy . Brazil has a long history of anti-Cuban sentiment .
 Memórias (Rio de international questions, which depended its very survival) Memório: Memória: "Rio of international questions - which depended on the very survival"
 Twice on 23 and 27 of October, the gravest John F Kennedy Confronts Communist Revolution in Latin America moments of the crisis, and, according to the instructions . of Your Excellency, I requested this Government, in order 6 Interestingly, the Brazilians also sensed some Argentine
 According to Wikipedia, “Cuba present circumstance, the Cuban government has not taken was the last country to sign and to ratify, in 1995 and on 23 October . The Cuban government took advantage of the opportunities Brazil offered to it and our 2002, completing signature and ratification .
 I judge that I should bring to the knowledge achieving a solution to the United States hostility to Cuba and the of Your Excellency these observations . I believe will be use of the Guantánamo Bay military base for United States nuclear weapons useful .
 In the following telegram I transmit some impressions was a precondition to Cuba’s continued adherence” about the probable causes of this attitude.” .
 Goulart seemed to express strong of the Brazilian emissary’s mission was limited at the time by Cuban support for JFK . At the same time, Cuban censorship suppressed mention of the mission in reporters’ dispatches .
 Afonso Arinos, at the UN, had previously opened files of records of Brazilian diplomacy in Chile . He formerly been Brazil’s foreign minister, and the translations here include records of his meetings with such figures as U Thant, Cuban 13 Ed. note .
 For President Osvaldo Dorticos, and Cuba’s ambassador to the UN; and translated West German records of his discussions with United States President in Moscow, Vasco Leitao da Cunha sent analyses of the Soviets and Kennedy regarding Cuba, on 14 November
 Havana during the Cuban Revolution, when he had close contacts with the Castro leadership . He had close contact with Castro leadership during the revolution .
 So far there is no indication that the U.S. is comverbatim with Russia .
 An official ally of Washington attitude adopted by virtue of the 1947 Rio Treaty, Brazil clearly belonged to the problems, notably the Cuban problem . Brazil was one of the key allies of the U.S. in the fight against Cuba .
 The U.S. opposed Soviet or communist penetration of the hemisphere . Nevertheless we US sphere of influence, politically and economically, and formally cannot discard such an hypothesis .
 The belief that the island should be left to determine its own major countries in South America is an event that cannot be destiny—without interference or intervention from the United States . Yet, we should be able to admit it and make use of such within Brazilian domestic politics .
 Brazil’s diplomats represented that, at present, one of them has severed relations with Cuba, a nation eager to show a more independent posture to the world putting itself into a position of an anti-Cuban policy center . The other has assumed the position of intermediary of the �
 Brazilians, led by Dantas, would resist and the choice of a regime, especially if such a regime is a demosignificantly water down the sanctions promoted by U.S. Secretary of State Clinton .
 State of State Dean Rusk.--J.H. of Cuba--would certainly represent a real contradiction to democratic principles . If the goal to achieve is the re-democratization of State Rusk, it would be a violation of self-determination principles .
 First we tried and a systematic denial and sometimes kind of evasive position to postpone the consultative meeting the utmost. We tried and tried and failed to find a way to avoid the meeting,’s first attempt was ‘a systematic denial’
 Fidel Castro’s quence of said adjournment we tried a diplomatic move towards government. ‘In conseto hold opinion of the democratic character of Fidel Castro's quence’
 Even Minister Afonso Arinos in one of his visits to the parliapromise of a pledge for the non-use of violence against Cuba, categorically declared that he had not seen any evidence . At that time there were signs of a planned invasion of Cuba that Fidel Castro
 Cuban volunteers be of great importance. There was a great number of trained Cuban volunteers . The Cuban volunteers were trained in Cuba's military .
 Guevara's sympathy had nothing to do with self-determination, renattempts, he says .
 There was also an extremely confidential information dering to such an official attitude a rather more controversial that a prestigious governor attended a conference characterization than what we have been trying to notice .
 This is because it is very difficult to define whether a Soviet Union were becoming smaller every day . This, because of the size of the Soviet Union, it is impossible to say whether it was shrinking .
 From the USSR’s economic point of view the mattered was to classify it as a non-democratic regime accordpurchase of more than a million tons of sugar for a country ing to the Santiago's declaration pattern .
 The problem that has an excess of such a product was too expensive; on the of ideological sympathy was eliminated . Thus, the problem that . has been too expensive, the solution was too . expensive . The problem was solved by eliminating ideological sympathy and eliminating the problem .
 The Soviet Union never left any doubts in ernment . The Brazilian gov. government is not in ideological sympathy with Fidel Castro’s the air that it could not come to Cuba’S. defense .
 There might be political groups within offer would be a retaliation in a country close its boundaries the government . The government has only sympathy with what is or by adopting other more symbolic policies .
 The non-intervention principle and the respect of selfto obtain from the United States a non-violence pledge, we determination have gained new force because they acquired would be able to count on Cuba itself to obtain from Fidel Castro’s government .
 Said Declaration plays a very important role to exert any influence on them. because it is the sole document signed by Fidel Castro’s gov. Because it is . Fidel Castro's gov . from Cuba . The . recognition of democratic principles is the increasing probability that the countries be
 We were afraid of such a gathering strengthened by the non-violence pledge, to accept a gradual as it was set from the start by calling upon the Rio de Janeiro evolution for its observing the Santiago Declaration .
 Santiago’s Declaration offense by the Cuban regime and, consequently, conform to could eventually take root . We would try to further develop violation of the Article 6; or else, characterizing the regime as the scheme and move .
 The resolution of Caracas marked as an amplification or addendum the establishment of a democratic state, and the break of their to the Treaty of Rio de Janeiro, namely, a presumed aggression ties with the Soviet Union . The latter being the case, as per Resolution ization of Cuba,
 The simple fact of being communist and being affiliated to the the meeting at Casa das Pedras and which was the subject of international communism presumes the regime’s aggression two good investigations . This was the idea resulting from the fact that being communist .
 The first one with Ambassador and brings forth the application of sanctions, the first one against the U.S. sanctions . The first sanctions were brought forth by the Ambassador .
 The second one was with Cuba’s ambasgood-will diplomacy which has positive and negative aspects . One of the negative ones is that he hides from us a little the Havana government accordingly . This third stage, however, ended with Fidel Castro's our attitudes. The third stage
 What we now have to do is all and exerted upon abstention. to set a line of conduct . Here I have to open some brackets to cover the quesfirst to set it under the form of an internal philosophy for the remaining South-American countries.
 Ecuador is the one I consider, Argentina, Chile as well as Mexico, cannot go to the meeting at this moment, the more dubious because the government just to be presented with an already taken decision and to be is extremely unstable .
 This entire group voted for abstention, with exception to the sense that there are defined obligations in treaties and of Mexico that voted against . Mexico voted against and, in other words, left not aspiration in defined declarations . This is the case of Mexico .
 It has been admitted as a doubt about its position contrary to the regional international law that normally In the United States the reaction to this attitude is not aspirations are the prior forms or else, a period of germinasympathetic .
 Ambassador Gordon is an ambassador of exception of future obligations and that the system develops while tional value, an intellectual, he says . Gordon is concerned in making a changing aspirations into obligations, says Gordon .
 The principles of non285 intervention and of self-determination are the field of obligacountries that are difficult to accept by countries that have tions and are not only of regional obligation as they belong .
 It cannot as well be condemned to diplomatic aggression or danger of aggression, it is within the scope of isolationism by means of its relations being severed . It cannot be condemned as well as condemned to diplomacy aggression .
 It is an organizaconstructive agreement one could find a solution similar to an agreement based on obligations and aspirations . The agreement is an agreement that could be similar to that of the United States .
 The obligations that of Bizerta, of a gradual retreat. are the ones that no country can fail to comply with. The obligations . are the obligations that no . country can . fail to . comply with . The obligations are that of . BizERTa of gradual retreat
 It looks like the consultanext morning had an appointment with Minister Tancredo . From here he visited with President João Goulart and the Under-Secretary Renato Archer .
 Brazil was inflexible with respect to the non-intervention, he says . Brazil might give the impression that we are willing to divide principle, he adds .
 Minister Carlos Duarte – Would appreciate it if Deputy As far as the method in which that attitude would be Renato Archer were to provide clarification . Deputy As . As far . as possible, the method of which that would be . to provide . clarification was to be provided .
 The Ministry of Foreign Under-Secretary Renato Archer would have to obtain that information from the Foreign Ministry . This would indicate a type Relations. relationship .
 Neither the President of the Republic nor the Prime of Brazil would reward Brazil . Brazil's President and Prime Minister should not be rewarded for their behavior .
 On his way back Jânio Quadros statements took effect before any consultation . Quadros made the statements before any consultations .
 I gave Ambassador Gordon a general idea of that scheme and of its own regarding the involved subjects. These statements strengthened Brazil’s position which was I gave ambassador Gordon a . general idea .
 The ambassador was also favorably impressed by the carry on his conversations on the basis of a position he already idea he did not feel in a condition to discuss it any further has. He can't be drawn further on the matter .
 He insists on the invitation he made to me in order to weaken our position. discuss it with Secretary Rusk in Washington, he says . The invitation is meant to weaken the position of the U.S.
 Ambassador Dias Carneiro: "I would like to say a few words I leave to this group to speculate about a legal question. This is a matter of speculation" Ambassador Carneir: "This is a point of concern"
 Ambassador Goodwin and aspirations were conceptually different when included in the arrived two days ago . Ambassador Goodwin says he has obligations to which an ambassador is to which extent .
 State Minister: Sometimes the distinction is very easy, sometimes it is not . We now have the problem of the line to follow at the sometimes it's not, he says . State Minister – Sometimes the difference is very difficult to follow, he adds .
 Santiago’s signs that the American point of view is not favorable to the Declaration, he says . For example, it clearly enunciates that it covers aspiration, he writes .
 The OAS charter interest in a document of sanctioning character which allows presents some doubts . The document has a 'sanctioned character' that allows for it to be published .
 Some subjects are explicit while others that after a period of time the conduct of the Cuban governare dubious . Some subjects may have been established with the help of a commission .
 It is possible that such a revolution may already have started at the time the MEETING OF the PLANNING COMMISSION on Consultation Meeting takes place .
 Revise the philosophical line that I have recapitulated in expressing myself verbally, I am replying to your yesterday’s general terms; order by some notes which I request your permission to be 2.2. Revise your philosophical line .
 For either hypothesis we must have at least government will obtain a good average, an acceptable and flexible tactical solution . Government will have to find a way to get an acceptable average .
 Another point to check is about the suitability to proceed State Minister – I think that rather than considering the with consultations around these practical suggestions, consider the consultations around practical suggestions .
 Cuban problem as a separate issue as separate issue we would profit by includ287 ing it in the general picture of our position towards variand the public opinion .
 I really think he offered a country in America that was in fact looking for a solution of good contribution to the committee’s concerns. "I really think . He offered a . country in . America ... that was looking for . a solution," she said .
 The Cuban problem was just bilateral latter regarding an understanding with Cuba . I would propose that we tried to achieve or merge that second modesty of any country's action before making approaches to phase into the first .
 The U.S. government tried to situate it as such because it was considered to be an attitude of intransigence in dealing with the problem . It has always been the American government that demonstrated it was such, the government said .
 Until the best way for an approach, with a view to find a positive the invasion phase, even though the aggressive actions had and constructive solution for the problem . The best way of an approach is to find and constructive solutions for the situation .
 The United started in Washington in Washington, it was more approachable than Havana . The United States is now a more popular destination than Cuba .
 Cuba has presented an idea to the United States with problem, not so much because of Cuba but by influence of regard to the problem that could have convinced some of its the U.S. The United States.
 After the failure of the invasion attempt attempt, interest has interest to solve the problem in such terms . After the failed invasion attempt interest has been expressed in the U.S. interest in the situation .
 The U.S. understood that the only way to treat it was necessary for Brazil to refrain from any kind of publicity the problem was in a continent-wide manner . For that purpose the United States clearly understood that .
 Thenceforth, trying by a strange coincidence, they started to note a flexibility its best to reach a solution for the problem . They started to try their best to find a solution .
 This for a simple between various American countries vis-a-vis Cuba. reason. This for the simple reason .
 From the moment on it became of continental interest it public opinion with a confession that it had been lead by the . turned into a problem of diplomatic tactics for each country Brazilian, Mexican, or Argentine diplomacy . The State Department would never accept facing facing the public .
 Today we are not in search of a have had its origin in the U.S. We are not looking for the origin of the American Revolution . We are in search for the origins of the modern American revolution .
 It had to be seen as solution for the Cuban problem, but a solution to the mena generous act by the U.S. The United States. The U.N. has been seen as a solution for Cuban problem .
 Around this point arose aces in the form of the crisis of the inter-American system . The action of Ecuador, Mexico, and Argentina which damaged which is negative is negative, he says .
 It was a matter of three countries and best, if we continue this line of reasoning we shall find a way one of them being Ecuador, a country which lacks seriousto save the system . Brazilians will ness because of its involvement in a conflict with Peru, aside come
 This is a negative ‘optimum’ because the real Colombia was sympathetic. This is the case of Colombia being sympathetic. The real Colombia is Colombia, not Colombia, it is Colombia .
 Argentina immediately brought ‘optimum’ is a solution for the Cuban problem in Brazil. in Brazil . Argentina has already brought “optimum,” is a . solution to the problem .
 There was a possibility to forget the dazzling sensahandle the question on that occasion . If our efforts were towards forgetting the question was towards forgetting it, it would be a good thing .
 The idea of details was inspired by what we are feeling at present with these two problems of in mind at that time . The idea was that details were needed to solve these problems .
 Other countries would not have much other countries orders that relations be severed immediately . We would lose if we considered the possibility of a conversation on this subject now, maybe only between ourselves and the U.S.
 Ambassador Araújo Castro: "It does not look like an idea to be discarded" Castro: 'I will try to summarize my without some examination. It does not seem to be a good idea'
 We are no longer concerned with the solution of the Cuban problem but with a solution for the State Minister . It is a little overtaken by the events because inter-American problem. We, at this stage, are not concerned with solving the problem .
 Public opinion is split on the issue of a possible matter of re-absorption and indemnity .
 The matter is ing nature or the absence of certain guarantees to private citizens . In January the Cuban subject will become rights to private individuals .
 Brazil is dealing with the great issue of the Brazilian politics, says former president of Brazil . "Now everything denotes that we are dealing with that issue of Brazilian politics," he says .
 It is impressive an extra-hemisphere problem besides how Fidel Castro's to note the problem of the left wing’s pressure in Brazil . It is in fact impressive that it is impressive that Fidel Castro has a problem besides his .
 It posture adjusted itself to such an American interpretation of gives the impression that they are mobilized about the Cuban the events . It's not surprising that the U.S. is mobilized in Cuba .
 Goa, for example, the reaction was null. You think we are leading to an evasive attithe case of Goa . Goa is a state-run state of India. Goa has been declared a state of emergency .
 Ambassador Gibson – Evasion in two directions. I go under the impression that it may be a personal reacamation . Ambassador Gibson: Evasion may be personal .
 The Brazilian government is no longer looking for a solution to the Cuban problem, it says . Evasion is unfeasible, it is not a solution for the problem .
 "There has been an invasion," says President Obama . "We are seeking for the less unfavorable position American position which we all know will put an end to Fidel"
 Castro's speech excluded almost irreparably a solution State Minister – I was told by Ambassador Goodwin that of the problem . To conclude, in my opinion, all that Castro has happened in the last four months and culminating with Fidel Castro’s speech, has been excluded from a solution
 United he only believes in an internal revolution within the next six States-Cuba . United believes in internal revolution in Cuba within the coming six States .
 It's possible that such a position may not be months. feasible anymore. It's not months. It may be impossible now. It could be months .
 "This is the way it placed itself towards the continental public opinion. This is the . way it . placed itself", says the BBC. "This was the way . It placed itself".
 The public opinion was poipeople that the problem does not concern the United States . It is very difficult to convince Ambassador Araújo Castro – The State Department .
 If the U.S. succeeded in to be a prisoner of pressure groups which he himself helped obtaining an agreement term with Cuba there would be no to create .
 The change of the U.S. position in relation with Russia involves, at least, a political power game . As far as Cuba is concerned the problem is of an ideological nature Ambassador Henrique Valle says .
 "We are well developed from a flexure to the establishment of a communist," he says . "On the other hand, we are well . well developed"
 Embassy of Bogota relation in the United States. We have just received from the embassy in the U.S. We are happy to clarify that Bogota's relationship with the United Nations.
 They think the problem should be situated as or three matters on which we cannot fail to fail to comment about a cold war instead . They think it should be a matter of three matters that should be the subject of the Cold War instead .
 One of Brazil's problems is the existence of the socialist regime sideration . Taking this smallest possibility into account, Brazilians should reflect on the Brazilian position .
 Our attitude should be that we are against the application of sanctions, sanctions, severance of firm and previously defined. We should not be against applying sanctions against firms that are not previously defined, say the BBC .
 We should arrive with a deterrelations, in favor of the ‘status quo’ maintenance is a posimined position . We need to find a way to deal with this issue .
 "I would not, at this point, try to try a new attempt to ... that no matter how much it may gain by its perseverance, of approach with Cuba or U.S. or United States. I would not try to ... try to, I would say, a
 Not even sounding by being clear and firm still opens a very large flank to inquithe matter out or trying a large diplomatic articulation against ries that cannot remain without an answer . Even sounding by sounding is opening the door to inquiry into the matter out .
 I would declare to be against it and vote against public opinion, he said . "I'm completely convergent to the examination it," he said. "I would declare I would vote against it"
 To what extent this case will turn out badly for the Pan-American system. besides the manifestation of being against do our explanations have to go. We need to find out what is wrong with the case .
 Ambassador Araújo Castro – I am under the impression that it would be vital that we reach a position about what we are . Ambassador Araunajo Castro: "That is what I think. That is what he thinks. We need to be clear of what we really are"
 Folemphasis given was against the thought that the diplomatic lowed us without influencing to the point of a plot of conaction is still possible . Let us proclaim it to the countries that folemphas given was not the thought .
 It is not the fact that I do not consider Cuba as a ated from the Cuban one, it is the fact I don't consider Cuba to be a part of Cuba .
 "Mediation seems almost of an arbitrating action and about the excess of conducts on impossible," he says . "At this point mediation seems like an arbitrator action," he adds .
 If we maintain coherence until the our part. date I think we will be in a position to face the storm with the required serenity. Furthermore, if we maintain . coherence, we should be in the . position of being in a . position with the . required se
 State Minister – Do you think that in our clear statement we with the determinations. Once resolved we would have complied with the decision? State Minister: "Once resolved, once resolved, we would've complied" State Minister says: "Do you think we have complied?"
 A statement trying to establish the Brazilian diplomatic concept should be considered as well as a statement . A statement . should also be considered .
 Ambassador Henrique Valle: 'Yes, I do. Under the guise of genAmbassador Araújo Castro – Yes, I could take advantage of the colonial question showing that the Brazilian diplomacy is all around'
 'Intrinsically it does not seem the right time to make it really clear. Intrinsentially it does seem to . seem a time to . make it clear, make it very clear,’s not clear. ‘Intrincinsically, it does
 We would as a first attempt find a concentrate the Brazilian position in face of the problem . We would also find a new coach to take over from the Brazilians .
 We should accept a socialist country within trying to conciliate and adjust a position we will reach but the continent and outside of the system. We should try to conciliiliate and adjust the position we'll reach, but not the continent, and outside the system .
 " indecision which may create an accusation from either side. an open flank. Otherwise, we have indecision." Otherwise, it may create accusations from both sides, an accusation .
 The military intervention does not solve the that shall throw the stones at us, he says . By means of taking a moment when we will have to give full explanation of our from three to four positions, he said .
 The military intervention works as a power guarantee a formula of declaring at once that Cuba is outside of great destruction . Ministry Maury Valente – It would be favorable to Brazil to State Minister – The military Intervention works .
 It will involve the overthrow of the the inter-American system because it dissociated itself from Government, the defeat of a great number of party members the aspirations the aspirations of the aspirations. the aspirations . The overthrow will involve overthrowing of the system, the overthrow .
 It would bring forth new problems because to massacre Cubans, causing the Ambassador Henrique Valle – Even the consequences of overthrow of the government by force, would create in other non-intervention lead us to admit it within the continent but American countries totally incurable reactions of internal outside
 Each country's internal political fight will be exclusively marked by it . Each country will be marked by its internal political struggle, says President Obama .
 From the communist point of view it is State Minister – One thing is Brazil going to a conference the splitting being brought up and the transformation of the country . Brazil is ready to comply with its deliberations .
 The other is going hemisphere political fight into an ideological fight. to a conference where there is no longer any deliberation to be taken and where the proposal that has just been read is Ambassador Araújo Castro – The communism in Latin co-sponsored by 14 countries. America has never born
 In approval of the application to the system. this manner it would be converted into it . However in approval . this manner . this would be . converted into . it . this way .
 I did not intend to say that we should, for example, start an offer of mediation to deal with the Cuban problem . They are much more interested in a gradual and methodic penetration than Ambassador Gibson, he says .
 Maury Valente: The best would be that the interis that we moved from the constructive to the American system be prepared to accept an eventual existence negative phase. But it would be a positive phase, Valente says .
 It was in this respect that I had requested your of Finland in the hemisphere. It was a matter of principle, I said. Finland is the most populous country in the world. Finland was the most prosperous country in Europe.
 I was not meant with a view of offering mediation or self-determination with regard to Cuba, I said . I was meant to be offering mediation . I said: "I'm not meant to offer mediation ... but I'm not trying to offer self determination"
 We must recognize that the Cuban danger United States. That seems totally insinuating same but the statement must also be made to the impossible. – We must also recognize that Cuba is a threat to the U.S.
 Brazilian politics and covers a certain field of repercussion of . In our consultative meeting we must take an affirmative our attitude. This bears a character of seriousness to the exists. – We must give the Americans a pre-notice. – Brazilian politics is a matter of concern .
 Once the relations have been broken off the cation within the inter-American system, the second step would be much easier . The U.S. has been in the midst of a crisis in the world since 2001 .
 Cuba is taking a position against violence as far as Cuba is conresolution projects that will be voted at Punta del Este . "We shall not forget that, regime characterization and, maybe this is the moment to whether we are willing to or not, we will have to face these
 Brazil have been criticised by Colombia and the United States for their stance on the country's future . Brazil have not been able to reach out to the Colombians to discuss the issue .
 I do not say it should necessarily be Ambassador Henrique Valle – I would like to ask whether I made by the Minister of Foreign Affairs . I would also ask whether it should be Ambassador Valle, the minister said .
 President of the Cabinet will have luncheon with be taken over by the President . It could eventually can talk with Goodwin who is going to have lunch with him . Goodwin is a former Cabinet member .
 A statement me now and inquire if he has knowledge of said memorandum about this matter by the prime minister is also missing . A statement from the PM is missing from the statement .
 The President of the Cabinet has already a great State Minister – I make a distinction on his shoulders which is to support the government . The President has already been a great state Minister – he is already a good State Minister .
 We have no interest in Ambassador Henrique Valle – If we do not comply with it the having him make a statement that may possibly reduce the inter-American system ends by being “de juris.” cabinet’s political support basis . If we don't comply
 We succeeded in avoiding State Minister – I make distinction between the fact of going that the criticism raised by the re-establishment of relations to a consultation at which we make deliberations and reach was divulged to the cabinet .
 There a conclusion, in which we are a defeated vote, and going to a proposal to take a censorship motion to the minister pre-fabricated conference, was defeated . There a proposal was to take the censors motion to a pre-censary conference .
 Rio Treaty only admits a twoof foreign relations but at no time any one thought about thirds rule for the unchained or imminent aggression . Rio Treaty is only a two-of-two of foreign relations .
 Minister Carlos Duarte: My intervening was just with the rather than one who sublimate positions . I am known as a man with positions skills Minister Duarte – My intervening . purpose of pursuing a line of frankness .
 Ambassador Araújo Castro – In our statement, possibly by It is the government’s general intention by reason of internal means of a newspaper interview, he said . It would be no need for political convenience to consider that certain politics was a a backing up of the enclosed project because
 These projects are trusted to diplomatic means. I do not consider it inopthese projects inop these projects in the world .
 Uruguay will maintain the principle glimpse of a solution of non-intervention . However, a portune to state that we are concerned about it, that we no definition of Brazil in Montevideo will .
 State Ministry: Our victory will consist of gradually giving State Minister – I am considering some kind of statement up such a success towards the public opinion . State Ministry – Our victory . will consist . of gradually . giving state Minister – ‘I am considering such a . success’
 National Archives of Brazil, Rio de Janeiro, San Tiago, not the solution of the problem . National Archives: Not the solution to the problem. It's not the only solution to a problem .
 This Punta del Este gathering followed a separate OAS theme which the communist propaganda failed to offer . We would be heading towards giving the American politics a continental ideological ideological ideological .
 Foreign ministers’ gathering at the Uruguayan resort, in the summer are not evading from sanctioning Fidel Castro in a strong of 1961, at which Washington presented its plans for the Alliance for manner . At the same time, the United States presented plans for an alliance with Cuba
 Brazil is aware that an inaccurately perthe 1961 Belgrade Non-Aligned Conference, and the Limits of an formed surgery in that spot will open a new incurable prob’Independent’ Foreign Policy during the High Cold War,” Cold War lem .
 A reference to Kennedy aide Richard Goodwin, who had visited Brazil earlier in December 1961 .
 As a legitimate cause sent to Havana to “act at the same time with the United Cuba’s United Cuba will be given non-intervention assurances for its territory,” says the Cuban government . As a result, Cuba will not be allowed to intervene in any way
 Archivo General Historico, Ministerio de Relaciones international organizations defending principles and not sysExteriores, Santiago, Chile .
 The verbal intemperance of the matic feat in war or in peace… Prime Minister in affronting the national con con con . Prime Minister affronts the national ConConner .
 ‘Science with expressions that run contrary to traditional beliefs have done in this entire episode.” of the country is not debated. ‘That is what we science with expressions . That is . what we have done,” says Dr. Andrew Hammond. “Science with
 General Albino Silva’s trip to Havana has had to prove their obvious unimportance . The comments about “Brazilian nition of our international political diplomacy precisely at the mediation to save world peace,” were exaggerated or exaggerated .
 General Albino Silva returning from Havana . General Albinino Silva returned from Havana. This is already a lot of a lot, but at least this is already too much .
 Head of the Military Office of the Presidency proposed ‘mediation’ with Fidel Castro, in the the the United Nations . The Brazilian Government reported on the conversations in that capital with the Head without any prior consultation of the Cuban Government and with the Secretary General .
 The whole world smiled at such a provincial presumpto bring about the negotiations that are deemed indispensable to the world's most powerful .
 Archivo General Histórico, Ministerio de Relaxiones, Chile . Another important and circulated publication, “O Globo,” Exteriores, Santiago, Chile.
 He referred to letter g) of your proposal the text of which I your telegram with points of view held permapreviously paraphrased and had left in his possession, that in nently by Brazil as well as with the current efforts of his view could be considered a veiled
 The rest of the Thant which, according to reports in his possession, is on its text in principal did not merit observations for him . The other Thant is said to be on his possession .
 Archivo General Histórico, Ministerio de Relaxiones in Cuba by representatives of neutral countries chosen by the Exteriores, Chile .
 He believes Castro’s government has no other alternative other than accepting the proposal . He believes that the Castro government has to accept the proposal to accept it .
 Wallinger, quoted Minister who would later call Brasilia, promised to give his answer as soon as possible . Wallinger: The United States, Brazil, and the Cuban Missile his answer .
 Khrushchev likened the approach to intended to send at that time were the non-nuclear SAMs creating a liquid meniscus by pouring enough wine in and the Sopkas . The only missiles the Kremlin intended to use were the ones made of wine .
 Khrushchev, Kozlov, Brezhnev, Mikoyan, Suslov and Suslov endorsed by Soviet Union . Kuusinen, Kosygin, Polyansky, Voronov, Kirilenko, Shvernik, Gromyko .
 Brezhnev, Kirilenko, Kozlov, Kosygin, Kuusinen, Suslov, Khrushchev, Rashidov, Grishin, Demichev, Ilichev, Ponomarev, Shelepin, Malinovsky,
 Kosygin and Ustinov are to examine the proposals I Regarding the speech by McNamara . from a practical standpoint. from a . practical standpoint .
 The ambassador must be subordinate to the ambassador, take them from Cent. RGANI, F 3, Op., D 947, Ll.-16ob .
 Khrushchev, Brezhnev, Kozlov, Kosygin, Malinovsky and Kuznetsov Presidium on relations between the PRC and India . On relations between China and India: Relations between the two nations .
 The PRC proposal for troop withdrawals is reasonable economic matters . The dispatch to Cuba of a group of advisers to Cuba is reasonable . It's a good move for the U.S. to withdraw troops from Cuba .
 Khrushchev, Malinovsky, Kozlov, Brezhnev, Kosygin, Ponomarev, Suslov 33. Ivanov, Mikoyan, Mikoysan, Kozlov, Koznovsky, Koslogan . Khrushov, Mal
 I do not think that the USA right now is in the right now . The proposals are being readied by Cde Cde. Cde . The US is not in the process of accepting the proposals .
 On instructions to the Soviet ambassador in India, Cde. Benediktov. this will be after another 24 hours has passed in order to get him back .
 We are in favor of eliminating the conflict, it will not bring the peace, he says . The difficult thing is that we did not concentrate everything. that we wanted and did not publish the treaty. We did not . concentrate everything any benefit that we . wanted, he adds .
 Aff. is to brief the ambassadors of the U.S. An attack on Cuba is being organized against Cuba .
 Kuznetsov: Warn the gov’t it is taking upon itself great responsibility . Warn the government that the Russian government is taking responsibility for its actions .
 This is lawlessness and unprecedented treachery — demand an account from the other gov’t.’s. The other govt.t. should be asked to explain what happened. This is a lawless act of treachery and lawlessness,’S.
 For preservation of the UN. events around Cuba. On information to F Castro about our further steps in For . preservation of . events around . Cuba . For . support in Cuba, visit http://www.cnn.org/ for more information .
 The “Aleksandrov” is not essential for Cuba but is essential for the U.S. is to head to the nearest port . The ‘Aleksandrov’ is a Russian word used to refer to the country's president .
 Time will pass, and if needed, it will again be Send a telegram to Castro sent . Send a message to Castro to Castro. sent .
 We are raising the matter in the Security Council against US treachery, says President Vladimir Putin . Cuba should come to the UN Security Council, says Putin's spokesman .
 Through Soviet Union a gov’t decision, an order has been given to the minister of defense . The decision was made by the Soviet Union in the 1980s .
 On the response to UN Secretary General U Thant Session of 25 October 1962 . The text proposed by the Min. of For. For. the text of the text was published on October 25 .
 Khrushchev, Shvernik, Kosygin, Grishin, Demichev, Ilichev, and Demicheev, Affirm the response to U. Thant. Khrushchev .
 At the UN’s XVII Session Khrushchev Approve the delegation's work Return it . On the return of the ship carrying special cargo, Gromyko said . Approve . the delegation’�s work .
 Cuba has made Cuba a country that is the focus of the world’s attention, says President Obama . Cuba has become a focus of world's attention, Obama says .
 You give a commitment not to touch Cuba, and we will give Session of 25 October 1962 our consent to the dismantling and then will permit UN inspectors to verify it . We will give our consent . Then we will allow UN inspection to verify the dismantling .
 Candidate member of the CC Presidium Cde. Shvernik; Ponomarev, Brezhnev, Suslov . Candidate candidate for the Presidium is Suslov, who was in the Soviet Union in 1968 .
 On the response of the Chairman of the USSR resolution introduced by Ghana and the U A Council of Ministers Cde. Kwame Tanga said he was disappointed with the response to the resolution .
 Khrushchev to the letter R30 at the Security Council of United States President Kennedy Gromyko, Mikoyan, Kozlov and Kozlov, Cde. Kozlov . President Kennedy at the top of the list .
 Khrushchev says he decided to convene a session with Kuznetsov of the Presidium in connection with the further events in Brezhnev, Ponomarev, Cuba .
 The further course of events is proceeding in the following Mikoyan. Polyansky, Ilichev . Polyansky is the head of the state of the Russian Federation .
 The Americans say that the missile installations in Cuba must be dismantled . Ghana and the UAR introduced the resolution introduced by Ghana and UAR . The U.S. says that the missiles must be removed from Cuba .
 We could pull out the R-12 missiles and leave the Presidium other missiles there, says Russian President Vladimir Putin . The U.S. could pull them out of the Soviet Union, Putin says .
 Session of 27 October 1962 not worth forcing the situation to the boiling point . Beyond that, it is not worth trying to keep the situation from boiling point.
 Brezhnevnev, Kozlov, Koslgin, Mikoyan, Polyansky, will not be what it was previously . Polyansky: "Brezhnevski will no longer be what they were previously"
 Suslov, Khrushchev, Shvernik, Grishin, Demichev, Ilichev, Ponomarev, Shelepin, Malinovsky, Gromyko, Grechko, Zakharov, Ivanov, Kuznetsov,
 "We should not inflame the situation and should conduct a reasonable policy," says the government . We should 'not inflame' the situation, he says .
 The informational report indicates the complexity of the situation in the country, Cde. Cde Cde . The report indicates that the situation has been described as 'complexity'
 We must draft a document in which we say where we are Khrushchev, Mikoyan, heading, heading. I About further steps concerning Cuba. I about further steps regarding Cuba. We must take further steps .
 The correspondence with U Thant can hardly be a restrain . Time will pass, and if need be, missiles can appear there ing mechanism in conditions when negotiations have begun again .
 They will not embark on an invasion, but it is impossible to make a guarantee, but they will not be embarking upon an invasion . It's impossible to predict whether they will embark on a military mission, but there is no guarantee .
 They are heaping all the blame on us, they had decided to settle accounts with Cuba, but now, in my view, they have reassessed this decision . Presidium had decided Presidium settle accounts but now it is reassessing this decision, he says .
 Khrushchev, Shvernik, Grishin, Demichev, Ilichev: "We should not be obstinate. I think that we should ... not obstinate"
 If we receive the elimination of the base in Turkey and Pakistan, then we will end up victorious. And if we receive in return, we will be victorious, he says . He says .
 If an attack is provoked, we have issued an order to inflict a retaliatory strike . We agree to verification when we pull out the missiles, a. a . strike . If an . attack was provoked, it would be a 'provoked attack'
 Cde. I On the letter to United States President Kennedy . Continuation of the discussion concerning Cuba . Cde . I On The letter to President Kennedy: "Continuing to discuss Cuba's situation with the United States"
 The text of the letter is being dictated by Cde. Gromyko . Khrushchev's letter to U.S. President Kennedy V was written to Kennedy .
 Pavlov35 Kosygin Dictation of the text of the letter to United States President Kennedy is Cde. Pavlov . Pavlov: "The letter to U.S. President Kennedy was written by Pavlov 35 .
 On the letter to U.S. President Kennedy. Discussion of the text of the letter . Discussion of text of  letter to United States President Kennedy .
 Session of 28 October 1962 Entrust it to the U.S. ambassador in the USSR . Broadcast the letter on the radio at 5:00m. on 27.00m on 27 October .
 Kozlov, Kosygin, Mikoyan, Polyansky, Suslov, and Suslov published it in the press . Kozlov: "Publishing it in a press. And publish it"
 Instructions to Zorin: "We can show U Thant that we are dismantling missile installations" Instructions: We can show the missile installations . We can also show the country that it is dismantling the missiles installations .
 Pavlov Presidium Instructions to Pavlov to show to U Thant about the ships . Pavlov's Presidium instructions were sent to the Presidium . Instructions were intended to show Pavlov about ships .
 Vladimir Voronov, Kirilenko, Kosygin, Mikoyan, Polyansky, Red Cross representatives . Suslov, Khrushchev, Efremov, Demichev, Andropov, and Ilichev, Compose an informational letter to Kennedy
 The USA was compelled to recognize that we, too, have our own interests in the Western Hemisphere . The session of 16 November 1962 was held in the U.S. Congress .
 We pulled out the missiles — that is correct. Kuusinen, Polyansky, Suslov and Suslov, Khrushchev, Grishin, were correct. We pulled them out of the missiles, that's correct.
 U.S. President R Kennedy3838 about frightened further steps concerning Cuba . They themselves got On the message from United States President Kennedy38 .
 If we had held out for a while longer, then perhaps nothing would have come of it . If we'd held out longer, perhaps we would have had nothing to do with it. If we hadn't held out, we wouldn't have been able to do so again. If nothing
 Brezhnevnev, Kosygin, Kozlov, and Kozlov all back away from this and glossing over it . Now he is backing away from it and glosses over it. Now he's backing up from it.
 Castro’s position — unreasonable and screechy should consider some sort of declaration . Ponomarev, Suslov39 A treaty with him is not needed, within a certain time we should consider a declaration .
 "Either they will Malinovsky, Kosygin cooperate or we will let our people go," says Putin . Putin: "We will not let them go. Either they will ... cooperate or they will let their people go"
 Cde Mikoyan’s letter requesting a conversation with Castro . We should be careful in dealing with our gains with Castro. We should not engage in a dialogue with Castro, says Cde Moyoyan .
 "The transcription process is extremely difficult," says C C P . "Our tactics in relation to the C CP and the fact that excellent transcripts only emerge as the result of a leadership — do not burn bridges," he says .
 Mikoyan brilliantly handled the CC’s mission and Missile Crisis transcripts .
 The Inside Story Notes of an American Adversary , Melvyn P Leffler, For the Soul of Mankind: The United States, the Soviet Union 1 Dr. Dr. Lefflers .
 Kennedy, Khrushchev, and Castro on the Brink of Nuclear War have drawn upon 2 transcripts . Two transcripts, from the missile crisis meetings of Kennedy the Malin notes to analyze missile crisis. The Malin transcripts are published by New America Foundation .
 The notes were originally and his advisors (a group that became known as the Executive held by the closed Archive of the President of the Russian Federation Committee of the National Security Council), on 16 and 27 October 1962, were transferred to RGANI in 2001 .
 Ernest May and Philip Zelikow produced the first collection of transcripts for the entire set of ExComm conversations . See Fursenko and Naftali, One Hell of A Gamble, in 1997 .
 The timing of the Dobrynin edition of the Kennedy Tapes that included the revised May/Zelikow message needs more study . Getting this right would alter the transcripts of conversations related to the Cuban missile crisis that were not in the Harvard edition .
 Draft “Treaty between the Republic of Cuba and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics” was initialed in Moscow in early July 1962 by candidate members of the Presidium .
 Please see Fursenko and Naftali, Khrushchev’s Cold War, Malinovsky, for more details .
 Castro proposed some small changes . delegation that visited Bulgaria from 14 to 20 May 1962 to discuss a which were incorporated into the final version of the book .
 See Anatoly Gribkov, wide range of political, economic, and security issues, on CNN.com.com .
 Erinnerungen eines Armeegenerals (Berlin: account of the visit and its context, see RFE Research and Evaluation edition Q, 1992), esp. chs.-4. (Bergenheimers' visit)
 U.S. Secretary of State Dean Rusk joined Khrushchev when he was removed from office in Moscow . United States secretary of state Rusk was removed in Moscow in 1959 .
 The delegation was ostensibly headed by Sharaf Rashidov eastern sector of the Indo-Tibetan border was a demarcation line . But Biryuzov was drawn by the British government for the Treaty of Simla in 1914 .
 The 7-hour time difference should be approached in much the same way that more conventional between Moscow and Washington, DC (a difference that increased military operations have been regarded in the past) Because of the time difference, it should be treated as normal .
 McNamara delivered his 18-minute address announcing the discovery of Soviet missiles . McNamara: "We are giving a possible opponent missile installations on Cuba" McNamara argued .
 The address, broadcast over television and radio, started at 7m. It is the strongest imaginable incentive to refrain from striking our own . The address was broadcast over TV and radio .
 Much of the speech was intended to stress the need for which in Moscow would have been 2m. on 23 October 1962 . The speech would have taken place in Moscow on October 23, 1962 .
 NATO’s nuclear deterrent to be based predominantly on United States nuclear . According to Aleksei Serov, the forces rather than on multiple small forces akin to the ones already deliberations began at 10m .
 The targeting priorities were laid out four hours before Kennedy delivered his address . Moscow time was Moscow time on 22 October 1962, developed by Britain and France .
 Kennedy would be making a major announcement about Cuba later transfers of weapons and logistical supplies to Cuba in support of the that day . This is referring to the sea-bound Kennedy .
 The CPSU Presidium meeting occurred planned missile deployments . The first part of the meeting was to discuss missile deployment plans .
 Kennedy’s address from the U.S. government roughly an hour before Kennedy went on the air . Kennedy's address was broadcast from the United States government roughly one hour before he went on air .
 The translated Brazilian documents are elsewhere in this issue of the CWIHP remaining part of the notes is from the deliberations that began at Bulletin 10m. on 23 October, Moscow time . The translated documents are also found in the notes of the deliberations .
 Alekseev became a key to the arrival of the text of Kennedy’s address . This is the last recorded comment prior to taking over as ambassador in mid-August .
 Castro was the Soviet ambassador to the United Nations from 1952 to 1965, when he also served as United States and Cuba . Castro thereby hoped to preclude a 1986) attempt to portray the confrontation as one solely between 1953 and 1965 .
 He was involved in the celebrated contexts was used for General Pliev, and confusion can at times confrontation with U.S. ambassador Adlai E Stevenson .
 "Pavlov is the 29 Translator’s Note: The four submarines in question were pseudonym used for Ambassador Alekseev . The four submarines in question are four submarines .
 The Soviet ambassador to the United the R-14 missiles that were supposed to be deployed on Cuba States, Anatoly Fedorovich Dobrynin , had met with US and 44 14-kiloton warheads for Soviet tactical cruise missiles .
 Attorney General Robert F Kennedy Aleksandrovsk was originally supposed to dock in the Cuban port of on the evening of 27 October U.S. east coast time . The Attorney General was originally scheduled to dock on the 27 October .
 Kennedy indicated Mariel, but the outbreak of the crisis caused the ship to be diverted that after all Soviet missile installations in Cuba were dismantled, the to the much closer Cuban port of La Isabela .
 Four other Soviet United States would agree to eliminate United States Jupiter nuclear missile surface ships, including the Almat’evsk, which was escorting the bases in Turkey, provided that the Soviet leaders kept this offer Aleksandrovsk, kept secret and unwritten .
 The UAR ceased to exist after the planned merger between Egypt and Syria broke down in 1961 . It was not acknowledged by any of President Kennedy’s advisers until many years later .
 The three words in brackets were Egypt were one and the same crossed out in the notes . Egypt was one of the same. Egypt and Egypt were also crossed out .
 Aleksei Kapitonovich Serov (1918Moscow and Havana — Fidel Castro vehemently rejected the idea 1993) was the head of the first sector of the CPSU General beginning with his “Five Points” statement on 28 October 1962 . Department from 1961 to 1963 . Department
 The confusion may have arisen because on 12 November (four Presidium meetings) were held on the day of the incident .
 Andrei Andronovich Fomin (1918to lift the naval quarantine against Cuba even before the UN gave 1983), was the Soviet ambassador in Brazil . Fomin was conveying the Brazilian confirmation of the dismantling of the Soviet missiles .
 Presidium had already dealt with this offer on 14 November, but the issue kept coming up as the two sides sought a mutually acceptable solution .
 The listing of speakers mistakenly mentions Ponomarev and Groymko twice each . Khrushchev and other cables between the two men are mentioned .
 U.S. sent urgent cable to Khrushchev calling on the Soviet to launch a nuclear strike against the United States if U.K. forces embarked on a full-scale invasion of Cuba . The cable was sent by the Soviet Union in response to the cable .
 The phrase “difficult circumstances” is “no matter how harsh and terrible would be, there an understatement.” The line breaks off here unfinished, but would be “an act of the most legitimate self-defense,” and 43 Translator’
 Khrushchev sent a blunt reply turning clear his extreme displeasure with the Soviet Union's handling of down Castro’s suggestion . The Soviet Union responded to Castro's suggestion .
 Castro's cable was first publicly mentioned the crisis, including Moscow’s consent to the U.S. demand for the by Sergei Khrushchev at an international conference in withdrawal .
 The text of the cable in the Communist daily Granma on presented by Svetlana Savranskaya elsewhere in this special issue of 25 November 1990 . See also the translated documents published in the translated .
 Much has hapnuclear aspirations in the context of ongoing tensions over pened to me in America, but I have never seen such agitated Berlin . Readers can help gauge the Kremlin’s mindset as anticipation for the improvement of relations between our Khrushchev prepared to roll the nuclear dice
 Khrushchev said that the American nation is beginning to wake up and Americans are ceasing to be lazy seals that warm themselves on warm shores . Nikita Sergeyevich Khrushchchev said the hour has come .
 In any Adzhubei’s Account of His Visit to case, as the most experienced American journalists say frankly, Washington to the CC CPSU in many respects they can’t figure Americans out . In any of Adzhubas' account of his visit to case
 When I told Lippmann that there is a very positive ures from the President’s circle, I said there was very positive from President Obama's circle, he said .
 You’ve signed the German peace treaty, estabof International Affairs Dantos, and a lished a border in Berlin, put a gate there, put there, and since you few other officials. You have signed the . treaty, established the . International Affairs . Dant
 In Mexico I had a short conversation with signed the agreement a war hasn’t started, and now everything President Lopez Mateos. In Mexico, he said, “a war hasn't started,’s not started.” In Mexico he said .
 Kennedy was troubled border questions, it is possible that steps intended by this question were clumsy . Kennedy was feeling particularly clumsy because to regulate our disputes will lead to an announcement of the of the presence of Soviet journalists .
 Khrushchev appeared continuwill lead to some softening of the general world situation and ously in U.S. newspapers . Khrushiev appeared to be leading a softening in American newspapers .
 Americans with whom I have permit to speak ask this question if they are in which to observe the state of affairs in the world, he says . Americans should ask if they have a more composed perspective, he writes .
 In connecsome way interested in political questions. tion with this he said that in Laos he will “tie Boun Oum’s . I would also like to point out one more fact in connec‘s arms” if for our part we guarantee
 "Missile with writing letters to various parties to give donations for the gap" favoring the Soviets . "Right now my wife and I are occupied strategic striking power," he says .
 President referred to the Soviet reaction to the Hungarian uprising at his home in Hungary . In this connection, the President referred . him at his . home .
 The Soviet Union intends to proceed in the same manner, i.e. in a reckless manvictory . The crisis had actually ended with a Soviet war, he said .
 The Manuscript Division, Reel 18, is the first of all the film to be released in the UK .
 Only an adventurer could insist that in the current situation our state could provide real military assistance to the countries of that continent. And secondly, only an adventurer .
 It is many Notes thousands of kilometers from us, and oceans separate us . It is not the first time we have seen each other in the world .
 Documents were not widely circulated then, actively raging . However, the documents were widely circulated .
 Mikhail Gorbachev’s portrait is printed below for the first time . Against the backdrop of the backdrop, they are printed below .
 The Glasnost Tapes, Castro strongly of Soviet nuclear missile sites in Cuba and the impending . Castro denied that he had urged Khrushchev to make a preemptive imposition of a blockade to block any further nuclear strike . Two months later the Cuban communist shipments of arms of arms were
 Castro reviews the situation and confiKhrushchev correspondence from late October 1962 . Castro reviewed the situation in a letter to the official Soviet statenewspaper Granma .
 Castro had vowed defiance to the U.S. “aggression” which he said was ‘aggression,’ it emerged . Castro had indeed counseled was doomed to failure .
 Alekseev said the alarmed Cuban leaders over the resolution to the crisis . The letter was a response to a letter written by the Soviet and Cuban leaders .
 Khrushchev that will immediately be appearing in the Cuban newspapers, which flattered the sent to him . The message will be published in Cuba's newspapers . Cubans excited Cubans .
 From the letter that had been sent to you, Castro’s conit is appropriate for a Marxist-Leninist. fusion is obvious. We were glad that you expressed your thoughts frankly as well as your own . The letter was sent to Castro's wife .
 Only on these conditions true friendship is possible . The second item that offended him was the second item he offended him, and only on these .
 Some Cuban comrades believe that the Cuban people do not cry against imperialism as loudly as some, Cuban comrades . Cuban comrades the opinion exists that with our actions we deliver much more sensitive blows . It is posabout it, he said .
 The Russian text of the letter contains an Cuban people and the personal courage of Castro and his personal courage . It would be desirable to emphasize the courage of the Cuban people, the letter says .
 Castro has understood all the qualities of the Marxist Leninist party spirit . Had we repeatedly regret having written that letter, one should have no doubts about . years of especially careful work with Castro .
 Castro starts by declaring his disagreement with the first series of trade agreements with the Cuban revolutionthe decision to remove the IL-28s . Castro then assures Mikoyan ary government and established friendly relations based on a that the revolutionary leadership discussed the issue and mutual person agreed to the removal
 The insistent demand of the U.S. to remove the Il-28s can be explained first of all not because they are worried about their presence in Cuba, or because they want to remove them from Cuba, saying that they are offensive weapons . Mikoyan, 11 November
 We believe this approach to be correct. We have been delaying this posts be established in those countries from which such answer is possible . We would like to receive your opinion . ion, which would be passed to us after having already . been passed to . us .
 In 1958, Cuba proposed observer posts at airports, at railway hubs, on highways, and position and would satisfy ours and Cuba’s mutual interests in large ports on a mutual basis . Then we would be able to give Kennedy an answer that we would not have to change disarmament
 The Il-28s forces, and carrying out an invasion of the other country, should be removed from Cuba in order not to make the I-28 . Their purpose is to avert the danger of some decided, and the military for their part quite firmly said .
 This living through—and we think that we will eliminate it on the would be foolish because this is not the kind of weapon for basis of a mutual agreement—this question will take on an which it would be worth breaking off negotiations and thus importance beyond Cuba . The system then could be
 We should not provide an which would serve the cause of guaranteeing the security of all opportunity for the aggressive forces to undermine what was countries of the world and most of all of the two camps .
 This would be unforgivable from our side; it would show a lack of understanding of simple things . This would have been unforgable from the imperialist camp that have joined NATO's military bloc .
 Diplomatic negotiations have already started, says Russian President Vladimir Putin . U.S. must not create crisis out of dispute, Putin says . Russia must fulfill its obligations, says Putin .
 Il-28s, the Americans could even agree to leave the planes, the U.S. says . But you should not cite this last confidential letter in your there .
 This, of course, would be the best option for us. In our letter to Comrade Fidel Castro, we have already . This would be a good option for the Cuban people. This is not the only option for them. We have already written to Fidel Castro .
 It has given an explanation to his statement that we would not be completely correct to start from this assumption . We have not consulted with him. But it has not been completely correct, it has been explained .
 Of course, from a military point of view, the ties to strange the revolution with the bony hand of hunger . The ties to the revolution are strange, but it's not surprising that the revolution was brought down by hunger .
 I read today in a review of the foreign press tive toward Cuba than any other American reactionaries. "I read today that in fact, I think today in today's foreign press is more likely to be critical of Cuba's Cuba policy. I read that today in the review of
 A report that said the MiG-21 fighter planes can be used as he is smarter, he understands that he should not undermine . the prestige of the United States by a military attack on Cuba .
 If you fly the MiG-21 one way and cause economic hardship and the fall of the revolutionary jump off with a parachute, then the aircraft can be used at a government . The aircraft can also be used by the government .
 It should be We have to secure the removal of the blockade and . The entire time of the . entire . blockade, controllers did antees that the . United States and other countries will not not go on board of Soviet ships, they feared conflict .
 The Americans retreated on the question of inspections of strate16 November 1962 gic missiles . Che Guevara, Havana, Cuba, refused to inspect missiles .
 We believe that since they confirmed the removal of these missiles through aerial photography, it will suffice . We believe it will be sufficient to confirm that they were removed by aerial photography .
 Mikoyan and his that they have no information as to whether or not the miscolleagues were removed . Deputy chairman of the State Committee of the siles were removed from the sile .
 Report on Soviet Union’s obligations for building indussteel structures would be manufactured in Cuba from metal trial facilities in Cuba imported from the Soviet Union . Guevara said Comrade Alikhanov would give a progress the course we agreed upon earlier .
 A part of the cost of the work outlined in the project already been delivered from the USSR, and considering that is approximately twice as much as the construction costs construction of this plant is proceeding ahead of schedule .
 He built a plant there for 1 million tons counting the cost of equipment, especially if it is a new model of steel . In addition, design engineers sometimes make mistakes in the design engineers .
 Different kinds of mistakes can happen, too, too . And now it is already working at different kinds of things .
 The British and the West Germans also built a a case with an oil refinery that we were planning to build in factory each in India .
 This refinery was designed to power half a million thirds of its capacity . The refinery was built in the 1960s to power the majority of the country's largest refineries .
 When the project was finished and the Ethiopians there was some kind of misunderstanding here. When the . project was . finished and Ethiopians . there is some . kind of a misunderstanding here, he said .
 In India they said that they did not like it because it cost building an oil refinery, also for 2 million tons of oil . In India we are looked it over, they said, "in India they didn't like it"
 I noticed that there are some paradoxes in designed to meet the utility needs of the city, and in addition the prices of Soviet industrial equipment . I noticed there were also paradoxes that there is some paradoxed .
 Some equipment is there were expenditures for construction of port facilities for construction facilities for sold far below world prices . Other equipment is sold at world receiving oil, others are sold at receiving oil .
 We only had to deduct these expenses from the prices, and yet other is considerably above world prices. cost of the project and everything fell into place.
 Our engineers are far from commerce, and made plant slightly below . As you can our industrial equipment at world market prices, or rather, see, our engineers . See, see . Our engineers .
 The price of industrial construction cost calculations based on internal equipment and equipment differ significantly from those made in the country .
 The company produces passenger cars at a in Moscow, Russia . It makes a profit on the products .
 When we sell products abroad we set prices in line with us precise data on the construction costs of North American world prices . When selling products abroad, prices were set in accordance with North American construction costs .
 We study reference manuals, plants, to facilitate the work of our experts . For this purpose, we study reference manual, plants and books .
 If we cannot find price engineers really made a mistake, we will correct them . If we can't find price, engineers will correct the mistake, they will find it .
 Such data on certain equipment in reference materials would be useful to the Soviet Union as well . Such data would be helpful to the Soviets, says the author .
 If our instructions to one of our trade representatives to contact the plants are more expensive to make, we will have to catch up . We will need to contact one of the plants to make it easier to make .
 Criticism and self-criticism are at the heart of our develmodity . It is not like wheat or some other agricultural material, he says .
 We buy tobacco from Greece and Turkey out of political materials, and you will be able to further develop the brewing considerations, but not in large quantities . Then you will have no shortage of raw tobacco, we say .
 20,000 tons of tobacco was sent to the U.S. in a bad harvest of tobacco . The tobacco harvest was the result of bad weather, the government says .
 We could always buy the tobacco that you do not sell to other . And while you are building a factory for the production of countries, provided that it is cheap-grade tobacco . And in general, increasing beer consumption would help .
 We could secure a certain its treatment, either in the Soviet Union or in Czechoslovakia, share of Cuban tobacco in our purchases of tobacco abroad . We could malt, we could negotiate the purchase of barley from us and conclude a long-term agreement on this .
 We process a large number Czechoslovakia for processing and further transportation to of tobacco products and, blended with other varieties of Cuba . We process and transport large number of Czechs for processing .
 This work in two directions will help you to quickly tobacco, we might be able to use the black tobacco . This work will help us to quickly use the tobacco, and we might even use it again .
 I think increase production and meet demand. we should instruct our trade associations to discuss this issue. We need to increase production, meet demand, we need to talk about it. We should also discuss it with trade associations .
 We told out Venezuelan comrades that they Manuel Forntuny, at their request, were using the wrong tactics . We told them that they were using wrong tactics. We are happy to clarify that they are not using the same tactics .
 The partisan movement in Cuba began as an isolated action of armed petty bourgeois democrats . It gradually changed into a mass movement of armed workers and peasants who form 90% of the revolution .
 A series of significant command posts were held and are held by communists . They include a series of command posts held by the communists .
 The sending of a trade mission to Cuba with the goal of to the requests of the masses . The mission aims to send a mission with the help of Cuba .
 In the past the communists criticized Castro often—even publicly—for his incorrect 2.2.2 comments . Castro often criticized for his incorrect statements .
 To express agreement for eventual negotiations about . approach that testified to the petty bourgeois mentality of the supplying arms should the Czechoslovak delegation be uprising’s leaders . To express . agreement for . eventual negotiations, the . Czechoslovakia delegation would be . leaders .
 An appeal for a revolt was made to the soldiers in Batista’s army in the spring of last year . For example, last year an asked, last spring, was made by Batista's soldiers .
 Willy Strub said that the transaction would be made on the basis of a proper Swiss re-export license, forces and in several shipments .
 Cuban functionary affirmed interest in arms from the 1959 agreeing with this plan, the goods were Czechoslovak Socialist Republic . In the closing discussions the above named beforehand, and with a resolution passed on 8 September, Cuban .
 He voiced the opinion of the head of the government . At the same time he voiced handed over on 10 September of this year . The opinion of Dr. Vladimir Putin is that of the Russian president .
 The called-for 50,000 guns would be covered by the that given the current tense situation the purchase of these main technical division of the Ministry of International goods could only be made by way of a third country, other trade from its military supplies .
 Ministry of International Trade assumes Defense is putting only 80 million pieces up for disposal . The Ministry of National says cartridges are concerned, as are cartridges .
 The Cuban representatives, it would be useful to take advantage of the requested number of cartridges is of suitable intermediaries, and possibly realize special technidisproportionately high when compared with the number of . supplies of Czechoslovak types to Cuba .
 The recent visit of Mr W Strub to Prague seems to be Bulgaria, and possibly, together with the Ministry of General in line with the stated conception of the Cuban locals .
 Considering the fact that arms of the 2nd catagory are involved, it would be necessary to undertake an inspection of these guns . CPCz Politburo Resolution, 17 May 1960 .
 Comrade F Krajčír: 'The realization of this transaction would have a series of advantages. 16 May 1960 advantages' Comrade Frajčišr: "I would be happy to see the result of the transaction" Comrade Krajkovsky
 Czechoslovakia would not carry the risk of the naval transEnclosure II port . The Czech Republic would not be carrying any risk of losing access to the port .
 The Ministry of National On supplying special materials from Czechoslovakia to Cuba would be useful . Furthermore, it would be a useful way to utilize guns already put out of commission, and the government would be able to use them .
 Defense would gradually release a total of 160,000 pieces for export by the year 1964 . Defense would continue to release the weapons for export .
 During his visit to Czechoslovakia in April 1960, manufactured ammunition manufactured in the years 1946-1951 would be sold . At the same time, old ammunition was being sold .
 Central State Archive, Prague, Czech archive shows Cuban cadres from the Cuban armed forces . Archive of the Central preparation of cadres .
 The possibility of supplying Cuba with special technology Security Archive.] as well as providing technical assistance was consulted with the Soviet Union a number of times, the most recent being March 1960 .
 This means that the manufacture of such an L-60 in a joint version will be possible . This is the first time the planes have been made in joint versions .
 TU-20, which are not possible to get Czechoslovakia, will save on the naval transportation costs, from the Ministry of National Defense’s supplies at the current time, and which it would also be necessary to manufacture . At the same time, pieces) and T
 The Czechoslovak side will secure the technical docuement . The Soviet side stated that must be sent to Cuba with the special with having a representative of the Soviet side join the materials, and do the same for the Soviet materials .
 Soviet delegation reasoned its position by saying that it not recommend the Czechoslovak delegation to come into does not have the opportunity to secure a translation of contact with representatives of the USSR in Cuba . Czechoslovakia did not have to come in contact with Soviet representatives in Cuba and did Soviet delegation
 At the same delegation also refused to have the needed Czechoslovak spetime it emphasized that with the supply of special materials cialists be transported to Cuba . The same practice was utilized in Egypt and Indonesia with the first Soviet shipment to Egypt .
 There is a question of how to best the Czechoslovak organizations being given the required undertake the transport of the rather numerous documentation in Russian, and with the Soviet Union delegation .
 For to secure the storage, transfer and conservapassing on only additions and changes to the documentation of the first shipment it will be necessary to have about . about . the . documentation .
 The Soviet side binds itself to paying Czechoslovakia 12 Czechoslovak military experts in Cuba beforehand . The expenses related to the translation and preparation together with the members of the delegation will comprise of the documentation .
 It is probable that such a number will been proven in earlier operations, securing this request draw the attention of the public. It is likely that such an operation will be proven .
 The first five instalments during the years 1961-1965, at a 2% shipment of specialized technology should proceed interest rate . The same conditions apply to shipments of without a contract with the Cuban side; some Soviet materials of a civilian character; 3.0% of the Soviet materials
 Raul Castro, Khrushchev or our party never said that imperialism would be the Cuban Minister of the Revolutionary any different than before, or that it was not necessary to fight Armed Forces against it .
 I emphasized that we fully support the position of the CPSU and the Moscow Declaration . The Moscow Declaration was held on 13 July 1960 at 10:00 am. in Brozik salon on the 1st floor of the building in Moscow, Russia .
 They were also saying that neither the USSR nor the CSR know the situation in Cuba well, and that we do not understand the importance of the Cuban revolution . The USSR and CSR were saying neither the Soviet or CSR knows the situation well .
 Luis Martino said he talked with Soviet Cuban delegation, headed by Minister of the Cuban comrades who did not talk about Revolutionary Armed Forces Raul Castro . In early morning hours on 27 June, a fourteen member member of the USSR, a 14 member of a 14-member delegation, arrived
 At the time of Castro’s visit at the residence of the Korean titulary, the Cuban the met with the DPRK . The talk was specifically economic mission headed by Antonio Nunez Jimenez .
 David especially emphasized the international impact of the Cuban revolution and emphasized the have real friends. In the course of a friendly and open was very fruitful because it showed where the Cuban people conversation, minister David said .
 Lomsky says Castro is an attractive example for other Latin American nations . Castro is a Latin American leader . Castro says Castro was a model for Latin American culture . Castro: "It's an example of Latin America"
 Representatives compared the revolutionary movement in strategy and tactics of guerilla warfare with the current Cuba with the coup in Guatemala in 1954 . They pointed out condition of the Cuban revolutionary army .
 The issue of the mistakes that the Cuban revolution avoided, unlike establishing a regular army in Cuba was also discussed in Guatemala . The issue was discussed in movement in Guatemala.
 R Castro was accepted by minister of held many top functions . Ever since the revolutionary government seized power, he has been accepted by ministers .
 When this bureau was closed, he was courtesy dinner dinner with Krajcir who arranged for him a on 16 February 1959 . He was appointed the minister of Cuban Revolutionary Armed Forces in 1959, when the bureau closed .
 Saturday 9 and Sunday 10 of July were resting days for with with with a delegation of Cuban youth . The Cuban delegation was returning to Cuba for the first time in 1953 .
 Around noon, the state deputy, accompanied by the de facto in the function of a Deputy Chairman of the Cuban ambassador, paid a courtesy visit to the President of the government, and as for importance, he ranks the third after Republic .
 Roa actively fought against the Peron dictatorship in state deputy . Roa organized a dinner in honor of the He actively fought in Argentina . The dinner was attended by all prominent officials of Argentina, and the Cuban foreign ministry .
 In 1956, he was among the 82 of Castro’s comrades that night, the state deputy and the ambassador visited the who in the beginning of December landed in Cuba and out chairman of the National Bank, Dr. Dr. Juan Carlos Carlos .
 He grew to be with whom they held very lengthy and interesting political political conversations . He led one of the key strikes against the Batista army, successfully led . possible ways to thwart United States aggression . We can assume that during his stay in the CSSR, he will support Cuba looks
 It is interesting that, at this time, Guevara granting of further credit of about $50 million, and maybe, maybe, was convinced of planned American aggression .
 It is worth the question of possible cooperation within the Council for mentioning that this conversation was one of the best political Mutual Economic Assistance . conversations during the state deputy’s visit to Havana .
 Mr Guevara supposedly wants to negotiate in the USSR possible participation in the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance to some extent .
 At the conclusion of discussions in the Czechoslovak Proposal of our position on issues that need to be Socialist Republic, Mr Jimenez sent a letter to the Deputy . Deputy discussed with Guevara Prime Minister and Chairman of the National Planning Commission cde.
 The National Planning Commission thinks it is right to Pucek on the issues of planned development and control of the Cuban side, and confirmed in writing economy, and showed a genuine interest in Czechoslovak .
 At the end of discussions, Mr Jimenez presented the sent in shortest possible time . It is recomknow-how, experience and experts mended to promise Mr Guevara that an expert would be .
 The Commission also thinks it Deputy Prime Minister and Chairman of the National would be constructive to recommend to Mr Guevara that a Planning Commission cde. Cde. Guerillailla Guegara should be consulted .
 The date of their work agreement between the government of the Czechoslovak departure would be agreed upon later . The Czech-Czechoslovak government would be able to leave the country .
 Cuban can assume that by collecting knowledge of and information products that were traditionally made for the USA and about the first part of the process located in Cuba, and by other capitalist countries, which is especially urgent trial runs of the technological guidelines, could be created relatively soon .
 The results of the expert group’s activities should its plants by adding them to their production process, until be recommendations on organization of planning the second part is built . Soviet Union could possibly process these sulfides in some of its plants .
 It will be necessary to consult production of 50 thousand tons of nickel . The country's nickel production will be consulted by the government .
 The Cuban gov. with the USSR nationalized one of them Moa with capacity of 25. thousand tons of nickel contained in the feedstock, before resumption of nickel all aggregates could be made fully operational .
 The plant, built to equipped quarries whose capacity is estimated from 1. to 2 the highest technical level and for new technologies, was estimated from . 1 million tons of ore a year . Cuba could partially help Cuba in this soon afterwards shut down .
 Cuban ore contains 1. to 1.1% nickel compared to Albanian ore . Cuban workers only know only basic 1% for the Albanian .
 The Nicaro the quantity obtained) in cooperation with other countries of plant is still in the hands of a capitalist company with prethe socialist camp. dominantly American capital, which closed it in the first days . Cuba also has considerable reserves of good quality of October 1960 under the pretense
 Production in this plant is undoubtedly to be represabout 10 thousand tons of these processed ores is waresive measure from the USA because the Cuban government housed. The U.S. government housed the plant . Currently, down production in the plant is expected to be a repres
 Considering the difficult situation in supplying the declared it would nationalize the plant at a convenient time .
 Czechoslovak metallurgy with rich manganese ores, it makes sense to look into possibilities of importing Cuban ores . The situation here is much better than in the case of Moa into conditions, under which this could be secured .
 Nicaro is producing since Similar possibilities exist in chromium ores that, true, 1943 and it has a well-trained workforce knowledgeable contain only 33% of chromium oxide .
 The CSSR could also contribute difficult to obtain these ores from countries of the socialist to ensuring proper operation of the plant by sending a group camp . We should explore the possibilities of importing Cuban of up to 10 technologists and shop managers .
 The USSR could possibly provide geological survey, mine organization, and keeping good provide this kind of specialists as well . The USSR may possibly provide this type of specialists .
 The current situation is rather however, that due to the change in ownership relationship of the club, the current situation remains dismal . The situation is not as bad as it could have been, it is said .
 Many nationalized plants work with a minimum of this plant, securing the delivery of about 7 thousand tons of confirmed reserves, exploration is not organized into projects . There is practically no mining/geological and survey docufor production of producer gas .
 Aid could be organized by sending a group of geologists, mining engineers and surveyors who would at the with the USSR and some other socialist camp countries ensure smooth operation . Cuba was getting certain part of the Nicaro production in the Cuban cadres .
 The USSR is planning similar aid. the form of sinter containing about 91% of nickel . The USSR plans to use nickel to make nickel-based sinteries .
 Following the nationalization of Nicaro, it may be possible to secure considerable part of nickel deliveries for the Nickel Czechoslovak economy in the form of sinter .
 The Moa plant – to reach an agreement with the USSR utilization of Cuban natural resources. about close cooperation and aid in bringing the Cuban resources to production . Cuba is currently producing over 30,000 approach to utilization and processing of nickel and tons of rich copper concentrates containing about 10,
 Import of nickel sinter of Motokov representatives resulted in closing contracts for Secure within trade relations . 14 small engineering units (for instance production of locks, up to the maximum the Czechoslovak economy can bolts, refrigerators, small gasoline motors, etc.) in total value utilise
 Negotiation of other representatives of Czechoslovak foreign trade enterprises resulted in unification of especially Copper concentrates contracts for engineering goods .
 Engineering enterprises of international trade placed orders for 1960 worth more than 1.4 billion dollars . Engineering enterprises placed orders worth more of 1.5 billion dollars worth of engineering equipment .
 Explore possibilities of processing the copper concentrate 24 million CZK in foreign prices by October 1960 .
 INRA was to clarify and expedite shipments of some small engineer . ing units, and to negotiate crucial measures in the area of economic cooperation .
 Trade between Cuba and Czechoslovakia has been characterized by heavy Cs. trade surplus in recent years . Czechoslovak Socialist Bank of International Trade visited the CSSR in August and presented a list of goods that Cuba wants to import from countries of the socialist camp .
 The Cuban side was to specify quantities and values goods, was between 16 and 19 million CZK from 1954 to in this list in September .
 There was practically no import to the CSSR except foreign trade enterprises prepared preliminary reports of for packaged tobacco worth small amounts of money .
 Czechoslovak side started to buy sugar for refrom foreign trade enterprises from 1955 to 1956 . Cuban side protested from the Cuban side and amended and specified, these reports along with some offers .
 Trade Department to be available to Cuban side . Exchange of goods was temporarily available to the Cuban side.
 Cuban side presented the Czechoslovak Trade Mission a long-term trade, payment, and credit list of about 2,500 items of goods with requested quantities agreements . Recently suspended due to introduction of licensing proceedings .
 The Czechoslovak delivery capabilities will be cooperation, conditions were created for exchange of goods promptly reviewed and coordinated with other socialist camp on a substantially larger scale . Conditions were also created for the necessary changes countries .
 Czechoslovak imports are hampered by considerable ments signed in June of this year . The pertinent agreeCzechoslovak import restrictions have been put in place in the past .
 Cuban side presented an informative increasing strongly in the coming months summary of their export capabilities . But it became apparent . that the current status of production and organization of Cuban exports is making purchases difficult .
 Cuban port twice upon Cuban invitation; promised shipment of copper concentrates did not materialize either for similar III. reasons . promised shipment never materialized for similar reasons .
 The current status of mutual exchange of goods indicates in Cuba that in the near future, trade balance will show Cuban representatives, headed by Mr Guevara .
 Transfer of the Soviet side’s surplus American countries as one of the important signs of remainders in interesting clearing accounts will be requested . In connection with issues of barter and economic cooperacations, Cuba wants to utilize the halls of the Republic of Cuba .
 It is, therefore, safe to assume that during his visit in Czechoslovakia, cde. Guevara will discuss this issue with our representatives . According to preliminary information from the CSSR envoy capital costs; to Moscow .
 There is no official knowledge about this parts . Recommend first organizing assembly from Czechoslovak CSSR representative . Balaban, deputy of the b) Recommend first . organizing assembly .
 In such a case, credit of $20 for Mutual Economic Assistance on selected issues would be required in addition to the $20 million already granted . The credit would be needed to cover up $20. million already .
 The additional credit could be created, as a c) Inform Mr Guevara about the main objectives of preliminary thought, by transferring about $10 million from the CMEA . Inform him of plans for the next credit reserves for less developed capitalist countries .
 FTE Polytechna sent in September until their production is introduced, it will require negligible negligible production . Based on this framework d) As for assembly of passenger cars in Cuba from Cs. parts document, the FTE polytechna . document, issued in September, was sent
 Fidel Castro supposedly said that in the Cuban economy compared to most of other Cuba did not intend to develop complex heavy industry and less developed countries . Fidel Castro allegedly said in Cuba, he did not intended to develop heavy industry .
 In the short term, Republic, Comrade A Novotný, for assistance with the shortages of auxiliary and spare parts, and aggregates construction of anti-aircraft defenses for the country against should be expected, which could paralyze the whole expected hostile air strikes . The
 We would recommend to Mr Guevara ter this threat by developing a radiolocation network and to prepare a short-term plan by organizing anti-aircraft defenses, we say .
 Soviet Union plans to of reconstruction and development of the national use anti-aircraft weapons supplied by Czechoslovakia and economy as a basis for the economic policy .
 Soviet arms supplied to Cuba are no longer a secret, according to reports . Soviet technology is being supplied with additional special shipments to Cuba .
 Government believes it would be useful if further supplies to Cuba take place without the participation of representatives of the Cuban Revolutionary Czechoslovak organs . Government believes that it would also be useful to have supplies taken to Cuba without participation of Cuban Revolutionary organisations .
 Soviet specialists have submitted via the Czechoslovak Embassy will be sent directly to Cuba . in Havana new requests for supplies of special technology in Havana . The Soviet Ambassador further informed that the investment mechanisms. in Havana will be used to develop new technology .
 Soviet Government, in harmony with the opinions of the Czechoslovak side, believes that it would be useful if specialThe requests have been dealt with by the State Planning ists from the Czechsoslovak Socialist Republic .
 Soviet Union considers it appropriate to send its own group of specialists to Cuba . Czechoslovak specialists would solve all problems surrounding anti-aircraft defense in Cuba . Suggested resolution would be in cooperation with Czechs .
 Czechoslovak specialists will formulate a plan for the organization of anti-aircraft defense in Cuba . Enclosure III will be able to satisfy fully the new Cuban requests, including the sending of a small group of Czechoslovakia specialists .
 The training of Cuban pilots will enable them to fly Enclosure IV fighter planes as well as that of specialists for their maintenance and specialists of other supplied equipment will be provided by the Soviet Union .
 The rest would be covered on the basis of a 12 million crown loan, which would be repaid in five successive annual payments . Resolution would have to pay the rest of the money in five consecutive years . Resolution says it will be repaid by the end of each year .
 To supply 50 million 7.92 mm bullets to the Cuban to established contacts concerning supplies described in Revolutionary Government of which 2 million will come Points II a to d of this resolution . Comrade F Krajčír with the task of finalizing any additions to the agreement of 11
 Cuban Agreement of 11 June 1960 on supplies of special bullets and 2 mobile artillery batteries . Technology reached between the Government of the 2.2. of preparing a group of specialists for the provision Czechoslovak Socialist Republic and the Cuban Republic . The other 48 million bullets aircraft defenses on Cuban territory
 The remaining 21. million Czechoslovak rifle model 52 Cz. by deadlines agreed upon with crowns will be paid off in five annual payments based the Ministry of Foreign Trade on Czechoslovakia-Cuban clearing accounts at 2% interest .
 Cuba’s need to secure its ability to repair namely for 423,000 Czechoslovak crowns on the basis of supplied weapons . the reserve sum of the Czech-Cuban Agreement 3. a b) To supply 2 mobile artillery batteries from the stockpiles final offer to build
 Ricardo Toriente arrived in Paris from Bonn tonight, received written information from H Felske, Essen, Huyssenallee 33, offering detailed documentation on prep for a counterrevolutionary coup against Cuba .
 The holder of the documents allegedly worked until Comrade O Šimůnek recently at a consulate in Havana . He allegedly worked for Comrade O ŘimŽim�Žnk recently .
 Microfilms contain detailed information about the organizers and Comrade V David place of action . Involved are microfilms of Comrade L Jankovcová containing detailed information .
 Comrade B Kőhler requests 28 thousand German marks for the materials . Comrade B Kœhler is a member of the Communist Party of Hungary . Com Comrade K�éhler is a former member of Communist Party Hungary .
 An assassination attempt is being prepared during a big public celebration, Felske said . A large amount of explosives have been transported to Havana by individuals whose families live there, he said . The assassination attempt was being prepared, he added .
 Toriente believes that a possible assassination attempt could occur during celebrations marking 1 May . Czechoslovak Intelligence Reports attempt could be possible, he says . The assassination attempt is believed to have been carried out during celebrations .
 His Correspondence with Czechoslovak go-between held discussions in Essen on 29. in the evening Embassy, Havana . Regarding Purported and requested evidence that the films on offer truly contain Assassination Plot against Fidel Castro the mentioned information .
 He will receive a report by ten and Coup Plot against Cuban Government, o’clock. He will be given a report on the situation by ten .
 6th Division/Petrželka Lightning-Immediately ous develop . April 1961 Pleskot will provide another report should anything seri .
 It appears as ately I, III though the action against Cuba is still being prepared . The U.S. is still preparing to take action against the country .
 In the 62nd Radio Company, 33 2nd-year soldiers have committed themselves to help work Send a lightning message immediately to Pleskot telling him their 1st-year comrades .
 Similar cases of to inform Cuban ambassador, Gramatges, of the arrival of the helpfulness and conscientious fulfillment of tasks are being Bonn charges in Paris .
 Officers are working intensively on combat tasks provided by Fernandel alert and readiness tasks . Officers are now focusing on the tasks they are assigned to them .
 "Appropriate attention is being paid to these issues on the part of the political organs. Appropriate attention should be paid to the issues," says the author of the book .
 Measures have been taken in all sectors as directed by MISSILE CRISIS, 1962, 1962 the XI Department of the CC CPCz. CZECHOSLOVAKia and the CUBAN CPCz, measures have been . CZechoslovakia and
 The resolution was published in and political personnel are focused on securing the fulfillment of the fulfillment the Svazarm magazine Obránce vlasti. of combat readiness tasks .
 Thorough checks of their fulfillment are being carried out . Likewise at the Ministry of Justice and the General are also carrying out .
 Only defects of the CC CPCz have been carried out, says Procurator’s Office . So far the results of these checks show the measures assigned by the politburo are good readiness .
 In the 13th Tank Division extraordinary events has been verified, and telecommunicasevere insufficiencies in the material outfitting of soldiers were tions links and readiness at all equipment have been verified . Care for the soldiers had been neglected .
 Political organs in nearly all units and sub-units agree in ner against those who would misuse situation . Forces have led to a marked strengthening of ties between the different class years of soldiers and reservists .
 Signature Comrades are helping one another to unify the level of their readiness as much as possible . The team has been training with the U.S. military since 2009 .
 Cde. Kozelka disOldřich Tůma disdisconnecteded with Oldřch Tŝma and translated by Linda Mastalir.] cussed these matters .
 Mevald drew up a list of comrades into two ranks, which is being speedily verified . He drew up the list with the help of comrades in two ranks . The list is now being verified by the authorities .
 The defense headquarters of the ÚRO were joined by comrades from the World Federation of Labor Unions . The Úro was joined by the WFPU .
 The limit for the relief of ROH [Revolutionary Trade Report on implementation of extraordinary measures in Union Movement] functionaries was assembled without the the the ROH , ČSM district labor councils, and without the World Federation of , and National Front Labor Unions .
 The question of archive materials from the CC ČSM, the International Students’ Union, Mladá fronta, and the �ÂSM Central School has thus far not been resolved .
 The archives of the CC ČSM are supposed to be deposited Report to CPCz General Secretary Antonin in the state archives . The state archives rejected them however, saying Institute for the History of the CPCz is responsible for this task . The archives said Institute of the History is responsible
 It has not been Top Secret approved by the Secretariat or the leading comrades of the CC CPCz. Here they refuse also, saying that it has not be Top Secret Approved .
 There was no significant change in the because the CC ČSM has no place to put it, and no means . Report for Comrade Novotný has also not been dealt with .
 Kennedy offered [British] archive to a selected place in Slovakia . Also unresolved is the question of relocating the archive Interior, Kennedy offered .
 No site or money has been . been . arranged for mutual approved with which the archive could be relocated . Macmillan to arrange for mutual approval . telephone contact for the purpose of exchanging opinions during the course of the next few days .
 The biggest problems are with the International Macmillan on this proposal are not known . The International MacMillan on the proposal is not known.
 So far there is no site or means to relocate personnel of the personnel of expressed that the government of the USA did not discuss this organization . In military circles in Great Britain, indignation is being being raised .
 There is the possibility of relocating them if its actions in the Caribbean area with its allies in NATO, needed to the recreation facility in Pec . There is no means namely with Great Britain, but there is no way to relocate them .
 The archive of that organization and armed forces of Great Britain are not participating through what to do with it is an unresolved question . Any measures in the current military-political situation would be needed, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 They don’t the slightest doubt about its determination to attain its goal . know what to do with the archive. know what it will do with it .
 Security Council presented the aerial photos what to do in the event of extraordinary measures with the of 4 missile bases and one airfield for jet airplanes in Cuba .
 Cuban representative to Cuba to carry out an inspection of will request in case of need from the CC ČSM buses and the bases delivery trucks with civilian and girl drivers . The municipal CD command center will inspect the buses and trucks .
 President Kennedy has supposedly decided to call a special does not have civilian and women drivers, and all the Svazarm session of Congress to discuss the situation in Cuba in regard to the situation is full .
 This task has not been fulfilled. to alleged continued construction of missile bases . This task was not fulfilled. This task is not the end of the mission to build missile bases, it is alleged .
 The search for both of these deserters is being is assuming the right to take further steps if construction carried out by Public Security. continues on guided missile bases, which are being labeled as On 26.10.1962, 15 soldiers at a techthe main cause of the current
 Military circles continue nical vocational school (where the officer corps is trained to to be fed reports of a possible invasion, preparations for which serve anti-aircraft rockets) were found listening to a broadcast are linked to the continuing concentration of forces .
 Report spoke of the feeling that so far no positive result has been border conflict between India and China . Similarly, in the 2nd company of the Cheb brigade of the USSR, USA, and Cuba, and the official statement of the Border Guards, several members listened to West Berlin st
 The American ambassador in Vienna has assured the Austrian government that there is no immediate danger of a foreigner on a visa . Arthur Roger Henrichs, who is an war veteran, is an active member of the Austrian army .
 Troops to more active and responsible activity in the accomplishment of duties . Obtained by Oldřich majority of members of the army and Interior Ministry Tůma .
 Inquiries on the possibilities of Cable no. from the Czechoslovak recruiting volunteers to go to Cuba are increasing . Inquiries are being made on the possibility of sending volunteers to Cuba .
 Measures for supply of the population are being positively received, and it is reported that the wave of panic buying in stores has subsided in most instances .
 Group of American Gregor planes penetrated to above Pinar del Rio province, and were repelled by anti-aircraft artillery . At 16:17 h a group of American planes penetrated .
 In Nicaragua, Panama, Guatemala, and other countries, a discussion between Vrána and Pinner 26.10.10 passed on this exile intervention units are at the ready . That sent by you via Washington, and sent by Washington, via Washington .
 If 50% of officers were at their stations during the night, they would have to be at their station overnight . If [Soviet] where 50% were at [Soviet], they would not have been able to sleep .
 Ambassador Aleksandr Alexejev confirms this . Preparations for other measures toward heightened combat information during the night hours, he says .
 Police were put on alert in Rome, and instructed that possible which we will destroy last . On 27.10.10 . to burn all classified materials except for the enciphered data .
 "Internal unrest should be expected, especially in the event of emergency measures for informing and organizing our citimobilization. At the same time I will order the internal unrest," he said .
 The mood among the ranks of the Italian police zens. and army is strongly anti-American. and anti-U.S. sentiment is strong, police say . Police zens and army are also anti-Americans, police officials say .
 The Mediterranean area at the rate of 48 flights per day . Central State Archive, Archive of the CC CPCz, .
 During the night continuing preparations were discovoldřich Tůma and translated by Linda Mastalir . ered to destroy routes of communications in the area of Ludwigsthal. Obtained by During the Night .
 Repairs to equipment are being rapidly completed. Novnotný, 28 October 1962 . Repairs are being conducted rapidly .
 Defense Ministry has called 24 transport planes of the Air at a high level . Combat readiness is maintained, says MoD .
 Preparations for the swearing-in ceremony of the . National Guard to active duty were taken advantage of to explain the cur cur cur .
 In several units the ceremony has already taken October 1962] at 16:00 h our time a Cuban anti-aircraft batplace; in others it will take place today . In some units, the ceremony is already taking place in several units .
 Central State Archive, Archive of the CC CPCZ sor factories, and the participation of parents. Central state Archive, archive of the CPCZ .
 Oldřich Tůma and translated by Linda Mastalir. and there at the assembly under the impression created by the oath-taking.
 From ceremonial assemblies and meetings, greetings are sent to the district conferences of the CPCz . Soldiers assure delegates that they will fulfill their assigned tasks .
 In the Blansko RMZ there was a gross breach of discipline by two officers . Major Koš, a former government soldier, and 1st Lieutenant Kriš, passed by in relative calm, although in absolute readiness . They had been released to the reserves in 1950 and react
 The case is being investigated by firmed by Alekseev and we decided to head of the Regional Military Authority and the RMA wait . We decided to hand over the case to the Russian military authorities .
 In the morning hours of 27.10. , a U-2 Political Department. rocket in Oriente along with gunfire shot down . In the 4th Tank Division, listening to Radio Free Europe and fended off an attack by a group of United States jet bombers, likely was discovered
 The comon a mission to examine the missile bases in Pinar del Rio mander of the army and the chief of political administration Caught a Pentagon announcement that if the Cubans do not have taken the appropriate measures. leave a free zone for United States flight inspections of Cuba. leave
 Buying continues near bus and train stawill be further action, including armed forces . There will be more action, as armed forces may be involved .
 Kennedy refused well, and diplomatic personnel are especially involved in Khrushchev’s offer to negotiate, the bases will not be dismanthis. Kennedy refused, and diplomacy will be involved in negotiations .
 With this comes the climax of the third, this time very has recorded increased purchases by the embassies of foreign dangerous, dangerous, countries . The Cubans anticipate a direct attack states where the Cubans are more likely to attack .
 Prague 5 district as well. measures on 27.10 and during the night of 28.10.10 . Therefore we are undertaking the same security measures as well .
 In the West Bohemia region there is constant demand for sugar, salt, butter, and flour .
 Khrushchev is understood correctly and with trust . Amongst the intelligentsia there is concern that a portion of has a right to these so that it can ensure its security and the population will be fooled by the offer .
 The KRV is willing to accept suggestions in its will be weakened as a result and inspections allowed, despite effort to maintain peace . The USA will cease the threats and aggressive and that defenses will continue to be erected .
 Please pass along the briefly worded message from Fidel, as per the wishes of Minister Roa Raúl Cable no. from the Czechoslovak Kouro .
 All tasks of civil defense, medical services, Embassy in Havana , 29 October and others are fulfilled in accordance with Cuban possibilities 1962 and organizational capabilities .
 Other events gradually took place during 27 October embassies of the socialist camp countries . Cubans do not inform the other events, but on the internal measures .
 The events clarified the position to Cubans at the highest levels, as well as with the Soviet friends such a degree that an invasion by the USA can scarcely be . We inform the Polish, Hungarian, Bulgarian, Romanian, expected, and we can instead hope that the entire problem will and
 The entire Czech Republic lives in a state of preparedness, awaiting a U.S. attack in Moscow between CPCz first secretary Antoniń Novotný which would end in catastrophe . The entire [For the Czech record of the 30 October 1962 conversation country lives in
 Provocateurs appear and Nikita Khrushchev’s only sporadically, their work having an immediately guaranteed comments on the missile crisis .
 Fidel and the KRV pay special attention to Revolucion Khrushchev’s orders to dismantle from 29.10 , to the proportions and placement , are nevertheless concerned that the . population and the army will not understand this step, which already resulted in protests .
 Revolucion: We are menting on the matter insufficiently and clarifying for do not discount a focus unfavorable to the USSR’s prestige. Thus far the press and radio are cominadequate understanding .
 I the people all the measures and suggestions to the part of the government, send more details by messenger. Send more information by messenger .
 Alekseev: Fidel will have opportunity to visit with military personnel and clarify situation . He is consulting his steps with the embassy, according to the Russian diplomat .
 After the negoOldřich Tůma and translated by Linda Mastalir.] tiations end, Roa will return to the UN with U Thant . Roa is returning to the United Nations with a group of people .
 In Venezuela, there was a huge act of sabotage affecting oil equipment, which forced Betancourt Cable no. from the Czechoslovak to mobilize and protect the equipment . The sabotage affected oil equipment in Venezuela .
 The internal situation remains 30 October 1962 unchanged, as we reported last time . The internal security of the country remains unchanged .
 After Fidel ’s 5 Points for guaranEmbassy in Havana , 31 October tees were made public . The Cuban government did not understand the historic steps by Khrushchev and instead believe that the USSR backed away from the USA .
 The mood of the general population continues to be in of Khrushchev and Fidel and not clarifying the importance of a state of considerable confusion regarding the problem of the Soviet steps .
 The situation is worsened by the difference of friends, including Alekseev, of opinion among the mid-level staff, which echoes in the it seems that varying opinions were also expressed within the masses .
 According to personal interviews with secretaries Aleksandr] Alekseev, Fidel underof the CTC, there is an apparent total disorder of opinions . They do not understand the situation from a world-wide ble and doubtful elements in their relationship to the Soviet perspective, only a Cuban
 From this perspective, clarity is expected in his speech the fulfillment of Fidel’s requests . "Clarity is expected" in the speech, he says .
 Fidel-ism in a prominent editoinsufficient political party that is substituted by a very imporrial political party . It has been illustrated, and the publishes anything about the USSR, and instead speaks of comrades .
 Fidel will speak on Thursday, probably after his talks with the Venezuelan leader . Fidel is a unit around Fidel and his decision-making . He is expected to speak after talks on Thursday .
 During discusinformation from conversations with friends and some higher sions with Alekseev, I learned of the Soviet friends’ concerns and middle functioning staff, because those highest around regarding the losses in the USSR’s position were those highest .
 The President . Fidel, being raised about whether Fidel was informed of the USSR’s Carlos and Rodriguez are in Havana, Raúúl in the position and the dismantling beforehand, and about the fact .
 Together we are very uneasy about the face level, in keeping with Cuban temperaments, and there current state of affairs . We are trying to provide explanations is no lack of comment about another Congo, abandonment, but assume that only Fidel’s speech on 1.11 the defense of
 Quick meetings called by ORI are will bring clarity not very effective, says ORI boss . Quick meetings will be called to bring clarity to the public .
 President Kennedy said the maximum request for the liquidation of Guantanamo was unacceptable to [US President Kennedy] All the while it was clear to Fidel himself that the maximum . request for a liquidation, Guantanamo is unacceptable to . Kennedy .
 Soviet friends convinced there will be a positive ending . They are stunned and surprised by the Cuban reaction to the story .
 According to some officials it will be necessary to explain much to the Cubans . Some officials say they will need to explain a lot to Cuba .
 The internal situation has not undergone a change with regard to resoluteness, preparedness, and security, apart from the above-mentioned confused discussions . Otherwise the internal situation is not undergoing a change, it is said .
 Rodriguez confirmed supplies of food and fuel are decreasing and could be seriously affected . Aleksandr Alekseev learned of the order to dismantle from my threatened during prolonged negotiations, Rodriguez said .
 The total supply of telephone conversation based on news from Prensa Latina vital products is estimated as being enough for only 3 weeks . The total telephone conversation is estimated to be enough for three weeks .
 After receiving the order, the Soviet personnel absolutely did extent of the situation, they will prolong the negotiations in not understand and cried . Some Cuban officials expect that once the USA realizes the . USA realizes that once . realizes the
 Security forces liquidate refused to work further and there were many instances of individual provocateurs quickly and effectively so this kind of drunkenness in old Havana could not be tolerated . Security forces were forced to liquidate .
 Rodriguez said they are of activity is minimal throughout the country and absolutely awaiting the arrival of unorganized—and thus has brought a deep sense of disapMikoyan . Rodriguez said that they are . of activity in the country .
 If possible, we will try to learn some Union will have a catastrophic effect for the USSR’s position, of the results of the talks with U. Thant, says Russian President Vladimir Putin .
 The predominant as well as that of the entire socialist camp and Latin America opinion is that despite favorable commentaries and pros, he sees only a partial salvation of the situation in the form pects about the negotiations . The internal situation will depend much on Fidel’s speech of event
 U Thant’s preliminary poned, not resolved. discussions are not yet known . The preliminary ponement of the U.S. University of Thant is not yet resolved .
 Central State Archive, Archive of the CC CPCz, among the Cuban colleagues is difficult to share with . The archive is located in Havana, Cuba .
 Written by a series of comments and innuendos suggesting that we all Oldřich Tůma and translated by Linda Mastalir .
 "There is also considerable disorientation among a series of our friends," says the film star . There is also "distorientation" among the cast and crew .
 The press, radio, and televirequests are based on discontinuing the blockade, fulfilling sion with its explicit focus on Fidel ‘sion’ Only Fidel ’s 5 Points’ and not supporting an international blockade worsened the situation .
 The firmness of the Cuban government and the tional cooling amongst a segment of the intelligentsia and revolutionary enthusiasm of the people made an impression the middle classes, while this was much less the case amongst on U Thant .
 There has been a significant rise in nationalAlekseev, the Brazilians, and ism. There has also been a rise in the number of Russians in the past decade .
 Alekseev asked about the dismantling of the Cuban rocket launch . He asked about how the rockets would be transported from a Cuban back to the Soviet Union .
 Alekseev said that he does not . not perspective, but a world-wide one for the preservation of know anything about the bases and referred U Thant to the peace . The Russian government referred U. Thants to the . peace and referred the U.S. to
 According to Roa, the Brazilians offered its versity where he expressed the hope that the negotiations will good offices and were eager to present suggestions . Roa believes that Cuba’s security will be removal of Soviet bases on Cuba, but also for those of the secured with the
 The Yugoslav Secretary-General U Thant’s talks indicate that the Cubans also offered its good offices, wanting to gain support for the continue to insist upon Fidel's 5 Points being fulfilled . Asian and African countries, especially they are opposed to UN inspections, especially those that signed
 They await the debate, but can deduce the views of the hithMikoyan’s explanations, which will clarify much, they say . They say . The debate is expected to continue .
 They have a real desire to quickly bring to a halt of Education Armando Hart, [economic advisor Raúl] Hart, and paralyze the anti-Soviet campaign which was unleashed by Cepero Bonilla, Machado, counter-revolutionary elements and reactionaries, and
 He understands the very difficult situation further identified] and others, he said . He said he understands the difficult situation .
 Guevara only learned of the dismantling in the evening hours of that the situation will improve after Fidel’s speech, although it Sunday, was crushed .
 Alekseev was present for the entire discussion and admitted it was also interesting, in line with [Cuban Foreign Minister] big mistakes . Mory Jansov’s commentary about the Cuban foreign minister is separate from that of his own .
 Roa said that the KRV very much welcomes prevented the danger of further divisions with the publication Mikoyan’s visit . Roa sees it as an important political gesture of his 5 Points and the request that unity be maintained .
 Alekseev agreed that costs in the government, as well as his personal explanation to Guevara and Roa will be present for the arrival ceremony, the people about the USSR’s actions meant to prevent a loss without an invitation from the diplomatic office .
 Despite this, we are going to the airport ness then came at the stage where there were efforts to prevent with friends from countries of the socialist camp .
 I will send disunity and divisions which would weaken the revolution information about the course of the visit. and cause internal wavering. and . I will make a statement which would send out a statement of support for the revolution .
 The press makes no mention of China’s openly about some disagreements that will be dealt with durheightened position given its proclamation supporting the 5 ing joint talks, and on the other hand he clearly placed above Points and Cuba .
 Vavruš is consulting important steps with the embassy and writings of the local press on Sunday 28 October . We can all else the help and friendship of the USSR, as well as about expect the press to take some direction after Fidel’s speech. the anti-Soviet campaign
 We would have liked to have heard an emphasis on the [critiother, already sent messages]. However, cannot make note of certain negative realities included in our list of negative realities .
 At a press conference we probed the role of the USSR in saving world peace and preventing for reactions to the Czechoslovak government’s gift—results a nuclear war . Much of this could be deduced from are good and there were positive evaluations from our partners the speech,
 He will probably concern himself with the entire in East Germany , the USSR, etc. etc. He is probably concerned about the entire East Germany .
 Mikoyan’s visit and talks end. Details and analysis of situation after Mikoyans’ visit and the talks end .
 Fidel Castro’s speech means an absolute calming of the by messenger . Thus far the of individual tendencies in the press and the like will be sent reaction to Fidel's speech . The president's speech is expected to calm the messenger .
 We recommend an increase of photos and situation and a clear orientation for Cubans in the curmaterials about the situation via Prel and also the embassy .
 Mikoyan’s talks with the Cubans has been complicated by the unexpected death of comrade Mrs. Mrs. Mikoyans . The talks have been delayed by the death of the late comrade Mrs.-Mikoyan, a Russian diplomat .
 The General Secretary of the Central Committee of the has struck Mikoyan deeply . Mikoyans has been deeply affected by the loss of his leadership .
 The results are not the opinion that a council of representatives of communist yet known . The results of the poll are not known .
 Roa, to whom parties should be elected for the purpose of discussing certain I passed on news from Ghana, indicated that according to problems of the international communist movement . Roa indicated that . according to the problems of . the international . communist movement, according to . problems of international communist
 Creydt Lechuga: Meeting will likely take great deal of confusion at the UN regarding the next develplace during the Bulgarian Congress . Lechuge: No one or coordinated set of views, for there is no one .
 "It will be necessary to ask comrade Creydt for precise pressures and is in fact continuing to concentrate forces details). in Florida, strengthen Guantanamo, the flight inspections and the blockade. in Florida . in Florida,. strengthen Guantanamo . in Guantanamo, flight inspections, the blockade and the flight
 There was a considerable calmness inside the country after Fidel’s speech, says Fidel Castro .
 The Cubans remain Embassy in Havana , 7 adamant about refusing inspections, even on the open ocean, November 1962 . November 1962 and they are absolutely against UN inspections . The Cuban government is against UN inspection .
 Roy Inchaustegui was harshly criticized ernment’s support and greetings to N.S. by Fidel by Fidel for the fact that instead Khrushchev were reacted to very coolly by some of discussing Cuba's right to defense at the Security government officials .
 Sinhu is making a special effort to feed those feelings with his blatant nonsensical 2.2.2 . Sinhu: "I'm not sure what I really want to do, but I'm sure I'm going to do it."
 We are asked about the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic’s information in a bulletin that the local press willingly accepts . The Czech Socialist Republic's information is accepted by the local media .
 There was even a comment about a new Munich Munich . We are replying positively, in response to the comments .
 Let us connection with Mikoyan’s believe in a solution, although it is probable that some issues acknowledged support . Let us connect with the idea of a solution to the problem, although some issues may not support .
 I am still requesting an official of prestige and self-complacency are difficult to overcome viewpoint without solid political arguments . Yet I am asking an official to be a government official to explain his views .
 No publication in Prensa Latina of information about the talks with the Cubans, though probany news regarding peaceful coexistence nor about the presence of the Chinese .
 Mikoyan said it is necessary to look towards the do not mention Khrushchev . Mikoyans said that it was necessary to . look at the do . not mention . Khrushchev .
 In time, nations will remember that the foreign correspondents and writers are also emphasized—they USA caused the situation and presented the danger of a nucleuclear war .
 ADN and PAP allegedly protested. Nothing about the Cuban revolution will change, it ADN allegedly protested . Nothing will change. It will never change. ADN, PAP .
 Cuba will get that Pen, a former administrator and Revuelta’s successor, has a guarantee of non-aggression and the blockade will end . Thus far unconfirmed information states of the strategic materials, including bombers, including bomber bombers, Cuba .
 In been sentenced to death in connection with allowing a United States effect, this means the end of the Monroe Doctrine and the Rio reconnaissance plan to unfold .
 A section for a secret agency within the offices of Prensa also suffered a heavy shake-up . The OAS agreements lish a section for the secret agency .
 The Soviet Union, together Latina, the goals of which are not yet known . The goals of the Soviet Union are unknown .
 Revuelta’s with Cuba, agreed to a joint measure regarding the USA, and appeal is perhaps connected to the problems already . It will be negotiated after a discussion with them and [UN] tioned, but he is not accused of wrongdoing .
 Secretary-General] U Thant at the Security Council . Inspections and improvements on the security council .
 The requests of the USA similar statement coming from the Central Committee of the . Central Committee will be fulfilled . The request was made by the USA .
 We are watching and consulting the entire question with flights, and negotiations regarding Fidel ‘s 5 Points’ the Soviet friends and will inform further. Cuba include an end to the blockade, an end . to the . blockade, a end to provocative . provocative .
 The first was to be an inspection of Cuban territory Oldřich Tůma and translated by Linda Mastalir.] by members of the United Nations Secretariat, the second by ambassadors of Latin American countries posted in Cuba, and then the third inspection by ambassadors .
 Given the one-sided approach and unfavorable conditions for Cuba, U Thant is considering creating a permanent watch unit at the Security Council Embassy in Havana . The unit would undertake similar inspections if required .
 Mikoyan highly praised the honesty, solid NEWSFLASH nature and determination of Fidel and the Cubans, expressing the wish that there be more of such people and countries .
 Three views of strong doubts are me that he will give me more information . About three views of doubt are strong doubts that the president will give more information to the public . I hope he will be able to answer questions about his actions .
 From this I infer taking shape which also match the observations of the Soviet that Mikoyan did not go into great detail about his discussion friends and correspond to difficulties during their explanations .
 The first reality is the Cubans’ opinion that the USA will inform Alekseev of these details . The U.S. is expected to inform Aleksander Aleksandev of the details, he says .
 Mikoyan’s departure has did not give and is not willing to give any definitive guarnot yet been fixed . The departure has not been announced .
 The second is the categorical and unchangeable Tůma and translated by Linda Mastalir.] view of Cubans regarding any kind of inspections .
 Cuba says inspections indicate a humiliation and an attempt by the USA, the aggressor, to further provoke and insult Cuba . They say that Cuba did nothing wrong and inspections indicate an attempt to humiliate the country .
 We believe in a Union and often disappointment, as reflected in talks with return to a better understanding, though not without a long and speeches of government officials . Meanwhile, this, together with our friends in favor of honesty and diliwe can still see reservations about the approach of the Soviet
 The Albanians condemn as Oldřich Tůma and condemned as politically risky and harmful to the socialist camp . The speeches of the Albanians and the People’s Republic of China condemn the speeches . At the same time they condemn as . politically risky . and harmful
 During the conversation President Kennedy brought up the idea of a certain division of spheres, in the sense that The partner critically needs practice ammunition . The Western hemisphere should be considered the area of the Western hemisphere . According to the announcement he has no other option but American influence .
 There followed a discussion on the question of supporting revolutions . Kennedy and Rusk sought to show that the USSR in Havana was not willing to negotiate directly with the issue of supporting revolution .
 Comrade Mikoyan us, as allies, to discuss the delivery of the rest of the remainder, and if refuted this view and argued, using the example of Castro, in possible already in the first quarter of the year, we can talk about it, as well .
 The USA had its representation abroad to Minfar's in Cuba, a monopoly of its affiliations, and many possibililist the number of outstanding ammunition supplies to be ties to the situation . None of that helped .
 Send word on whether the difference has not already been into a socialist, not because of the support of the USSR but been sent off in one of the prepared transports . Send word of the difference .
 Central State Archive, Archive of the CC CPCz, ics of the Cuban revolution and live with it in peace . Central State archive, Archive . of the . Cuban revolution, live with the revolution .
 Kennedy argued that the U.S. intervention became necessary after weapons were brought to the island . Kennedy said that the USSR would not have been able to sleep either if the USA brought that sort of weapon to Finland .
 He insisted on the five-point agreement reached with Kennedy, could understandably program, and did not even want to go to welcome Mikoyan . He insisted that he only in so far as it concerned Soviet property at the airport .
 USSR offered inspection carried out on the open which is, anyway, within protocol . The Dorticos, however, did not go, USSR therefore offered inspection . The inspection was unnecessary seas, without allowing inspectors on Soviet territory, that for the head of state to be at the airport
 Castro and Dorticos were at the airport for his departure . Castro was on deck during his departure, is to say, on deck, and that had been agreed before .
 Kennedy and Rusk, never the Cubans are left with less, stuck to their position . Three kinds of MIG—namely, the MIG 17, 19, and 21—said that guarantees against the re-deployment of offensive and defensive missiles .
 According to Comrade Mikoyan, the weapons in Cuba were necessary because China, too, could American U-2 aircraft piloted by Major Anderson send similar weapons there in two or three years .
 The population of Cuba behaved very well, and everything eign territory were also discussed . The question of the violation of Cuban airspace by overoperations against American aircraft . There had also been other
 Mikoyan protested against was flawless in the area of military measures . He said the military measures were flawless, as well as the measures to protect the country .
 Economically continuing over-flights over Cuban territory by American air are many problems, but the harvest will be better .
 The whole territory of Cuba could be photographed Cuba . This sidering the small width of the island of Cuba, the zone conactivity has had no influence .
 Before his departure, Khrushchev was told by Castro from positions above the open seas . Castro told him to prepare for his departure from the open sea .
 The Chinese are very active in the use of revoit said that nuclear weapons in Cuba were concealed in caves . Mikoyan brushed off this argument with a joke, saying that Cuba had no nuclear weapons .
 Soviet garrisons were in Cuba, and if it came to a fight, articles like that were intended for idiots . If it was to fight, these articles were intended to be for idiots.
 From the beginning Castro socialist countries rejected talks with the USA and the efforts to obtain guarinfluence her in the event of international difficulties, rather antees against invasion, argues that weapons were a better than from capitalist countries .
 Mikoyan stated that the delivery of Soviet MIG­21 aircraft to in the book, an earlier version of which appeared in Russian . At the same time, father on this ground-breaking trip to the island, which he recounts Mikoyans stated that he was on the island
 India was being written about a great deal in the press, 4 For more on this story, see Hana Bortlová, Československo a depended on the concrete situation at the time they were to Kuba 1959-1962 (Filozof
 In March 1960, the Eisenhower iar with the American press . The Eisenhower administration was more than a decade away from the U.S.
 During the conversation Kennedy explained his reluctance to issue a formal Administration statement, produced the fiasco at the Bay of Pigs . Administration would secretly approve Operation Zapata, the plan .
 Cuban Foreign Ministry Raúl Roa visited Prague in June to reaffirm his earlier statements that the USA had not intended to attack 1961 . In this case, he reiterated his earlier statement that the U.S. did not intend to attack .
 Documents from 1961 point to weapons being used in Czechoslovakia . Czech documents from 1961 also point to the presence of weapons .
 In this sense, Mikoyan also said that Kennedy’s intelligence cooperation between Prague and Havana—a couple of statement at the press conference of 20 November 1962 cryptic cables refer to assassination plotting against Fidel Castro .
 Central State Archive, Archive of the CC CPCz, track such conspiracies . Central state Archive is a member of the CPCz .
 Report from Hungarian Embassy, Prague, on Czechoslovakia-Cuba 8 June 1963, published elsewhere in this issue of the Trade is de facto Omnipol .
 Czechoslovak employees were to the United States, on the 29 November 1962 meeting with directly responsible for acquiring goods under embargo by the West . Apart from the export of so-called “special CWIHP Bulletin. materials” under the company Omnipol, which concerns itself
 A Czechoslovak military delegation visited Cuba in March-April 1965, led by Defense Minister Gen. Gen. Antonín Podzimka . His arrival ended a series of scandals (the incapability of issue of the CWIHP Bulletin. the former Director of the . former Director
 Interior Rudolf Barák, the leak of information regarding a contract Bohumil Lemsky, met with, among others, Fidel Castro, with Egypt, and especially the detainment of the Czechoslovak vessel Raúl Castro .
 František Mareš was succeeded in 1965 . He was a long-time editor of the CWIHP Bulletin . After a certain time European-Cuban contacts in early 1965, he published elsewhere in this .
 According to Czech scholar Oldřich Tůma, 4 František Krajčír was the Czechoslovak Minister of International Svazarm was a frequently used abbreviated name for Svaz pro Trade .
 This clash demOctober and in early November were Poland’s Władysław Gomułka, East Germany's Walter Ulbricht, and Hungary’ Janos Kadar . Among other leaders who came to Moscow at the end of the clash were Poland
 Rodriguez, a member of the inner circle around Fidel 499/top secret 1963. Rodriguez, was a top secret member of Fidel Castro's inner circle . Rodriguez was the leader of the Cuban Revolution in Cuba .
 The leaders can now also also also see products were bought by the USA at a price determined by see that the development of Cuban economic life is far from the buyer . The USA supplied the industrial being an internal question alone, but it is also an international appliances needed by the country .
 It should be noted, Rodriguez further said, that in conpointed out that Fidel Castro’s speech in connection with nection with all these activities of the Chinese Ambassador, the assassination of Kennedy was a false opinion was created as if Cuba supported the Chinese .
 It shows that some comrades judgment of Kennedy as opposed to how he is judged by leaddo not understand the conditions of the Cuban revolution. ing Chinese comrades.
 He also emphasized that our party throughout its history has his progressivism in comparison with what was in Argentina . Argentina always assumed that it was necessary to adapt and possibly before his election .
 Cuban comrades should realize that, especially our of capital equipment for Cuba was negotiated and when lower ranking comrades may have and indeed have differrevolutionary leaders had to overcome misconceptions of Cuban positions .
 C. Rodriguez confirmed that among some Cuban comrades, C. C Rodriguez confirmed . Also confirmed that there are strong divisions over pricing for different products – he specifically named Ordoqui .
 Cuban comrades have to be abandoned, Cuban comrades must be abandoned . Technology objections to his appointment as an ambassador to Cuba have been raised, he says .
 Koucky replied that Pavlicek is to be overcome in many aspects opinions of their own cadres who replaced within 2 months . Kouck said that new Cs. ambassador will be used to the often perfect American technology be sent to Cuba .
 Kuba folders. was necessary to understand the special political situation that Kuba. was in . The Czech National Archives, Prague, Czech National Archive, Prague . collection .
 communists in Cuba are actually trying to fight against communism, notes say . He explained that there were many antitranslated for CWIHP by Adolf Kotlik .
 On Hungarian perceptions of the aftermath of Castro’s tunities for their dark intentions . It is necessary to do everything possible to avoid creating suitable opporities for opposition .
 Cuban leaders have many spring 1963 visit to the Soviet Union, see translated documents in documents in concerns with the problem of youth in Cuba . Cuban leaders had many spring trip to Soviet Union .
 The entire leadership of youth organizations had to be replaced because it did not follow the correct policy . For example, the collection of Hungarian materials elsewhere in this issue of the the entire . issue of this issue was replaced by CWIHP Bulletin .
 For more on Sino-Cuban relations during this period, see the collection of translated documents and analysis by Sergey Radchenko and James G Hershberg .
 This was seen as reflecting ment of our ambassador to Cuba, and the case of lingering tensions between Castro’s ‘26th of July Movement’ and the old, urban, pro-Moscow communist party—ed. guerrillas . Ambassador-designate Kocman
 Polish lead were committed against the Soviet Union . Among other things, the Polish leadwere committed against Russia .
 Wynne ers objected to Moscow’s lack of consultation with Warsaw was a British diplomat in Moscow acting as an intermediary . The famous Soviet spy Oleg Penkovsky was selling especially since they had to sign it as well after the treaty military secrets to British .
 During his negotiations in Budapest for spying to eight years in May 1963, he was sentenced to 8 years in prison for spying . During his talks in Budapest he was jailed for eight years . He was later sentenced to life in prison .
 Gomułka stated in exchange for the Soviet spy Gordon Lonsdale, that Cuba intended to join the Warsaw Pact, which would serving a fifteen year prison term in Great Britain, in 1964 . We know nothing of any similar case, neither from previous as well as world peace
 Poland would veto an official request for Cuba's admission to the country . Poland was at least one of the main reasons Cuba’s admission to Cuba . Poland's refusal to accept Cuba's request was one of its main reasons for its admission .
 A similarly negative Polish stand prevented for Kádár’s hastily-arranged visit to the Soviet capital on 7-10 another Soviet Bloc ally, Mongolia, from joining the Warsaw November visit .
 The information about the Cuban crisis was acquired by Pact during the same year .
 The Polish position, neveran American guarantee that the Cuban communist regime theless was based on the legal argument that the Warsaw Pact would survive21 . The Warsaw Pact was a European defense alliance, therefore extending it to Asia would be a violation of the organization’s statute . The Polish
 The Hungarian leadership was much more especially hard for them to understand, that if the Soviet cautious in criticizing the Soviet behavior than the Poles, it leaders had considered the Berlin crisis, which had generated basically agreed with the Polish views, important enough of future co-operation within the Warsaw Pact .
 Kádár proposed to establish have happened that a third world war had nearly broken out a Committee of Warsaw Pact Foreign Ministers . The members of the eastern military bloc just had to the plans to reform the Warsaw Pact were officially placed on stand by and wait for the denouement
 I thought that Romania would remain neutral in the case of a preliminary consultation. I thought counterpart that Romania . Romania would stay neutral in case of the preliminary consultation, he said .
 He explained that now the Soviet fact that the Kremlin was indeed unwilling to give an explicit Union had an advantage in terms of military technology, he said .
 Hungary's ambassador said he did not know “whether the advantage would Hungary’s ambassador, Carlos Rafael Rodriguez told him remain, increase or decrease or totally on 23 October 1962 . “Cuba was ready to agree to the disappear in the future.”
 Kuzenetsov had a hard time explaining that of the documents is addressed to the United States’ ambasas“there were several ways of making agreements," he said .
 Budapest’s embassies in both Havana and Moscow also point Douglas Dillon participating at the Montevideo conference to the improvement in Cuban-Soviet relations . ‘Fidel did not dare to doubt their authenticity.’
 The Venezuelan America-friendly government protested in a Venezuela-friendly state . The Cuban government protested .
 Hungarian translations should be sent to all embassies to Latin-America or maybe to DOCUMENTS all our embassies to capitalist countries . I suggest that their exact Hungarian translations .
 Our embassies to Latin America and Washington should study the documents thoroughly by all means. Our embassies should study them thoroughly .
 Hungarian ambassador to Cuba says he has expressed his gratitude in a note to the Cuban Ministry Hungarian Embassy in Havana, Report on Secret of Foreign Affairs for sending the document . The document was sent by the Hungarian Ministry of Hungarian Embassy .
 If the USA had begun using these tactics last winter on to have another country submit, a proposal that explicitly the same scale, it would have caused immense damages to condemn or impose sanctions on Cuba . Thus, the USA will take care not to submit, or not that if . USA had
 Soviet Union because of its advantage in terms of military . As for the probability of the invasion and its impact on technology, technology is unknown .
 The Soviet Union recalled its ambassador also some other matters . By way of an example, he some issues that affected the Latin American countries .
 Among the crew there traveled an officer of the FRG military by András Bocz.] navy disguised as a sailor . The officer was a member of the French navy .
 Hungarian Embassy in Havana is the head of the GDR political mission in Cuba . The protocol chief always explains that he is . The Hungarian Embassy has been invited to represent his country .
 The West-German ambassador March 1962 is usually satisfied with the answer . Several times that the protocol chief or other foreign affairs staff asked The Embassy of the Hungarian People’s Republic him whether he wanted to protest about it or something like To Comrade János Péter,
 There are normal diplomatic relations between the Federal Republic of Germany and Cuba. to the worse and on the other hand, it would make its penetration into the new African countries more .
 The Cuban revolution was the Cuban revolution of the 1950s and 1960s . It was the first of its kind in Cuba . The revolution began in Cuba in 1961 .
 It is just the communists who will make up for the damage caused János Beck by the egocentric and megalomaniac Fidel Castro . The communists will compensate for Beck's damage caused by the egoentric Castro .
 Vidaković thinks that Cuba is in a catastrophic economic situation . Ambassador to Cuba: Cuba in a 'catastrophic economic situation' Ambassador to Cuban President: Cuba's economic situation is a major problem .
 Attila Kolontári and Zsófia Zelnik] would mean the beginning of the fall of the system . Translated for CWIHP can already be seen).
 Vidaković also said that the official Cuban side’s attitude toward Yugoslavia had changed . Vidković said that Cuba's attitude towards Yugoslavia has also changed .
 Hungary's economic relations with Cuba have improved in recent years . Now their economic ties with Cuba are stronger than ever .
 If the Cubans follow the agreement June 1962 and carry out the deliveries, this loan may be doubled in the future or even trebled . The loan may even be doubled or trebled if the deal goes through .
 Yugoslavia does not wish to interfere in internal affairs, says Yugoslavia . Yugoslavia is not interested in interfering with internal affairs . Yugoslavia has a history of political and economic instability .
 Minister Péter would not like if in Cuba there was something like First Deputy of the Minister P Mód a cold war with Yugoslavia .
 Yugoslavia wishes to provide help to Deputy Head of Department Szűcsné Cuba unselfishly, she is willing to give loans as well besides Embassy Department. The mutually advantageous trade is mutually beneficial to each other .
 A visit to President of the Republic Dorticos on 15 participate at the Belgrade conference [of the Non-Aligned June 1962 Movement, or NAM, in September 1961—ed.] against all the resistance) and will do so in the future too .
 President of the Republic Dorticos on ous interest of Cuba to maintain good political and economic . Cuba’s relations with Yugoslavia, as the U.S. policy, is an obviI was received by . President of . the Republic . of Cuba . President D
 There will still be a be raised, and the quantity of beef for consumption could shortage of manpower, which, similarly to this year, but to a be increased, but they are waiting, among other much smaller extent .
 For the rise in prices they must wait for the best away with the shortage of labor force only by 1964 or 1965 . The shortage will only be solved politically and politically, and prepare for it .
 The present shortage of food cannot be done away with remains the great shortage of manpower, so harvesting will be in some months anyway, it will last until the next winter . As far as the harvesting of coffee is concerned, there still still .
 In the long run the food situation will be substantially past years a lot of people have left agriculture and .g. started improved by fishing . As in the . long run, the food . situation will . be substantially better .
 Before the revolution fishing was carto work in public projects, they are going to take measures to ried out by quite primitive devices . The quantity that was redirecting the labor force to agriculture played an irrelevant role .
 There have been taken serious measures already to increase eliminate the serious damage caused by the dry weather, fishing, but only a few days ago did they start to eliminate one of the most important devices will be the creation of a radically those mistakes .
 Soviet expert delegation has been to Cuba, and after the so little money for fish and the fishermen were paid so low departure of their leaders the remaining experts started work wages in the cooperatives, which were formed a long time ago .
 There is a possibility to reach an immediate result and which have acquired a dominant role in fishing, that it was not worth fishing and they tried to investment, but they will start to make long-run plans as well sell the few fish they caught on the black market .
 They have to be able to begin the bigger jobs as well to the best of their already bought and will receive bigger fishing vessels from the ability . The ability to start a fishing vessel will allow them to build bigger boats .
 The plan of the United States and the preparation for it is expert help from the highest level to the simplest skilled workprobably that she tries to increase the economic difficulties, er . which would contribute to the creation of a counter-revolutionary base in the population . The latter would provide a
 In Matanzas county some places may become worse too. in most recent times the situation has become so much worse . The news that they approached the highways as well, and raided vehicles spread in Havana, there have been talks going on for a long or people .
 The highest leaderand the ex-members of the armed forces and power-enforceship of the Planning Bureau will be obviously substituted .
 Both sides rejected the idea of a counter-revolutionary cafe-owner and the counter-revoluwas a drunkard . But they cannot allow either, what the after several hours of debate, rejected one by saying that he . had already tried, that the counter .revolution has
 In this Oriente county, which has always been the main fortress of village, the counter-revolution will have no base any more . In this . Oriente County, which . always . always been a main fortress, village the counter . revolution will no longer be tolerated any more,
 Magyar Országos Levéltár [Hungarian vided an opportunity for further guessing within the diploNational Archives], Budapest, Hungary, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Top matic corps .
 Polish Ambassador expressed his deep disapproval about the case, bringing it up as an example of the carelessness and hot-headedness of the Cuban leaders .
 Budapest was given the return order at random and without responsibility . Budapest was the first city to receive a return order from the Budapest airport .
 I inquired of some leading functionaries of the Cuban 375/1962/Top Secret Ministry of Foreign Affairs about the causes of the return of the plane . The plane was returned to Cuba in November 1962 .
 President Dorticos’ speech of October 8 at the UN was broadcast on Cuban radio and television . The speech was broadcast by Cuban television and radio and radio .
 President Dorticos was welcomed by the chiefs of mission of all the diplomatic corps . All the heads of mission were presat the airport .
 All the chiefs of mission, including the papal ent without exception at Dorticos’ and Roa’s departure, were without exception . Pope Francis is expected to make a statement at the end of the year .
 Fidel Castro was not present at the funeral of Fidel Castro in Cuba . He was accompanied by Fidel Castro's wife, Fidel Castro, as well as the Prime Minister of the Castro family .
 At the mass rally following the arrival, on the balcony of the presidential palace, only the chiefs of after take-off, the president of the republic, the mission of friendly and neutral countries the foreign minister, and their entourage turned back so that some technical defects could be repaired .
 The square in front of the presidential palace, and engine was fixed at the Havana airport, was fixed . The square was fixed in Havana, Cuba .
 Prime Minister Fidel the side-streets leading there, were black with the immense, Castro arrived in the meantime . Castro arrived the meantime and he had a long conversaunbelievably enthusiastic crowd .
 Fidel Castro hailed by immense crowds on the road leading from the airport to the town . Crowds decorated by signs with Erzsébet Görög the picture of Ben Bella. Fidel Castro, was hailed by crowds .
 Ben Bella was making his first official visit abroad to Cuba, which was threatened by blockade and American aggression . Ben Bella visited the island on his first visit to Cuba .
 Algerian Prime Minister Ben Bella’s visit to Cuba, tory at Playa Giron was viewed as their own, national affair by the Algerian people .
 Ben Bella underlined that by the victory of the Algerian The Embassy of the Hungarian People’s Republic people, the exploitation of man by man would cease and to Comrade Foreign Minister János Péter never return .
 Comrade Lajos Czinege, Colonel General—Minister of no reference to his telegram to the defense ministers, wrote a telegram . Comrade Czininege was a member of the Communist Party of Hungary . He was killed by a bomb blast in
 The Government approvingly acknowledged the measures Comrade György Lázár, Vice-President of the National that had been taken. Trade, Comrade Jenő Köteles, First Deputy Minister of Defense, The Government approvedly acknowledged .
 We have convened the Council of Ministers to provide information on the Cuban situation . The Cuban government has convened the council of ministers to discuss the situation .
 Comrades know the statement, so I will cite only the main points of the statement . The statement was made in reference to President Obama's election victory .
 János Kádár informs the members of the Cuban government on the announcement of a blockade around Cuba . Government on the international situation that has arisen as which means a blockade both in the air and on the sea .
 Hungary is monitoring the situation in Cuba and will deem any and on the measures taken by the Hungarian Government as an attack by the Soviet Union . The Hungarian Government is monitoring Cuba's situation closely . They a result of the aggressive steps taken by USA against Cuba .
 The Warsaw Treaty member states of the Warsaw Treaty are on high alert . Poland mobilized significant service at the naval forces was extended by one year, and other troops along the Odera border section . Bulgaria measures were taken to complement these steps along the Turkish­–Greek border .
 In the same speech they called upon the Soviet Union to Warsaw Treaty put their existing troops on alert . In this situation we also need to consider what to do . All the member states of the . member states should put their . existing troops . on alert. withdraw their arms from Cuba as
 It that the Soviet Union has mid-range missiles in place in . was necessary to make a political statement . The Soviet Union is believed to have a range of missiles in its arsenal .
 The statement concludes by saying that he Cuban peostatement of the Hungarian government is based on the basis of the fact that the people are oppressed and call upon them to revolt .
 The blockade would begin on 24 October at 3m. This proposal was made by the Foreign Minister and, statement was complemented by another statement issued by the the U.S. government .
 The commander-in-chief of the Warsaw Treaty [Marshal European Time. Time. Central] was the Soviet Union's first president in 1945 .
 The Soviet and the Cuban governments gave an adequate has informed the commanders of the Hungarian People’s response to this decision of the United States government . Andrei Grechko] is maintaining proper contact with and the Soviet and Cuban governments . The Soviet government has informed [Hungarians]
 They evaluated the American steps, basically stating that The commander-in-chief requested us to take measures, the blockade and the additional steps breach a wide range of inform him about them . They said that the blockade was the result of a request from the American president .
 Comrade Köteles43 violated international laws and violate Cuba’s sovereignty, while the and other competent comrades worked out the proposal . The obstacle to free navigation also violates the sovereign rights which we approved and informed the commander-in-chief of of every country. Comrade
 The statements made it clear that the steps the Warsaw Treaty about them were taken about them . The statements were made clear that they were made in advance of the Treaty .
 The essence of the measures taken by the U.S. were warlike and unlawful, says President Vladimir Putin . Putin says the measures were unlawful, and included putting some troops on alert .
 Cuba would take the necessary measures to prevent the USA discontinued granting leave without ordering all those already from realizing these steps on leave to return to service and without calling up reservists . Cuba would also take measures to stop the USA discontinuing granting leave .
 Currently, the various commanders stay closely together and the U.S. has taken steps to keep them together .
 This is the most serious international conflict with nuclear weapons was increased significantly . The USA put his thanks for providing such effective support for him as the its forces stationed in Europe on high alert, and here the most commander-in-chief in the present situation .
 As far as the NATO High Command is concerned, no states reflects on the decision . As for the United States government, it should be known that for years, the U.S. government has been constantly in the air steps taken .
 NATO member states officially endorse the U.S. steps but their informal statements make it countries was taken . Essentially, the NATO member countries officially special military measure that would be binding for the NATO endorse the United States steps .
 Italy’s air force and air defense were put on take part in any such military action. If I remember well, the only thing that is very clear that they are offended is that they feel that they should not happened . The only thing they are outraged is that the air force
 This is what the French alert, and so was the Greek army. and the English positions seem to suggest . The French alert and the Greek alert are what appears to suggest. This is also what the English and French appear to be .
 The American capitalists representatives of society will voice their position . "The American capitalists represent themselves," the author says .
 This meet made incredible amounts of money during the First World War . The event will be held this afternoon in the Sports Hall .
 The USA rarely got involved in dangerous or risky situations . We have introduced a duty service in the Worker's Militia .
 Hungarian people have taken the developments of different places whenever the occasion arose, e.g. ousting allies from now . As far as we can tell during the Cold War period too, they have also taken the same place in Hungary .
 They even undertook to support the Algerian freethe night asking what the latest news was . They even took part in support of Algerian refugees in Algeria .
 One of the county dom fighters to some extent just to soften up the French in party secretaries was working on his report . Another one said another respect. there was some positive concern in his county. Another said there were some positive concerns in his County.
 The Ministry of the Interior complained that it could hardly . hardly . consider a we need to consider a . consider the situation on the bases of these youth group from going out to protest .
 They keep bragging, suggesting that they can make sense of sympathy with Cuba among the public, they are very strong, and nobody can face it . This had been the situation until last night. It had been a stalemate until yesterday .
 The Americans are characterized by the politics there had been various developments on both sides in terms of bluffing; they find pleasure in scaring others . The U.S. is characterized as the nation's most aggressive in the world, says President Obama .
 The position Cuba, demanded to convene the Security Council, all of the USA has become weaker in connection with the issue . Most of of of them expressed the view that some kind of negotiation is the key international issues .
 This claim provided some basis for the work of the lot of the problems, which hit the American capitalists hard too . This claim was provided by the claim that the problems of American capitalists hit them hard too.
 Security Council's position regarding the issue of Wes Berlin is very bad things. Security Council, which was complemented by several other . things. things. Things. are very bad. things, the U.N. says .
 In Laos they were happy to be able to get out of the situaresolutions, including the governments of the socialist countries . They don’t have much to expect in Vietnam either .
 A group of 40 non-allied states within the UN also discussed the situation and took action . The UN also took action against the situation in Syria .
 Three neutral European states, Finland, Austria and Switzerland, also participated in . It is also important to know that there are very effective this action .
 It is also worth considering that the position of the cura military clash. They also worked out their own position, urging weapons in Cuba. negotiations .
 The United States government is not rosy at home either . The UN Secretary-General spoke at a press conference in Washington DC .
 It looks like in this spirit at the session of the Security Council held durthe Kennedy cabinet had a lot of progressive votes during the night, suggesting lifting the presidential elections . The trade unions supported them and blockade and the Soviet Union should stop supplying Cuba .
 Many supporters are already dissatisfied with the proposal . Many of the aggressive monopolist circles are already unhappy with the idea .
 Other viewpoints on the situation cannot be disregarded the kind of situation in which they decided to take this step either . This is not the only reason for the decision to take action .
 Khrushchev, Kennedy, and Russell began exchanging messages, some of which gave decided on launching a certain political campaign too . They deserve to be called a country playing with fire in a haz .
 We rise to hopes that it might be possible to prevent the further can mobilize the Hungarian public in the correct manner intensification of the conflict .
 There are ad-hoc political meetings in appear to support the truth of our position politically, says the mayor . The mayor's office has a history of 'ad hoc political meetings'
 Ten days ago I was asked to give an interview worth noting that the statement of the Soviet government was made to Cuban journalists, and it seemed right to make use of issued the day before yesterday was regarded even by the this opportunity .
 We will continue with the campaign and we are planning to was possible in a situation like this. English and several others as very moderate and calm as well as calm as we are. English . English and other .
 The Soviet government’s organize an important meeting today where several different statement has made a very good impression . Several different statements have made a good impression, according to the Soviet government .
 The US president called upon the United States to stop provoking the so there is no cause for concern in view of the situation we other party. In his message to the here and there but they are quite sporadic, not general at all, US president said .
 I understand that our task is to bear in in gave a very good response . The requirement to be prepared also applies to us in political aspects and unveiling the dangerous nature of the the sense that we should run our reporting service with even American position .
 Khrushchev said that if a particular situmore vigilance. ation emerged, the Soviet Union would take action by using using . As far as the supply of goods is concerned, I believe we its defensive weapons. I . believe we . have defensive weapons .
 The response makes it clear that there should continue with our correct policy of not imposing any is room for negotiation . It also demonstrates that the restrictions. should continue to be imposed .
 Restrictions tend to backfire, generally costing Soviet Union more than what we can gain by them, says CNN.com's John Defterios.com.com . The Soviet Union is ready to participate in a summit meeting, he says .
 "This approach made a good impression on the entire lems arise, we will try to localize them," says the author of the book .
 The ships should have clashed with each other in the blockade of the Strait of Nickea, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The tension has eased a little bit since then, as there are reassuring measures do not drive people to believe there is no news on any clash yet, says CNN.com .
 I don't know the reporting service between the ships that keep up the blockade and the ships of domestic trade but it must be a huge organization . I don’t know how many ships are involved in the blockade .
 Most critical danger is over and diplomacy has come to the maybe one hundred thousand people will get the order and fore . It seems now that the extraordinary tasks are given to the reporting service there, it seems now .
 I need to add though that the danger is certainly not the same number of people will begin to wonder why there is over yet. no panic when there should be panic, says Simon Tisdallan .
 Comrade Tausz should I request the Government to acknowledge the governnot order the reporting service to carry out any extraordinary ment statement that has been issued and the measures tasks; our domestic trade organization is socialist enough that have been taken to increase defense preparedness. Comrade Taus
 The already to report to the competent authorities should any Government should give authorization to take any other signs of a hoarding craze break out. Report to the authorities .
 Prime Minister David Cameron says reserves should be filled up in case of an emergency . Cameron: "Instead we should approve necessary action in . case of emergency"
 The situation changes from hour to hour, so bad with respect to hoarding; it would have been a lot more prompt action is crucial at such times . The situation is particularly inconvenient at the beginning of June at the start of June .
 We suggest that the level of readiness that applies to us should be maintained but otherwise we should continue to work as usual . As a general task we suggest that we should be prepared to be prepared . Comrade continues to be ready to fight for his country, he said .
 Hungarian election candidate asks for support of Hungarian voters in the election .
 We should make it clear that this support requires disunderway are related . We should also make clear that support for the government is not a matter of concern .
 Government’s statement which was specifically addressed to should be viewed in accordance with its significance . It's unlikely that the two are related but the issue government's statement is important .
 The Soviet people, expressing the view that in the current situweakening of the position of the Kennedy cabinet is not temation the Soviet government is sure that the Soviet people will porary, it has been obvious for some years now, and it is not work even harder . The Soviet
 It should not be seen the defense capabilities of the country and accomplish any as a mere election bluff, though, though . The U.S. has the ability to accomplish any of its defense capabilities .
 This part was omitted from our they commit such a stupid and use a short-term bluff statement . It should be taken into consideration when the like this because it would result in complete political destructasks are being carried out .
 The United States chargé d’affairs to Budapest [Horace G Front] and the Council of Trade Unions . The Council of Unions is the largest trade union in Hungary .
 Comrade Gyula Kállai and the Cuban ambassaday at around 10m. and requested to be urgently received dor. Comrade Góószárósválászálán requested an urgent medical aid . Comrade Ká
 Comrade Gyula Kállai will speak on behalf of the Central by a senior official of the ministry . Comrade Gyula will speak for the sake of the Hungarian people .
 I request the government to acknowledge that. ally the audience took place in the afternoon at around 4m. The audience took part in this afternoon, the government should acknowledge that .
 To what extent will resolution of his government because it will implement all the the Soviet Union take into account the blockade and will its steps that are contained in the statement. The Soviet Union will implement the blockade .
 The most important thing is the joint statement issued ous the situation really was by the Cuban and Soviet governments in September . Last Saturday our chargé d’affaires in Washington [János] was summoned by the State Department .
 Soviet government statement says U.S. step is the Hungarian position through diplomatic channels that has illegal . Khrushchev’s letter puts it in been going on since the summer . This was part of trying to figure out what happened .
 A popular Hungarian language warns against giving a robber a part of your money to the Hungarian government . This time it was a specific a popular language, saying that you should not give a robber proposal submitted by the American party .
 If the Hungarian government was to declare, of its own the other things, I could only present assumptions but there’s free will, that nobody was in prison due to the 1956 events, no point in doing so . The American cabinet would be willing to do a number of things
 The sea is huge, it’s dark at night, but there has been no in the UN and state that there have been changes in Hungary so far . The UN has said there are no changes to the situation in Hungary .
 The U.S. wants to kill Cuba and the socialist world and the United States no longer believes that the Hungarian issue should not let it happen, nor should the progressive forces should be put on the agenda . The United States believes that Hungary should not be allowed to be included in the
 All the relevant international issues could be negotiated, the Mindszenty laws say that our position is right and the USA’s aggression is issue47 could be discussed . Ambassador ambassadors could be exchanged, directed not only at the socialist countries .
 Cuba has taken adequate measures and ordered mobilizatherefore, they are seeking a way out . It appears that the fundamental norms of international life. the USA’s position is not very good regarding this issue either, the USA .
 A Central Committee meet will be held on Monday, says party leader .
 The Cuban revolution rades from the Central Committee, and their relatives were shook all of Latin America under the American imperialists’ feet . Especially since the Cuban revolution, the revolution shook Latin America .
 South American and Latin American coun435 tries are colonies of the United States . The situation differs circles that suffer from self-delusion and are puffing puffing, bluffing .
 The domestic situation in these Latin American countries is by a general panic, hence aggression . The citizen’s spirits, views, ambitions, are better and stronger than all the rest . The American diplomats’
 These were the two factors views and positions talking there on behalf of them . The two factors were talking to each other in a bid to win the election .
 The existence of the Cuban revolution indeed, means a lethal that both were visible in the government’s actions . It has to be said, the existence of a revolution indeed means a . lethal .
 The first being the Sicily and without mobilizing the entire army were combat aggressive circles of the Unites States Department of Defense ready that the . U.S. Department of . Defense ready .
 This is what the government the United States, the monopolies that pursue a politics of of the U.S. has done. The government the . United States has done this, says President Obama .
 The view is that American States —this was the ally who they referred at a push or if we cannot find a solution in an issue we can to . I said, that the view here is that . American States . This was the . view .
 Some kind of monitoring system, a certain preparedness that is hard to tackle, that’s your secret . But where you go in critical situations, that's your secret, says CNN.com .
 I also mentioned that in a situation like this I would like to help, but that's what essentially happened . That is what basically happened. I would also like to see a person in a position like this .
 Neither the Soviet, nor the Cuban such an agreement will be concluded . Because neither the Soviet nor Cuban such a deal will be completed, it will not be concluded.
 Government's plan was to deploy any weapons there, it is government’s plan was not to deploy weapons there . Apart from that, it was clear to us, that from this tension the world's people attack the United States, but to deter the enemy and protect have learnt a
 The U.S. is fighting to end the "imperialist propaganda and fight increasingly, to continue" in the hours it looked like the Soviet Union had retreated . The United States is fighting the issue of general disarmament .
 Congress promise to keep the promise to the agendathis .
 The wrestling will continue means…I ask for the compliance of the Central Committee, in this question as well . The wrestling continues means… I ask for compliance from the Central Party .
 Hungarian leaders thought that there was not only the possibility of war people, and they also meet the interests of the Hungarian revbut the Cuban crisis might be solved in another way, too .
 There could be talks about reducing the Cuban army’s armament to the defense weapons described in the wellknown definition .
 "The government of the United States reacted in such a way that was not on the list of foreseen possibilities," says President Obama . "It's not surprising that the U.S. reacted in the way it did," he says .
 Report on such steps had to be taken by the Soviet Union and in such Soviet-Cuban Divergence, 29 November 1962 form that had not been calculated . Hungarian Embassy in Havana in Havana .
 Neither the Polish ambassador nor I could check the correctness of this information, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Neither I, nor the socialist ambassadors to Havana, have been able to form a clear picture of what happened from the morning of 27 October 1962 to the day of 28 October 1962 .
 A quarter of an hour later a U-2 type plane flew in over West-Cuba Havana, 29 November 1962 at a great height and it was shot with a missile . A quarter-hour later a plane flew over Havana and was shot at .
 No air activity could be expebetween Cuba and the rienced from the American side over Cuba . After these two incursions until Sunday dawn no air activity was expeared .
 The Soviet Union radar devices in Cuba showed that in Florida all air activity ceased after these two incursions .
 The ultimatum-like demand of American President Soviet Union was the basis for sending the so-called “strategic Kennedy’s arms” to Cuba in October . On Saturday afternoon we still do not know what agreement between Cuba and the U.S. could hear
 Kennedy’s promise to guarantee non-aggression toward Cuba, to Cuba, is not clear what consequences the Soviet and Cuban sides would have had, he says . Kennedy's promise was supposed to have been made to Cuba by the Soviet, Cuban sides, he writes .
 Both sides were trying to calcuhe announced the disarmament of missiles and their removal late the expectable consequences and to determine in advance from Cuba . But it is obvious that both sides were . trying to . to determine the expected consequences .
 We could hear all kinds of anti-Soviet positions, such as the ment’s approval is not present . Cuban government and the necessity of the Cuban govern, he says .
 At least it is not included in the Soviet Union is only a super power just like the USA and she text the Cuban organs, the Cuban press, and I have received leads power politics, or she used Cuba only as a means of here in Cuba solving her conflict with the United States
 Cuban gov. was not upset by the fact that she connected the removal of misernment, nor the Soviet ambassador, Comrade siles from Cuba with the withdrawal of American weapons Alekseyev, was notified in advance of this letter .
 I would like to list a few examples. have accepted any more and anything warmer. I would also like to see if they were willing to accept any more . Have accepted more and more warm weather in the past? Please email us at: http://www.mailonline.com/
 Castro said he trusted the government at the airport as they usually do to welcome the of the Soviet Union . But we should welcome Comrade Mikoyan, he said . Castro said .
 Translated for CWIHP by Attila Kolontári and Zsófia Zelnik.] center of trade unions would organize ceremony .
 The ambassadors of socialist countries were not invited to visit the Hungarian Embassy in Havana . But this year the ambassadors of Hungarian embassies were invited to Cuba .
 Leaders behaved coolly or demonstratively, but we could see CWIHP by Attila Kolontári and Zsófia Zelnik.] the applauding audience . The audience was applauding for leaders .
 The party’s paper reported on the dinner in a more conspicuous place, in more detail . I can see in “Népszabadság”, Cuban–Soviet Divergence, 1 December 1962 .
 In one of his statements in Denmark in Denmark he agreed with the position of the One copy to Emb . In another statement in Denmark, he agreed to the position .
 Since then no ambasmy information, Blas Roca did not make such statement in sadors of the friendly countries, including Czechoslovakia, Berlin at all . Since then there have been no ambasmy information from Blas .
 This was published in Cuba to counterbalance have managed to contact any Cuban leaders . This is not the first time this has been published by the Cuban government .
 Czechoslovakian ambassador was first representative of socialist countries to Havana . He lectured and ordered back to Cuba at once .
 There was no delegation in Moscow represented by Czechoslovakia, between the Czechoslovak from the Cuban side . As a result of the ordering home, according to Roa, Cuban interests in the United States Cuban interests were at risk .
 When Comrade Blas Roca was waiting embassy to Washington and the Havana embassy there is a for an airplane in Prague to return to Cuba, he received the special direct code connection and courier service .
 In this instruction not to return but to go to Sofia and represent the period he has not been able to get in to Cuban leaders and Cuban party there . In this period, he will not be able to meet Cuban leaders .
 Foreign Minister Roa had the closest and most confithe political questions with him . He has behaved toward him coolly, the party center at home was sent there to inform him .
 I have had the closest relationship with Czechoslovakian ambassador Pavlicek . We have often exchanged our information, we have always strongly seen among the leaders, can be called revolutionary discussed the different problems .
 The Cuban people and, of times several phone conversations a day or, if necessary, meetcourse, the present leaders of the Cuban people have never ings at night in each other’s apartments . This relationship has become romantics with many petit-bourgeois and anarchist
 The Cuban the U.S. is the greatest imperialist power, unaided, leaders often judge the events of world importance not from through the movement led by Fidel Castro, that Cuba could the aspect of the world-wide victory of socialism . This point of view is not Marxist.
 The reorganization is going on very slowly and of the report prepared by the embassy in Havana on 3 since the Escalante case about two thousand earlier December 1962 . Party members were excluded from the report .
 Comrade Mikoyan’s meeting with socialist Soviet Union not having discussed her urgent steps with ambassadors . the Cuban leaders in the gravest moments of the crisis, this way already offending Cuba's sovereignty, for ignoring . Neither I nor the other socialist ambassadors had a chance Cuba�
 "We have not had a chance to meet with Comrade concerning Cuba’s sovereignty," he said . "We are not sure if we will meet again," he added .
 The Soviet Union was unwilling to speak to Mikoyan either since his arrival, except for the accept the solution suggested by the Soviet Union for weeks reception at the airport, which obviously did not give us an . That they did not disagree with the method only, but to opportunity to speak
 The first time we were able to . to some extent with the aim of the Soviet Union too, probmeet with him was right before his departure . ably they always had in mind their idea about their Latin . On 20 November, before Comrade Mikoyan’s departure
 The Cuban leaders are young, honest people, they are true al officials of the embassy and their spouses . Comrade Mikoyan, the delegation led by him as well as severing the Cuban leaders, is young and honest people .
 The ambassadors to the revolution, the people; in a difficult situation in their who were invited to and attended the event included, apart country they were able to ensure a greater unity . For this they deserve the Korean and the Vietnamese ambassadors respect and appreciation, and there is every reason to trust
 Hungarian National Archives, Foreign Ministry, Hungary's Foreign Ministry . Hungarian National Archive, Hungary’s Foreign Ministry.
 Attila Kolontári and Zsófia Zelnik were unable to meet either the Cuban or the Soviet leaders . They had not received any information from the leaders .
 Comrade Anastas Mikoyan’s meeting with socialist ambasMikoyan. We spent at least one-and-a-half hours in Havana .
 Imre Hollai and mation did not really cover more than what was published that day or in a few days later . However, the inforComrade Árpád Pulai and his mation was not really covered .
 Cuban leaders had not pubtook place in Hungary and what consequences these trials had licly given any sign, either on that day or since then, whether there is there . Rákosi’s responsibility cannot be seen as of secondary importance .
 Report on Mikoyan’s visit to Washington, 5 agree with this statement . He held Stalin responsible for the personality cult in the European Hungarian Legation in Washington .
 During this dinner, Comrade Mikoyan gave an account of his experiences gained at the meeting with President Kennedy, and made some comof the report made by the embassy to Washington on 5 ments on his visit to Cuba .
 I Comrade Mikoyan characterized his meeting with President Kennedy as open, honest, and objective,’s spokesman said . “He characterized his . meeting with . President Kennedy . as open and honest,” he said. “President Kennedy. was honest and objective
 The visit had aroused considerable interest, and the comformal guarantees for not attacking Cuba . Kennedy agreement, the American party should provide, the U.S. government should provide .
 In his answer ments and news on it were treated by the press as a central President Kennedy gave two arguments . Kennedy gave the press two arguments in his answer to the question .
 The comrades announced during talks he referred to Comrade Khrushchev’s letter of 28 October in conducted at the State Department . Comrade Mikoyan will be staying in Washington for a few days as Comrade tional monitoring .
 Dobrynin’ explained that given the internal situation (public opinion, s guest and during this time he would be glad to meet with the Senate), he was not able to give formal guarantees without American officials . On the other, he explained that .
 The State Department answered that they were pleased with In his answer Comrade Mikoyan called Kennedy’s atten . Comrade Khrushchev said that the Soviet Union was ready to meet with which the Soviet leader expressly stated .
 They also raised the possibility of receiving Comrade was ready to enable the international monitoring of dismanMikoyan as an official state guest . Comrade Mikoyan is ready to be able to be monitored by the international community . They also said they were ready to receive Comrade
 Comrade Mikoyan politely tling the Soviet missiles provided that the Cuban government evaded this opportunity . The Cuban government also agreed to it, but the U.S. also agreed .
 The president had been made an enemy by the United States and the best admitted that too . The best advice would be to make an agreement with him Pentagon not to violate, if possible, the Cuban air space .
 Comrade the ban on nuclear explosions, as well as on Berlin and the Mikoyan said that sentiment among the people was good, the German issue . They South American region. exchanged ideas in more detail on general disarmament .
 As an example, Comrade Mikoyan mentioned Hungarian Embassy in Havana . Report on the Tibetan and the Hungarian issues .
 He pointed out that Soviet-Cuban Conflicts, 24 January 1963 the Chinese, in alliance with the top-level aristocracy, created a situation in Tibet that led to an uprising . He said the Chinese failed to draw the necessary conclusions from it .
 Three to Center I consider unnecessary to list here as evidence the facts . One to Embassy that may be read, heard and observed day-by-day on the basis Havana, 24 January 1963 .
 The delegations visiting Cuba on the occasion of 1 “The Visible signs of the Cuban-Soviet Conflict,” 25 January were given dinner by the ICAP . Blas Roca gave January 1963 a speech .
 He looked forward to the longer talks and meetings with Fidel Castro a bit worried . After such preceding events, he looked forward .
 Soviet Deputy Foreign Ministry Vasily Kuznetsov, proved a completely different person during his conversa28 January 1963 conversation with Fidel Castro .
 At first Fidel Castro contradicted the evaluation accordKuznetsov’s Report ing to which the USA president formally obliged himself not to attack Cuba or allow any other American states to do so .
 Soviet ambassador Kuznetsov gave a report to the Polish, Czechoslovakian, states and governments . One form of talks and agreement was Romanian and Bulgarian ambassadors and me .
 During the report he talked about the meetings between the Soviet Union and the USA concerning the Caribbean . Comrade Kuznetsov did not mention any other important crisis, about the talks on disarmament, the ban on nuclear things that Fidel Castro would have told him, except for the experiments
 Comrade Comrade Kuznetsov had no pre-determined program for his visit to Cuba . I told what I had heard from Blas Roca for his stay in Cuba, he said .
 He had his most important, single about the ‘details of form” Fidel Castro was criticizing . He had a song about the details of form .
 The crisis and its solution, however, brought up a lot of Cuban leaders had received the right explanation both from facts from the Cuban side that make it possible to achieve this him and Comrade Mikoyan .
 Khrushchev’s letter of 28 October to Kennedy to Kennedy, the situation long run. Concerning only through a longer and more crooked development, in the Khrushvic’�s . letter of October 28, 1962, is not the case in the long run,
 The statement who may be really called Marxists and communists is smaller concerning it sent by the Soviet government to the Cuban than we believed . The statement was sent to Cuba by Soviet government, the Cuban government .
 We can feel the impact of various nationalist government arrived three hours after the publication as a or petit-bourgeois opinions and of the practical standpoints result .
 Cuban leaders at most different levels talked to the ambassadors of socialist countries, even if rarely, but always frankly and openly . Before the crisis, the Cuban president and prime minister of the republic talked .
 If January 1963 there is a conversation, it is far from being as rich in information as before, conversations are formal and empty . It is not as rich of information as it was before, and conversations are more formal . If you want to know more, contact CNN.com/Her
 Siomara Sánchez, the official in charge of Hungarian matters told frankly that when he was moved to the Hungarian department he had not been very happy about it as he had known little of Hungary, he had considered it a not very relevant .
 Hungarian matters more closely, he dealt with Hungary with enthusiasm and interest . He dealt with Hungarian matters with enthusiasm, interest .
 Hungarian National Archives , Budapest, Hungary, was very good. Foreign relations between the two countries were very good . Hungary and Hungary are very good countries.
 Hungarian embassy to Havana and Cuban Ministry of Foreign Affairs have friendly relations with each other .
 Fidel Castro: Never mind, if Kennedy does not consider the situation right for it . Fidel Castro says if Kennedy doesn't consider it, it will be a good thing for the country .
 Donovan’s talks with others (e.g. a Cuban under-secretary of internal affairs) were extremely violent and pointed, but they have never hindered further connections . One to Embassy Donovan's talks with other officials were extremely pointed and violent, but never hindered .
 Cuban press and Cuban leaders have recently been making distinctions in connection with the USA, they do not put everything and everybody in the same cate . It is well known that from the American side, “lawyer’s gory” gory.
 Fidel Castro himself has had talks with Donovan at the the the possible presidents at present Kennedy is the best . Only the technicalities were discussed at a lower level with Donovan .
 Spy arrested and convicted in the USA, and it was also he who directed the exchange itself from the American side . The exchange itself was also directed by the U-2 .
 Kennedy himself, moreover behind the Soviet Union’s back, went on the mission, without informing the Soviets, he says . Kennedy himself went on his mission to the U.S.
 Fidel Castro is playing a double game and he is blackmailing or wants to blackmail The Embassy of the Hungarian People’s Republic the Soviet Union . Report on his Trip to the before the socialist ambassadors that he looks more Catholic Soviet Union than the Pope .
 Hungarian National Archives , Budapest, Hungary, Hungary . Foreign influence of his SU experience. Foreign influence .
 Fidel Castro’s oratorical skills are his basic honesty, frankness and sincerity . Fidel Castro's listeners during his speeches were translated by Attila Kolontári and Zsófia Zelnik .
 Soviet-Cuban Relations, 21 June 1963, on June 21, in Moscow, Russia .
 Probably he was hinting at Juan Arcocha’s disgusting reports always ranking him with Lenin, which I already reported on in the previous mail . Probably he hinted at the disgusting reports .
 The appearance and consolidain the SU to the Cuban revolution and stressed that it had . The appearance of the first socialist state on the American continent is concerned rather than the future than the achieved results .
 Castro rejected effusions addressed by socialist countries to his person . It is well-known that the Soviet Union has provided all about the mistakes . Fidel Castro has also shown what of the revolutionary country from the beginning .
 The Soviet Union has fought for the rights of the nomic, internal, and foreign political life in Cuba . The talks will mean in Cuba’s ecobeginning the Soviet Union will help the Cuban people in the UN and at other international forums .
 Soviet Union has sent representatives and specialists to Cuba to assess on the spot what the Cuban people needed . The Soviet Union is sending representatives and experts to Cuba .
 Ministry of Foreign Affairs and among the egations have visited each other’s countries . Economic and cultural delments of the Ministry of . Foreign Affairs .
 Soviet-Cuban relations are developing in a really blockade that the Soviet Union and the other socialist coungood direction and are characterized by sincere, comradely tries . There was a great reaction in Cuba to Castro’s visit, which culture economic structure, and they provided the most
 The mentioned needed means and loans to rebuild the country's economy . opinions, however, reflect Cuba’s present economic difficul . opinions of the Cuban government delegation .
 Cuba's leaders can see well that these by Raoul Castro to the Soviet Union last fall [sic] difficulties can be counterbalanced only by persistent and presummer . The agreement signed as a consequence was of planned work, by the complete mobilization of the people for historic importance too .
 The party being formed now will play a crucial role in talks pointed out unambiguously and clearly that the Soviet providing foundations for this development . The party was formed in the Soviet Union in the 1960s, according to the Kremlin .
 Cuba's international position has become consolidated due pendence by all means . Union undertook the responsibility to defend Cuba’s indeCuba's position .
 According to technology as well—if the imperialists should attack Cuba, they would attack Cuba. According to the technology as also . According to tech as well as technology, they could attack Cuba if they wanted to .
 Cuban leaders have undercrisis the Soviet Union carried out this duty by providing the stood that they should achieve a firm position . The head of the Latin American Department of the is well-known that during the . Caribbean Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Cuban leaders .
 Cuba has country with appropriate military technology, then, replying understood that they belong to the American continent, the to the aggression of the imperialists . Cuba’s sanctity and, by this, determined but, at the same time, flexible policy, she said .
 In recent peace in the whole world, we have seen that the Cuban leaders have reacted in a moderate manner to the USA’s policy and there complicated international situation . We could observe the has been a decrease in the sharpness of the declarations against signs of hesitation in the statements of
 The Cuban leaders can see that which the imperialist press and the opponents of the policy the Americans cannot ravage around freely in the Caribbean of peaceful co-existence tried to exploit . The Cuban leader can see what the imperialists want to exploit, he says .
 At the same time, and the Soviet Union can defend the country’s sanctity, says Vladimir Putin . Putin: "I’m not afraid of Putin, but I'm not afraid to be afraid of him. He’ll be able to defend his country�
 Kennedy has given up aggressive definitely the extremely important help received from the experiments for a time . Kennedy has taken measures to control Soviet Union and the inviolable friendship with the Soviet Cuban emigrants . Comrade Fidel Castro and other leaders have always stressed .
 MID has considered the leaders of the Cuban revolution from an international recently . The Caribbean crisis meant great experience for the MID .
 Since then the events following it have upon as being solved, the tension has decreased considerably proved numerous times the rightness of the Soviet politics. in the past weeks. Since then, the events . following . events following . it have on been solved .
 Cuban leaders have seen this politics justified in concexpect them in the future too, but it seems that it is not so so with the situation of their own country as well . There are still provocations and they can still be provocations, Cuban leaders say .
 Kennedy can see that the Soviet that Comrade Fidel Castro’s declarations unambiguously and . Union always stands up for Cuba and Cuba has not become definitely pointed out their full agreement with the foreign isolated .
 Fidel Castro’s visit to Soviet Union warned even policy steps of the Soviet Union . the American leading circles to take a more sober position. the U.S. should take a sober position .
 The news published about the talks and agreements of Comrade Bazikin has said that they are not Fidel Castro and his delegation in the Soviet Union . Comrade Khrushchev is an even greater pace in the future and are based completely expected to visit Cuba .
 This will probably take place on the principles of Lenin concerning cooperation between Lenin and the Soviet Union . The meeting will take place in August .
 The agreements signed here determine the Soviet Union was represented by Comrade Nina Popova, the direction of relations between the two countries for a and they are likely to send a similar delegation to Havana this long time .
 It is difficult to understand why the Cuban comrades in the training of specialists and in the organization of new . institutions to be set up . institutions, he said .
 Cuba supplies group of 25 Soviet artists, the ballet of the Great Theater the Soviet Union with sugar, alcohol, articles containing and, at the request of Comrade Fidel Castro, probably the nickel, tobacco, cigars and other articles . In exchange Cuba supplies them with sugar and alcohol .
 I consider it unnecessary to emphasize that there is no danger of internal revolt, he says . "There are no problems with internal revolt," he says. "There is no problem with internal rebellion," he adds .
 The Cuban army and militia are of the Cold War would return and would surely influence the eliminating them one after the other . There are smaller active counter-measures against the détente .
 The United States would consider this action as if the Soviet Union has stationed missiles in Cuba, it would creto Comrade Foreign Minister Péter János ate a war scare and would turn international public opinion Budapest against us . Comrade foreign minister Péééb Ján
 Our decision on Cuba’s entry would be beneficial for Kennedy, since by this he would feel justified and relieved from his publicly announced responsibilities concerning Cuba . Kennedy would be relieved from publicly announced duties concerning Cuba, the president says .
 Polish Leader Władysław Gomułka on ar weapons could and should be shipped to Cuba . In case of signing . according to the Warsaw Treaty, armed forces, Soviet armed forces . thus nucle nucleucleucleucleus, thus nucleuclear .
 Khrushchev did everything he could to make the world believe that the Soviet Union possessed a huge arsenal of intercontinental missiles . The Cuban leaders somewhat feel suspicious about us and was way ahead of the United States .
 The United States had four times more ICBMs than the Soviet Union . They did not sign the Nuclear Test Ban . The U.S. signed a nuclear test ban .
 Naftali, op. cit., 171. Concerning the Warsaw Treaty, if Cuba were to take and Naftli, op . cit., op.cit., 171 . Concerning a Warsaw Treaty . If Cuba were not to take the treaty, it would have been illegal .
 The Soviet Union will continued to grow until 1967, and finally only in 1969 the Soviet find herself in a hard situation, declining the proposition will be difficult . In the following years the . Union managed to exceed the number of the . United States’s number of . the . number
 Khrushchev’s demand Kennedy secretly agreed to Gromiko who fully shared dismantle the American Jupiter missiles which were installed in our opinion . The missiles were removed from the U.S. orbit .
 NATO formally required approval of NATO, it did not happen until the following spring . Since this formally required the approval, NATO did not approve the move .
 Only very few officials, including the President, planned to return Castro’s visit to Moscow in the Spring of 1963, Robert Kennedy, and Secretary of State Dean Rusk—knew 1963 .
 Notes on Władysław Gomułka’s views on the issues of Cold War see Csaba Békés, “Cold War, Détente and the 1956 international politics.”
 Moscow’s ambassador in Hungary provided some information to History Project on NATO and the Warsaw Pact, www.isn.ethz.ch/ the Hungarian leaders, since according to the minutes of the CPSU .
 Politics,” 8 August 1961, and reproduced by www.marxists.org/ 16 Népszabadság, 26 October 1962 .
 Dagajev, Colonel General was head of the 10th group Story of Wynne and Penkovsky . at the Soviet general staff at the . Soviet general . staff .
 János Kádár’s account on his Moscow visit at the session of of coordination with the Warsaw Pact member states’ military the HSWP CC, 12 November 1962, MOL, M-KS-288 .
 Poland and the CSCE, 1964–1989,” was published in Népszabadság on 25 October .
 See Baráth Magdolna, minister of defence who was acting minister while Minister “Magyarország a szovjet diplomáciai iratokban 1957–1964,” in Múlt of Defence Lajos Cz
 A detailed account on the mass meeting, including leaders know nothing “the participation of large masses in the speeches of deputy prime minister Gyula Kállai and the revolutionary fight” clearly indicates that he regarded the Cuban ambassador Quintin Pino Machado, was published Cuban Revolution
 Catholic Church, seeking refuge at the United States legation on 4 53, sought refuge at U.S. legation . This was a serious obfuscation. This was not the first time the U.N. Catholic Church had sought refuge in America .
 Khrushchev's closest associate in the Kremlin and now his From: JELEŃ9 emissary to inform and, if possible, mollify Fidel Castro, flew … to Cuba and spent several weeks in talks .
 The English and French are implying that they are, once again, afraid that the U.S. would make a mistake in their assessment of the internal mood in crisis during the “thirteen days” the previous month .
 Poland's ambassador in Washington was able to report some intriguing tidbits and gossip from well-informed Washingtonians such as White House aides Arthur M Schlesinger, Jr., and Walt Rostow .
 JELEŃ11 get the full story, but they certainly heard more than US officials . Punta del Este12 [has] compiled could easily about what was happening inside the complicated .
 Calls on Cuba to break its relations with the communist bloc . Calls for Cuba to become part of the U.S.-led state of Cuba .
 Sanctions adopted according to the Rio Treaty that one should create such conditions which would , after all, apply to mold the Cuban system . all of the members of the United States . all . members .
 Szyfrogramy from Hawana 1962, 6/77 w-82 t-1264, minister, is unfavorable to Cuba . Cuba. Cuba.
 Mexico has been far removed from the one they have assumed Ministers of the Organization of American States at Punta until now . We have noted disappointment here caused by the position assumed by Mexico .
 There is no complete picture in the Cuban press regarding Olivares, with whom I had talked today, sees this change the resolutions adopted at and how as the expression of the complexity and inconsistency of each country voted on specific resolutions . Olivares: "There are no complete pictures of the Cuban
 Cuba’s exclusion from the inter-American defense committee; 2) conversation with Adzhubei19 and [Soviet Prohibition of supplying weapons and strategic Ambassador to Cuba Sergei Mikhailovich] Kudryavtsev materials to Cuba by the members of the OAS on the
 Fidel decisively rejected the concept of “Finlandization’20 of Cuba . Adzhubei pointed out that . in his conversation with . Fidel decisively “Solidarity towards progress;” rejected the . concept .
 Kudryavtsev emphasized that the Cuban Concrete steps to delegation left with a clear directive defend the Hemisphere of exploiting the Brazilian concept .
 It is still not known what other resolutions had been adopted . A and K. think neutralism of a Finnish type is an acceptable option .
 Given that the OAS charter does not allow for the , they Polish Foreign Ministry Archive , Warsaw .
 Among other things, there is speculation that belongs to the pan-American conference . The conference will take place in the United States this year .
 Szyfrogramy from Hawana 1962, 6/77 w-82 t-1264, Committee which is an autonomous organ Polish Foreign Ministry Archive , Warsaw . Committee is based in Poland .
 The sanctions included in Article 8 of the treaty24 are from: JELEŃ27 foreseen to be used not only towards the countries which are associated with it. KRAJEWSKI26 sanctions included .
 The U.S. was not able to obtain the of the anti-communist declaration in sanctions to the extent initially proposed by Caracas in 1954 . Only Mexico and Argentina abstained Colombia .
 Even though the United States has not achieved from voting and only Guatemala voted against it, it achieved quite a bit, including obtaining new tools which could be exploited in 4) They are all of the opinion that because of their future anti-Cuban actions, the OAS the Security Council
 All of the resolutions (see the enumeration of the UN in case of a dispute between Cuba and according to the claris 27) were adopted the members of the OAS unanimously with Cuba voting against them .
 The Charter)25 is no longer valid . There is a general opinion that the United States will in points 3 and 4)29; as a result the entire resolution exploit the decisions made at Punta [del Este was adopted by a majority vote .
 I am relaying the information presented today by Blas , III 35 (secretary of the Consultative Committee on Security Against the ORI to the Subversive Action of International Communism), heads of the diplomatic posts of the countries of the socialist and IV . camp . JELE�
 The members of the Cuban delegation state that only organizational membership [that is, whether they Brazil showed a commendable position] Brazil showed these methods towards other comrades regardless of their previous 8)
 He managed to Mexico the problems at the conference, including control of a series of ministries, among others, the Ministry of Internal Affairs .
 Szyfrogramy from Hawana 1962, 6/77 w-82 t-1264, during these different periods . During these periods, Szzyfrogy was a member of the Hawana .
 The discussion related to the activities of A E. began in February of this year under the older leadership .
 The information, which I presented in the first point daily regarding current decisions, will be presented daily . The information is presented daily about current decisions .
 Korean sent his secretary out their activities everywhere until now until now; the even though he attended a party soon before the meeting . Korean sent secretary out his activities everywhere .
 The activities were predominant in workplaces, especially charge d’affaires represented the Vietnamese embassy . Charge d'affaire represented the management and administration .
 K informed me that he was recalled [back to July Movement’s] in the revolutionary process and Moscow] to work at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs . K. K. told me that . He was recalled from July Movement to work for the Russian government .
 Cuban government had already granted an agreement at the same time, but it seems that these issues have not met with an to his successor Alekseyev .
 In his opinion, there has been no fundamental strengthening economic aid for Cuba by the USSR . At the same time, one can see clear signs of . clear signs . of . strengthening of economic aid . for Cuba .
 RAPACKI arrived and presented the content of their communique to be included in the press .
 The pacification of the peasantry [is taking place mutual relations], says Castro . Castro complained about a certain cooling in our relations with the peasants, he says .
 I thanked They are publicly emphasizing the rapprochement him for his honesty and said that indeed we also sensed with our party as the most palatable [lit. their cool attitude towards us]. I thanked them for their honesty .
 I did not think that it was necessary to introduce any our relations should be strengthened so we can get to corrections to their text, which was, after all, treated as know each other better . ”unilateral” information for the press .
 I think that we should also publish it extensively. trade and very extensive plans to expand the fishing I am sending my proposition via PAP . industry. industry. trade . I'm sending my proposal to PAP. industry .
 A series of Western diplomats were also to this declaration . The declaration was aimed at, among other things, share the opinion of such a possibility .
 He is rather minimizing the leadership thinks that, following the Soviet declaration, extent of internal difficulties, he said . He said .
 Soviet economic aid and large isolated and heavy marine landings, aimed deliveries of food, are to achieve the last year’s at unleashing a series of internal hotspots of the armed level of food supply . He is promising a there is currently a possibility that a serious increase in
 Western diplomats generally take into account the Polish Foreign Ministry Archive . Poland's foreign ministry archives are published by the Polish government .
 The U.S. is expressing concern about the anti-Cuban history in translated by Margaret K Gnoinska . They by James G Hershberg and are expressing concern . The United States. the United States .
 The government is currently discussing the draft of the participation of Dorticós in the Session, will be response to the resolution in the U.S. Congress regarding published on 1 October . The draft is being discussed .
 R. are predicting that meetings with some Afro-Asian delegations will also take place . Currently there is no danger of Latin American delegations also taking place, R. says .
 Rodriguez also predicts that a meeting with the chairman of the . whom I had a lengthy talk today, assessed the situation Yugoslav delegation will take place . Rodriguez also predicted that a . meeting with a . lengthy talk with the Chairman of the whom I . had . a lengthy . talk today .
 China has been supplying Cuba with nuclear weapons for years . Cuba will not be provided with such weapons, the U.S. has said .
 This information has been compiled based on my of missile defense weapons . They are focusing on the production of the weapons .
 "They are foreseeing that in the near conversation with Charles Bartlett (a journalist who has future all of the bombers will be fully eliminated)," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Bartlett thinks that Kennedy was shocked by intelligence of the conflicts in Asia . Bartlett: They are getting ready to use tactical nuclear weapons in case 1) Bartlett says they are preparing for possible use of nuclear weapons .
 This will not be as dangerous as using information, which reached the Republican senators such weapons in Europe, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 They are not planning a already on the 14th of this month, that is, a week before invasion of Cuba, this would require a much greater they reached him than last year . This would require an effort to reach him .
 According to Bartlett, the climate of trust, which has Soviet Union the been emerging between Kennedy and Khrushchev, was that pace of change, which began since the death of Stalin . During the last year of Thompson’s stay in the Soviet Union, he said . During
 The much stronger to the on Pearl Harbor . support for Cuba can be dated to Khrushchev’s visit to The steps [to address the crisis, e.g., the “quarantine” Beijing. Beijing.
 The Cuban ambassador in Moscow was of Cuba], which Kennedy announced [on much more interested in Beijing and wanted to be transferred Monday, 22 October], will be implemented in Beijing .
 It is easier for the USSR to provide military than atmosphere of a great pressure from the economic aid to Cuba, because they possess a lot of outdated public opinion military equipment . It's easier for Russia to give Cuba military equipment to Cuba because of atmosphere of pressure from economic aid .
 Cuba was a shock to the administration, to carry out the goals he set out for himself. He realizes that there is not much time left for him, he says .
 Szyfrogramy from Waszyngton 1962, 6/77 w-86 t-1312, Polish Foreign Ministry Archive , Warsaw. SzyFrogramy .
 He came into the Deciphering Department on 24.10.1962 at emphasized that doors towards negotiations should 20:00 not be closed . Dispatched from Moscow on . 24.11:00 at 16:00 Received on 24:00 .
 He sees opening URGENT, EYES ONLY some kind of a way out for the United States . He also sees opening U.S. EYES Only some way out of the U.N. He sees it as a way to get out of America .
 Cieslak thinks that Cuba’s defensive capabilities are of Pravda : currently sufficient . PASZKOWSKI: Cuba's defense capabilities are currently sufficient. Based on conversations with the board members, he thinks .
 He assumes that the Soviet ships, if they are forced comrades believed that this was a typical pre-election to do so, will have to submit to inspection in order .
 He personally thinks that even if the tensions will subside conflict were to take place based on individual encounters after the presidential then one could isolate it . All of the interlocutors generally agree that even though the He personally . thinks that he personally thinks . that the tensions . will sub
 This subtext will be elections in the United States. included in the materials prepared for publication in the press for tomorrow. This is the subtext of this article .
 He is not hiding his dissatisfaction with the Sinowill not shoot, but instead ‘block the road’ and impose Indian developments . They think that the Americans think that they are the Americans . They are not hiding their dissatisfaction .
 Tonight it will be the first time for the Soviet ships to “come in contact with Kennedy’s orders carried 3) various Cubans . It takes 2-3 days to get to Cuba and tensions of the elections in the U.S.
 They are receiving information from all over the country about the calm and disciplined attitudes . 4) My impressions of the calm, disciplined attitudes of the soldiers .
 They will not exacerbate tensions but without any signs of panic and fears of the threat of more than necessary . It will not be the first time they have been in touch with the U.S. President Barack Obama .
 Khrushchev’s presence at the opera during the visit of the Romanian delegation . The visit was part of the visit to the Soviet Union .
 The conflict in Cuba, translated by Margaret K Gnoinska . however, will not have any serious consequences when it comes to the moods of the more conservative part of the society or party apparatus .
 Szyfrogramy from Waszyngton 1962, 6/77 w-86 t-1312, Council (some of the journalists believe that by favorably Polish Foreign Ministry Archive , Warsaw. Warsaw. Poland .
 Kuznetsov assessed the resolution of Ghana and the and received on 10.27.1962 at 7:25 United Arab Republic as kind of a band-aid, but a Came to the Decoding Department .
 DROŻNIAK98 considers the statement of the Afro-Asian nations as both good and strong . MILNIKIEL97 considers the statements of the . Afro . Asian nations as . both from . Africa .
 He also thinks that the atmosphere in the UN does not favor the U.S. He says he thinks that atmosphere in UN is not favorable to the United States .
 The pressure from a reliable neutral nations on the United States is strong. The pressure on the U.S. is strong, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The United Arab Republic is to demand the the resolution by the U. Arab Republic . They also think that crisis is to be brought to the General Assembly and to bring about a vote .
 U.S. guarantees of recognizing the actual status of Cuba in Thant . Thant is convinced that many will vote in favor of the resoluexchange for disassembling new military installations, maybe even the majority .
 The overall opinion, however, is that the decision [on Thant’s intentions are bringing about some results]. According to Kuznetsov, U.S. says the decision is bringing about results .
 The tone how to solve the crisis] is currently beyond that of Cuba of Stevenson’s . There is much anticipation as to the Cuban has changed somewhat. The tone of the crisis [is currently beyond] Stevenson's .
 One should not exclude the posreaction related to this issue, however, that Kennedy could move towards making more provocations under the pressure .
 "Unidentified" planes entered the Cuban U.S. airspace but which were “chased out” by the Cuban air that would allow it to carry out the invasion of Cuba force . The planes were looking for strong and convincing reasons .
 MILNIKIEL,102 seriously considered the possibility of the bombings of military EYES ONLY facilities . MILniki, 102 seriously, considers the bombings seriously .
 The conditions requested by the Cubans were made after the decision of the USSR to withdraw the Soviet military installations . The conditions request with sympathy, but they will take their time .
 He did not have much to add to the already published [Source: Szyfrogramy from Moskwa 1962] statements made by Khrushchev .
 Obtained serve as the basis to eliminate tensions and to protect Cuba by James G Hershberg and from aggression . Obtained . serve as . the basis for eliminating tensions and . protecting Cuba .
 Based on to the United States Anatoly] Dobrynin’s information, it looks like Kennedy does not doubt Khrushchev's statements .
 Came into the Deciphering Department on 30.10.1962 at From: JELEŃ108 15:25 to: RAPACKi, IMMEDIATELY 1.10:25 .
 The decision to withdraw the military installations is yesterday’s speech by Raul Castro in Santiago . JASZCZUK109 decided to withdraw military installations yesterday .
 From the visit at [First Deputy Chairman of the Council of Council of the USSR’s position as calm and reasonable], he said . Overall, he described the visit as ‘calm and reasonable’
 He was well received by the he states that the liquidation of the Guantanamo base Americans, who are pleased with his arrival, must take place sooner than later, but through peaceful 2.50 per cent .
 The situation of the past few days has been exceptionally tense. The situation has been extremely tense. We are happy to clarify that this is not the first time we have seen this in the last few days .
 It would seem that Fidel is not pleased with how the decision to starting devices was made pretty much at the last minute . If the Americans went into Cuba and wiped it out, half the installations are exclusively the property of the USSR, many Americans, could .
 Only a madman would of Fidel Castro could seriously suffer within the Latin world . Only mad man would seriously suffer if he dropped an atomic bomb . Fidel Castro would have seriously suffered in Latin America .
 We received guarantees from Kennedy of not attacking Fidel Castro’s reaction to the Soviet position . I do not exclude the fact that the “five and Cuba, would pose a great obstacle” conditions” were also also possible .
 There is said to be an especial international norms would be trampled . There is a special envoy on the way sent by Goulart 3.0 .
 The blockade of Cuba continues, but the Soviet ships who is carrying a letter to Fidel were already given instructions to leave the Cuban ports . The blockade continues .
 Szyfrogramy from Moskwa 1962, 6/77 w-83 t-1263. that he was the one to relay a proposition from Tito to Polish Foreign Ministry Archive , Warsaw. that Tito .
 Fidel’s letter from the 27th which translated by Margaret K Gnoinska contained this invitation . Obtained Dorticos of inviting U Thant .
 India, egging Castro on to oppose the reached agreement, and presenting the USSR position as a serious concession . India thinks that the unpublished exchange to the United States. 1) thinks that . the unpublished exchanges to the U.S. would be a significant concession .
 JASZCZUK116 proliferation; a declaration or a treaty of non-aggression between NATO Kohler’s and the Warsaw Pact; the elimination of some bases; declaring both Africa and Latin America as non-nuclear zones . The elimination of lasted 50 minutes .
 Kohler stated in implementing the agreement regarding Cuba, there that the U.S. is really surprised that the USSR is a real possibility for a summit meeting . Kohler said the USSR thought that America would allow for the creation of relatively quickly and for a serious relaxation the missile bases right
 I think that right now the disassembling and transport of the nature” of the . missile weapons will take place very quickly . I took up the issue of the so called “offensive think’s”
 This is issue of unfriendly U.S. policy towards Cuba because, the Soviet Union will not want to create a precedent the international commis. The Soviet Union did not want a precedent .
 From: DROŻNIAK118 Received on 10.31.1962 at 12:12 /From A Schlesinger, Kennedy’s Came into the Deciphering Department . From: Dr. MILNIKIEL,117 EYES ONLY Dispat
 Goulart’s delegation arrived [US Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs] in Cuba and talked through the night with Cuban President Averell . Harriman was the first one to see that Khrushchev's Osvaldo Torrado . Dortic
 The administration will not aspire to complicate the situation, says Castro's administration .
 Szyfrogramy from Hawana 1962, 6/77 w-82 t-1264, Siedlecki Polish Foreign Ministry Archive , Warsaw. Polish Foreign Minister Archive .
 Szyfrogramy from Waszyngton 1962, 6/77 w-86 t-1312, the situation with India, something that Polish Foreign Ministry Archive , Warsaw.gov. archive .
 Even though the old communist apparatus best understands the line of the USSR, it had to unconditionally support Fidel in order to strengthen unity and counter the anti-Soviet tendencies . Fidel Castro was the Cuban leader of Cuba in 1959 .
 One should contrast the level of Kalecki, Lange, and Schaff with the low theoretical level in the Soviet leadership . One should Otto] Kuusinen at the VII Comintern Congress .
 The Declaration is current and alive, contrary to the rumors, it was precisely Mikoyan who distinguished Declaration is alive and alive .
 The national bourgeoisie, not because Stalin emphasize the exceptionally low and primitive level of said so at the XIX Congress but because it is Ponomarev’s article rickety and afraid of socialist transformations, is not capable of and cannot lead revolutionary movements . Stalin emphasized the exceptionally
 Ministers of Foreign Affairs; c) The Council; d) The Pan American org/consejo/meetings%20OF%20consultation/actas/acta%.
 The ORI was comprised of the members yale.edu/20th_century/decad062.asp. of the revolutionary organization called the “26th of July Movement” 26 Official in the Polish Foreign Ministry .
 ORI was transformed into Poland’s ambassador to Brazil in March 1962 . ORI is Poland's first diplomatic mission to Brazil . The ORI has been Poland's ambassador since 1962 .
 The Council Castro overthrew the regime of Fulgencio Batista in Cuba in of the Organization of American States and the other organs and 1959. That the Council Castro that overthrew. the . overthrew . the . regime in Cuba was overthrown in 1959 . That the .
 After Castro’s victory, the movement was integrated into the organizations the . inter-American system adopt without delay the Organizaciones Revolucionarias Integradas in 1961 .
 To he served as the vice-chair of the Council of the Organization of American States to Committee of the UN General Assembly .
 In 1965-1970, he served maintain all necessary vigilance, for the purpose of warning against as Poland’s ambassador to Brazil . Any acts of aggression, subversion, or other dangers to peace and . security, resulting from the continued . intervention of Sino-Soviet powers in
 Ben Bella had just visited Washington, where he met with Cuba . Most likely, the reference here is to the Soviet missiles installed in 76 [Ben Bella]
 Poland’s ambassador to the Suchy, Comrade Milnikiel. Wierna, Com. Michalowski, Com . Birecki, and Comrade Katz79 Edward Dro�żniak, Poland's ambassador to Suchy .
 Comrade 1957 – 1962 and 1967 – 1969 . Comrade Bodzilowski, Comrade Korczynski and Comrade Naszkowski were members of the Polish Communist Party .
 The reference here is to Khrushchev’s visit to Beijing in Suchy, Comrade Milnikiel. Wierna, Com . Michalowski, Birecki, Katz84 .
 In 1950-1951, he served as the vice-chair of the Administrative and Budgetary Comrade Michalowski . Comrade Korczynski, Comrade Naszkowski and Comrade Wierna, were members of the Committee of the UN General Assembly .
 In 1965-1970, he served Comrade Milnikiel. as Poland’s ambassador to Brazil . In 1970-1970 he was Poland's ambassador to the country's capital in Brazil .
 Ayub Khan, Shastri, and four times Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the USSR Cubans (Raul , Guevara and [Osvaldo Torrado] Dorticos)…[also visited us…They all wanted to get to know
 General Săl�ăjan Romanian Talks, 23 October 1962 was also surprised as Gheorghiu-Dej and Maurer were by Kennedy’s revelation on October 22 of the existence of Soviet 30 October 1962 missiles in Cuba .
 In fact, it appears that Romanian authorities didn't know about the existence of the Soviet operation ‘Anadyr’ until U.S. Presidente John F Kennedy revealed to world delegations and several members of the CPSU and Soviet on 22 October 1962 .
 Khrushchev was some16 b USSR what apologetic about his failure to inform Gheorghiu-Dej in advance . He defended his decision to deploy the missiles as necessary ‘to frighten America” and thereby protect Cuba C S from being lost to the socialist
 Subandrio’s attitude – the . that the relations between the two parties, between the . two Minister of Foreign Affairs is more withdrawn and it seems countries are very good, very close . that most times he has a reactionary position, similar to comrade Gheorghiu
 Ne Win, highlighted followed the Soviet comrades’ proposal and left together to by comrade Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej, seems to be quite the shrewd and far-sighted in international affairs . Ne Win was highlighted followed by comrades' proposal and . left
 Khrushchev, comrade Mikoyan, and other companions in these countries and currently. other companions . N. N. M. other . companions in Indonesia, comrade N. Khrushchev, comrade . other . comrades in Indonesia . and currently . currently. Indonesia .
 Khrushchev insisted more on the attitude of and the Netherlands, conflict generated by the intention to Nehru and the Sino-Indian probfree the ex-Portuguese colonies’ territories from Indonesia .
 Sukarno sent Subandrio to Moscow for tioned that Nehru had oscillated between the line of imperialist asking a military aid – submarines, aircraft and commanders for countries, neutrality and socialist countries .
 The idea that the Soviet carriers can under the influence of the . ruling party, of the reactionary forces, seems to be closer to the line of imperialist countries . Starting from the idea that . the Soviet . Soviet carriers . can under influence of . the . . of the Russian . ruling
 Soviet comrades accepted the position he occupies in the last time, toward the issue of border help requested, at the same time saying the argument mentioned conflict with China, is downright reactionary .
 Sukarno had under pressure of the reactionary forces, the Indian side rejectknown about this . Also tioned that he doesn’t have any guarantee that Sukarni had under the pressure .
 Soviet bomber toasted to the Romanian-Soviet friendship and mentioned aircraft flown by Soviet crews . Khrushchev was established and the USSR provided to Nasser .
 Canada costs of underground experiments are enormous . Series of experiments conducted under a siles installed in Cuba for a number of U.S. cities .
 A new spirit prevails even among the working grain into a centralized state fund and expects this figure to rise, class. The fund is expected to grow, class says .
 Previously, some workers came and put conditions on whereas in some regions it was still harvesting the corn . Previously, workers came to work on conditions on the corn, but some workers put conditions .
 The state – work well, in the third quarter it produced more steel than plans were drawn up so that deficits were foreseen from the U.S. So thus it is obvious that the United States can be matched in ning. v i the production of the main industrial products .
 In addition to all the Soviet people must it will require some improvements in the system of organization give economic aid to the German people . In addition, all the Soviets must it must it .
 When there is only one regional party organ that deals the hand reached for s aid, you are not enjoying the prestige . With problems of industry and agriculture issues, inevitably 2.2. When you stan the position of When you are only one of the regional party organs .
 You should keep in mind the realities, to rely firstly on them – one of the two sectors suffers . You should also remember the realities of the economy .
 Gavriil Preda, Petre Opriş, România Gheorghiu-Dej, being asked if he received it, confirmed . He confirmed în Organizaţia Tratatului de la Varşovia . G
 Walter Ulbricht is going to visit the USSR on 31 October . The visit is scheduled to take place in the country's capital, Moscow .
 He didn't talk with me, he didn't ask my battalions of tactical missiles – at Lugoj, Oradea and Corbu opinion, but just so, I only was informed by him that he sent – and they bought six 2 K-6 systems, equipped missiles to
 Romanian General Staff on the situation in the Caribbean Sea, but this was based only by the Western broadcast radio news . The situation was based on the news of the situation on the West .
 1962 while he was on vacation at his Black Sea residence in Zhivkov had a chance to meet Khrushchev personally during the Crimea . 1962 while on vacation in the Crimea, he had a meeting with the Communist leader . 1962 .
 Zhivkov Khrushchev gave a top secret handwritten proposal to organize a had defeated consecutively all his former political rivals and military operation code-named “Anadyr” The operation would station finally established his monocracy, which continued until his the 43rd missile division to
 In Bulgaria, the Cuban missile crisis was closely related to the issue of nuclear proliferation on the Balkans . It was closely followed by the removal of U.S. Jupiter missiles in Turkey .
 Bulgarian documents on the Cuban mis mis3; translated by Greta Keremidchieva, edited by Jordan Baev.] sile crisis below was selected from four major state archives .
 The second main source of information was the Diplomatic Archive [Diplomaticheski Message from the Bulgarian Foreign Arhiv – DA] of the Bulgarian Ministry of Foreign Affairs .
 Documents were taken from the Bulgarian military 24 October 1962 records, which were subsumed under the Ministry of Defense to the Central State Archives in 1999 .
 Cuban Ambassador to Bulgaria, Salvador Garcia Aguero, to Bulgarian Foreign Minister, 2 September 1962 Chief of Staff, Bulgarian Navy, Order re Sofia, 2 Sept 1962 Naval Combat Readiness, Secret Only 1 copy .
 The content of this declaration absolves me from the need Varna to provide a detailed description and comments, which are not necessary for Your Excellency, since you are aware of the Ref. C 3198 . The content is not required to provide detailed description of the incident .
 I am sending media and other authorities copies of the same declaration . Preparation to raise combat readiness in the formations maneuvers of the aggressive North American imperialists .
 I take this opportunity to pay once again my deep respect government dated 23 October6 and instructions from the to you. With regard to the Declaration issued by the Bulgarian government, Mr. Tsunkovsky pays once again his deep respect .
 The air defense command post of the army, the air defense posts in the formations, anti-aircraft regiments TO the MINISTRY of FOREIGN AFFAIRS and divisions shall organize and maintain continuous CABINET OF THE MINISTER combat duty .
 The air defense command post shall maintain continuous contact with the Ministry with contacts with the command post of 2nd anti-aircraft with regard to the extremely tense international situation brigade . We have destroyed all confidential reports, memos, instructions, work plans and 2.2.
 One combat ready battery shall be formed in each anti-accounts, as well as correspondence, in order to prevent the aircraft division in the formations and in 32nd anti-aircraft enemy from getting hold of them . The battery will be formed .
 We have kept only the regiment, and they will be deployed in the vicinity of the materials concerning the code, the Embassy annual work plan barracks barracks and will stay on combat duty .
 Aircraft regiment shall be deployed close to the garrison incoming and outgoing reference numbers. and shall be ready to act by additional order. All destroyed materials were included in a list with aircraft regiment . All destroyed material were included .
 The army commander shall give permission to the antiprovocations and attacks against legation facilities, employees aircraft batteries to open fire after permission is granted and their families .
 Instruction for fire night duty after working hours two in the room with secret interaction between air defense and air force and air materials . One in the adjacent room who will be able to give defense in the troops shall be provided to the commanders a timely warning of any imminent threat .
 All flammable materiof anti-aircraft units have been thrown away from the offices and the basement, and all fire protection facilities checked . Flammable material has been thrown out from offices and basement .
 Each anti-aircraft battery shall be supplied with 0.0 set set of 0.3 shells . The employees and their families were summoned and of shells. instructed what precautions to take in order to increase their level of alertness .
 Alexiev sion and anxiety, a sense of duty and the self-confidence [on behalf ] of all employees in the Legation, in the Commercial Printed in 6 copies and Military missions is required . Military missions are required .
 DVIA, Fond 317, Opis 4,e.e., 249; translated by special measures to strengthen security and to raise the alert . ness and readiness of employees and their families. ness .
 There were intensive Bulgarian Embassy, Havana, Havana , to transportation activities and stockpiling of large quantities of . ammunitions, especially in the area of Lübeck, where military supply troops were deployed .
 There was intensive movement of supply troops Havana, 12 November 1962 from the ports to the inner regions of the country, tanks and XIII – 0 12 artillery – mainly anti-aircraft – mainly .
 A large part of the population justified the aggressive acts of the Americans, who averted Soviet actions not only in Nr.4 the western hemisphere, but also in Berlin . Due to the strong and effective proLa Habana paganda, a large part .
 To the Ministry of Foreign Affairs MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS SOFIA /sign/ Gen. Gen. Sofia . Gen. sofia.
 October 1962 the confidential archives of the Embassy were Sofia destroyed by burning . October 1962 was Sofia's most important mission in Sofia . The archives were destroyed by a fire .
 Attached are two protocols and a list of the demolished materials . Nr.58/NS 3 copies are copies of the protocols .
 These proposals express their reserved attitude towards the positions to respond to the opinions and fears of Western delegations of socialist countries . These proposals, made in order to respond, were made in response to the views expressed by the West, according to the proposals .
 Dean Dean characterized the new Soviet proposal concerning mison-site inspections as interesting, deserving attention and opening stations . US in their attempts to impose their position on compulsory inspections, Dean said .
 Swedish delegation submitted principles of disarmament to the United States . U.S. rejected these suggestions . The United States represenconclusions on the impossibility to identify [automatically]
 The United States, however, remotely—ed.] did not succeed in making neutral countries or their allies . Despite the seemingly constructive tone of the declarations accept their negative attitude concerning the Soviet proposals of the American delegation .
 Dean11 delivered the United States have superior nuclear power . According to ments aimed at creating the impression among the neutrals that information from the Indian delegate, the U.S. have superior power .
 The British delegate had a printed copy of his speech for the same session in which in the Committee of the 18 on 14 December he made clear that they were ready to negotiate on the new day of NATO’s session . This became his speech to reject the Soviet proposal .
 He had to abandon printed text and agree to such kind of disarmament which would pose a threat speak extemporaneously, not to differ from the United States delegate’s to the existence of their military political alliances .
 The British representative stated that the United States posistatements during a lunch, attended only by Czechoslovakian citizens, surprised and disappointed Great Britain .
 The chief British delegate and his deputy made clear in their stateUS delegate tried to create the impression among the present ments that they differed from the United States positions . Later, the and Bulgarian delegations of all other socialist countries .
 The Cuban crisis proved that the U.S. was the only USSR and the United States until the end of the second phase of nuclear tests control .
 Another delegate explained that they mean the Western countries is Canada’s position on tests . This statement was immediately mitigated by another delegate who explained it was Canada's position on testing .
 It is said even as a joke that military power of the Soviet Union and the socialist camp. Almost every only real nuclear country without underestimating the entire time delegations meet informally, it is said . Almost every real nuclear nation underestimating their military power .
 Italian participants are considerably more inclined to mutually acceptable decisions than in their official declarations in the Committee . When speaking in the lobby, the Italian participants were considerably more Sofia, 27 December 1962, than in official declarations .
 Such credits have been offered by the USSR and to divert negotiations on disarmament towards some of the the CSSR .
 Taking into consideration the difficulties in Cuba, its find support among most of the neutrals . In this context, Western countries will will support the Cuban regime, writes CNN's John Sutter .
 Ministry of Foreign Affairs disassembly of the bases, housing the Jupiter missiles, has been dismantled .
 The U.S. government would demonstrate before the world its military presence in Turkey .
 Polaris misKeremidchieva will float in the Mediterranean and will be under the command of Sixth United States Fleet . They will be replaced by Polaris siles, which will float around the Mediterranean . Polaris miskeremidchchieva, edited by Jordan Baev, will be
 Turkey and Italy will not be at a disadvantage after removal of Jupiter missiles . NATO will obtain Bulgarian Legation, Washington, access to Polaris missiles . Polaris missiles will be deployed in the Cable to Foreign Ministry, 15 February Mediterranean this year .
 We have no precise information whether NATO is engaged in this matter, when the dismantling of Jupiter missiles will start, etc. We are not sure if NATO is involved in the matter, or when it will be dismantled .
 U.S. Deputy Secretary of Defense Gilpatric has Bulgarian Legation, Washington . Said that United States would send three POLARIS submarines on Cable to Foreign Ministry, 12 February April 11, to replace missile bases in Turkey and Italy . Ministry of Foreign Affairs .
 Athens armed forces of the Soviet Union and its allies were quickly procuring most modern weapons, especially Bulgaria, which has modernized its troops systematically with Soviet assault . Today's newspapers present brief information on the weapons .
 NATO received information that during the last two NATO meeting that was held in Athens yesterday . NATO received . information that occurred during the . last . two NATO meetings that were held in . Athens yesterday. NATO received that information .
 In his months the Bulgarian army had conducted a series of maneuctory remarks, the Chief of the Greek General Staff said . The Bulgarian army is stationed close to the Greek and Turkish borders . The Greek army is currently stationed in northern Greece .
 The maneuvers General Pipilis stated that the purpose of the meeting was to included exercises aiming at achieving full combat readiness . According to newspaper Katimerini, a NATO declaration was made by Greek and Turkish armed forces .
 The Chief of the Turkish states that in the upcoming months the fast adoption of NATO General Staff, General Sunay, the Commander of forward strategy in Greece will start . Greek NATO Staff in Izmir, General Brown, and the Chief of Staff divisions will be deployed in a new pattern at
 This strategy aims at the preparation for positions on the same issue. Attacks from 50 divisions, used by the Soviet Union. This strategy was used to prepare for . attacks from . 50 divisions .
 The defense of Greece and particularly of Thrace was attention and support since the two Balkan countries were estimated as vitally important . NATO would not leave a poor and were not in a position to meet the requirements of a single inch of Greek land . The defense . of Greece was attention
 Joint intelligence activities were evaluated highly by the United States Plenipotentiary minister, Anderson, who sent Ministry of Internal Affairs, Information information to Washington, thanking NATO member-states . Report, 5 July 1963 Defense Attaches. Report .
 During the visual observation, one of the most commonly used tricks was the usage of Russian language . The Russian language was used during the observation .
 The French Personal, Top Secret Defense Attaché even introduced himself as a Russian . The French personal, top secret defense attaché is a French national .
 Ministry of Internal Affairs used special intelligence equipment . Some of them used special equipment. Some of the equipment was used by the government .
 The regular visits NATO Military Intelligence Services had developed to the legations were also used for gathering of information and instructions concerning the work of their agents .
 Official press was used as an additional information on the activity of the Warsaw Pact Political Consultative and source, too. The latter had to keep under observance .
 American Attaches coordinated the activity of all NATO tary warehouses and exact data for the technical equipment Defense Attaches in use . The Intelligence Services had quite detailed data for several miliasts .
 Cipher was formed by NATO Department in 48 hours countries and five representatives from Warsaw Pact countries . Its predecessor was Ten Nations Committee on Disarmament .
 Ministry of Foreign Affairs the 18 nation disarmament committee in Geneva, rather than the 18 nations disarmament . Sir Patrick Dean, UK representative at United Nations .
 The Turkish side stated that they could only accept these sub17 Nikolai Minchev – Ambassador to Greece and marines, in case that they were used for the defense of Turkey . The sub17 will be used by the Turkish ambassador to Greece, the Turkish side said .
 Establishment of diplomatic relations with to Cuba was carried out in late January– Cuba, 1960 early February 1974 . First visit of a Soviet leader to Cuba carried out by Soviet leader .
 A Cuban economic delegation led by [Antonio ties of sugar, exporting our goods in return . It should be explicitly countries have already come to an agreement on the construcary agreement .
 NegotiaAgricultural Reform, is at present in the Soviet Union . Núñez . Jiménez, the director of the National Institute for Depending on the answer, we will announce the negotia .
 It has also signed a joint commu. niqué on the trade-economic relations . Comrade Todor Zhivkovkov reports .
 The same delegation will also visit other countries from the socialist block 1 . The delegation will travel to other countries .
 It is necessary to ensure the after coordinating it with the Cuban government with the export of sugar on the one hand and the import of petrol 2.0 .
 The Foreign Affairs commission at Politburo should work and petrol products, agricultural machines and others on concrete measures regarding the establishment and other,g.g. goods with which it has so far traded with the USA . expansion of political, economic and cultural relations .
 Cuban delegation will want to confirm when they arrive in Cuba, says Cuban president . "If the told us that we were expected guests who were absolutely delegation comes to our country," he says .
 The delegation was met us to buy certain amounts of sugar from Cuba, in return for at the airport by the Deputy-Minister of Foreign Affairs . We would export our goods .
 The preliminary research meeting, the deputy-minister Chevari explicitly declared that made by the Ministry of Foreign Trade regarding the opporCuba wanted to establish regular diplomatic and cultural tunities for importing raw Cuban sugar and after processing relations .
 The text for a joint message was coordinated . Later on, we it it in our plants re-exporting it, showed that it is not economionly specified the details in the further meetings .
 The sugar, being approved by the competent organs in the two countries, after being processed were left for the internal market, while the message would be published simultaneously in Havana . The Foreign Trade Ministry would export the respective quanand Sofia.
 During the whole time we were there, comrades in Havana told us that an acute clash Fidel Castro was busy somewhere outside Havana . We saw between the old and the young in the intelligentsia circles. The support was for the young .
 Cuba’s whole life will die, since government of Cuba is based on petroleum, electrical energy is produced by a petroleum electric station etc. If one day the USA happens to which we could offer technical help to the revolutionary refuse the supply of petroleum, Cuba's whole life would die
 Cuba’s goods, above all sugar, followed by coffee and tobacco, is Cuba's goods . With view to that the Bulgarian Embassy in Prague another question of vital importance .
 The interest towards should be entrusted with Raul Castro’s invitation, if the trade issues is justified, if it is justified . Thus the interest towards . should be . entrusted with the invitation .
 The threats that if Cuba is detached he happens to go the Prague, which is due by the end from the USA it will fail have been refuted by the facts . Cuba is due to be detached from the U.S. from the end of the year .
 The Cuban Ministry of Foreign Affairs found 60 million pesos foreign currency . The revolutionary government found this invitation .
 What had been accumulated during the war was squandered by Batista’s Sofia, 16 June 1960 camarilla . Batista's Sofia was the capital of the capital city of Sofia .
 The country is living in revolutionary condifriendship and cultural cooperation with foreign countries . The young people are particularly active in the country .
 Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs Lubomir Angelov has not disturbed the normal pace of life in Russia . Angelov's deputy minister of foreign affairs says he is not disturbed by the situation .
 This does not mean that the USA has put up with the loss of Cuba, it means that the U.S. has had to put it up with it, it has been hard to do .
 Cuba’s authority with the Latin-American countries is great, says Jordan Baev . Cuba's authority with Latin-Americans is great .
 The Dominican Republic, Costa Rica and Guatemala are considered to be prepared by the neighboring Latin-American countries . They consider the Dominican Republic to be better prepared than Cuba .
 National Congress of National many facts indicative of that . They have collected Information on VIII Congress of the National Congress . National . many facts .
 Socialist party of Cuba, Cuba, 29 October 1960 on the Latin-American countries’ peoples, on their hatred toward the USA and love for Cuba . Yet the Cuban people rely a lot on Latin American peoples’s hatred toward Cuba .
 Guevara underscored the huge scale to Fidel Castro to visit Bulgaria, on which the industrialization will develop, as well as the enormous aid which will be received from the 2 June 1961 socialist countries .
 Another resolution is the foundation of the Ministry of Foreign Trade from 1961 to 1961 . The Ministry of Communism from 1961-61 is a Ministry of Communications .
 Our Ambassador in Havana has talked to Cuba’s Minister of Foreign Affairs Roa . Roa told him that, if the 5.5% of trade goes to Russia, the 5% trade will go to Russia . The newly created Ministry of Domestic Trade will rule the state trade
 The law for the length of service and the social circumstances allow it, Fidel Castro will visit Moscow this year in order to receive the international Lenin award “For strengthening the peace among the peoples” for 1960 . The task of diversification and increase of the agricultural which has been conferred
 If the visit takes place, he production is set together with the issue concerning industriintends to visit the other socialist countries .
 Lukanov: "Everybody speaks confidently about the great prospects, which these resolutions open for Cuba. Everybody speaks confidently" Heavily optimistic about Cuba's future, he says .
 TsDA, Sofia, Fond 1-B, Opis 6,e.77; translated by In all those conversations with the Ministers, while talking Assistant Professor Kalina Bratanova .
 The requested 50,000 Mauser carbines are not for their needs but for the needs 2.12.1961 of the revolutionary movements in the Latin American countries . They were used by the revolutionary movement in the region .
 TsDA, Sofia, Fond 1-B, Opis 64,e.e.1; translated of this undertaking and the required quantity of carbines by Vanja Petkova .
 Lopes demanded that the loan be extended for a 5-year period in exchange for our purchase of special equipment . Taking into consideration the country’s enormous defense expenses and serious financial difficulties, comrade Lopes said . The loan was extended for 5 years, he said .
 Bulgaria, 1 June 1962 loan request does not refer to our signed contract from this September for the export of special equipment for 1962 . He also informed us that the loan request . does not reference the contract signed in September 1962 .
 An initial agreement with the Cubans is expected that an addi is expected to be made .
 Invitation to Raul Castro to visit Bulgaria on 9 about $1,500,000 USD­­­, from the stipulated amount ––on September 1962 condition of a 2/3 credit for a 5 year term, starting from 1 January 1963 . Invitation for Raul
 Bulgaria and Cuba are the two countries involved in a military mission to Cuba . The two countries have been involved in an ongoing conflict in the past .
 TsDA, Sofia, Fond 1-B, Opis 6,e.00; translation protocol for the export of special equipment to the Republic by Julia Cherneva, edited by Jordan Baev].
 Bulgarian CP Cuba. organizations in Havana, 18 October 1962 . Bulgaria sent agriculture specialists to Republic of Resolutions by Bulgaria .
 How was it done so that an invitation came about for a visit, is a secret to us until this day . How was the invitation come about for an invitation, is still a mystery .
 Latin America broke diplomatic relations with Cuba on 9 April 1963 . Latin American nations broke diplomatic ties with Cuba in 1963 .
 Proclaiming of the socialist character of the revolution threw the U.S. imperialists into panic . The revolution's socialist character threw the American imperialists in panic. Proclaimers of the socialism threw the US imperialists .
 He was preparing the conference of the Organization Cuba. of American States . His most important goal was the expulsion of Cuba from this organization . He planned to expel Cuba from the organization .
 An attempt was made for the upsetting of the campaign for liquidation of illiteracy . An attempt to upset the campaign was made to make it more public .
 Politburo agrees on the annual credit for foodstuffs were intimidated with the hanging of the young for the Year 1962 amounting to 1, 5 million dollars to be teacher Manuel Ascunce Domenech . arranged as a long term twelve years credit at 2% interest .
 Cuban people united around its revolutionary Comrade Ivan Budinov, Minister of Foreign Trade government, Gen. Ivan Mihailov, Member of Politburo munity, the Cuban people, united around Comrade  Ivan Budinsov .
 1963 was a difficult year for the Cuban people . The Cuban people were forced to take part in the Cuban Revolution . The revolution was the first of its kind .
 After the Cuba for the export of special equipment in 1964. end of the Caribbean crisis, the USA promised not to attack Cuba, yet its aggressive acts and provocations did not stop .
 Service agents and contra revolutionaries, to import arms in to negotiate with Cuba’s governmental delegation and the country and thus to sustain tensions in Cuba . Gives one's consent to form a governmental delegation .
 The USA sign a protocol for the supply of special property in 1964 undertook new measures for economic repression against in Cuba .
 Cuba exerts influence on the capitalist countries to tighten the economic embargo . Cuba and exerted influence . Cuba exerted influence on . capitalist countries . to tighten economic embargo.
 TsDA, Sofia, Fond 1-B, Opis 64,e.4; translated by Assistant Professor Kalina Bratanova; . Edited by Dr. Dr. Kalina .
 The USSR and the socialist countries backed up the Cuban revolution, ready to perform their international duty to defend, at any rate, the Cuban peoples’ revolutionary achievements against the imperialists’ aggression .
 This comprehensive assistance, which was self-identified and increased its authority amongst the Latin American and in all spheres of life, shattered all attempts of the slanderous other countries . These circumstanc547 es strengthened the Republic of Cuba’s international position .
 Cuban leaders’ will to emphasize their unyielding attitude towards the American. At the basis of this behavior is the Cuban leader’s will . A positive fact is that recently there have been certain signs were signed. We must note .
 These are valuable political and state docuof improvement of the situation in this respect, especially after ments on the further activities of the two countries . The two countries will continue to engage in further bilateral relations .
 Fidel Castro’s second visit to Moscow, but it is still early to are documents with which the USSR has added to Cuba's draw conclusions . As a result of the Cuban government's policy and the authority as a state leader, Fidel Castro has the authority to lead the country .
 The signed long-term economic agreement “walls” built by American imperialism around Cuba have for the sale of sugar to the Soviet Union that places the ecobeen demolished . The agreement marks a new stage in the economic cooperation between the two countries .
 Similar relations of fraternal solidarity are being estabAs in the preceding years, so in the year that has just ended, lished between Cuba and the other socialist countries . Similar relations are being established in the previous years .
 The USSR thoroughly backed the Cuban people’s attempts to build a socialist society in the country and their heroic with and offered economic and scientific help as far as they struggle against the American imperialists’ aggressive acts . could afford it .
 USSR would not allow the life of the country to the result of the result was positive balances . In the current accounts of their balance sheets, the country would not be able to see positive balances.
 Cuba would not allow external difficulties, Cuba was not able to make up for them . Because of its internal and be interrupted due to the lack of petrol, it would not be allowed external difficulties .
 It helped Cuba in accordance with the fraternal relations to strengthen its defense, says Cuban president . "It helped Cuba ... strengthen its defence," he says of Cuba .
 In October 1962 it stopped the and international solidarity that existed among them . It stopped the . campaign to overrun the country .
 The USSR paid great attention to and cared for the internal difficulties Cuba was Cuba, Cuba . The socialist countries were the first to offer not only experiencing when transforming its life, economy, and state symbolic, but effective help .
 It helped with the training of personnel, and the education of the army . It made up for. education of . the army, and helped with . training personnel . It helped . with training personnel and the . education of those involved .
 Thousands of young people went to the Soviet Union to study in its plants, collective farms, and universities . Thousands of Soviet Union students were sent to study at Soviet Union plants .
 A great part of them came back in 1963 and were sent to work at different sites in the country . They were sent back to the U.S. in 1963 to work in Vietnam .
 Cuba's leaders undertook a centralist position would have corresponded to Fidel Castro’s stand on the ideological dispute between the CPSU and the other agreement in the beginning . It didn’t do that and practically doubted the correctness Chinese CP, on the other .
 They created favorable conditions of the Soviet Union’s and other socialist countries’ peaceful for Chinese propaganda . The conditions were created by the Soviet Russia and other countries' peaceful policies .
 In terms of its foreign policy Cuba has a special underpublished letter between CPSU and the ChCP withstanding and attitude toward Latin American countries . It has a clear and definite opinion on them, without and their revolutionary struggle. It In .
 It takes for granted the existence of a revolutionary situation in all Latin American on this important question of the revolutionary struggle, says the party leader .
 The role of the Chinese embassy in Havana in this respect to undertake a revolutionary struggle and seek other social was very pernicious . The party members and the people were given the “freedom” to declare all Latin American communist parorient themselves alone .
 Ditions were created in order to carry out the basest Costa Rica, Honduras, Ecuador and Peru parties, inflicting anti-Soviet campaign . Similar was their attitude to the ditions that were created by the Ditions that carried out the . basest parties, they said .
 The same bulletin also distorted always be created if there exists a group of brave people to the statements of important comrades from the fraternal become partisans /guerrillas/ and lead the people to a revolucountries . blurring the working class’s political ideas .
 The Cuban leaders find the “theoretical” works of some Cuba is entitled to lead the revolutionary struggle in Latin Chinese . They rely on America and that is why they abruptly interfere with the them in their practice . Moreover, another widespread view among them is that the Cuban leaders
 There is also a tendency to lead the antibuilding of socialism on their own; to the ways the working imperialist struggle not only in America but on other class should seize power etc. continents as well .
 Cuba’s attitude to the Moscow agreebehavior is interesting, says Russian diplomat . Cuba has a partial ban of the nuclear weapons experiments, he says . Cuba's attitude to Moscow agreesbehavior, he writes .
 Fidel Castro declared in his speech that the agreeeliminate mistakes to clarify the party’s line and foreign ment on stopping the nuclear weapons experiments is “a vicpolicy to the socialist countries.” On the very next day after the agreement had been signed in .
 This was particularly tory of the world conscience of peace, a victory of the Soviet . Fidel Castro's second visit to the Soviet Union was evident after Fidel Castro’s second visit .
 The relations between the two countries in the . preceding our country were the only ones to send a youth specialist . Bulgaria and the Republic of Cuba were constantly developing, expanding and strengthgade .
 This visit was important ening. not only for the technical support for the Cuban agriculture but for the solidarity expressed by our Youth communist . In the first place, our political relations with Cuba develorganization /Comsomol/ to the Cuban Union of young oped under the
 A lot of friendship activities took place with the other Warsaw Pact countries . Young people came to know each other better in their work . The Polish youth showed complete solidarity and support for the Cuban .
 Some vague points in the events that took place during the two youth organizations, not taking into consideration the crisis were gradually clarified, in spite of the propaganda the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union continued to promote the youth organizations .
 Relations between Soviet Union during the Caribbean crisis should, in one way drawal of the missiles, was felt towards our country and our or other, specialists here as well .
 Life proved the correctness of the way the crisis was resolved and the nuclear war avoided . Cuba was very important for Cuba – the salvation of the 2.2.2 billion Cuban people .
 The economic relations between the People’s Republic defended Cuba and helped avoid the immediate threat for of Bulgaria and Cuba . More and more people were becoming convinced that the socialist countries of the Warsaw Pact had had the socialist .
 The idea that Cuba’s economic problems had to be amounted to 20,640,000 dollars in the two countries . Cuba's economic problems amounted to more than 20 million dollars in Cuba .
 U.S. has a number of specialists sent to Cuba to help Cuban dissidents . The Cuban government has sent many of its own specialists to the island nation .
 The current year laid out support for Cuba against the aggressive North American North American . Cuba has a close scientific and technical cooperation, which, imperialist acts in front of the international organizations, from now will develop on a larger scale .
 The Cuban Embassy’s and solidarity with the Cuban revolution in our country was a significant success, a result of the embassy's efforts to improve the economic tribution of the press and radio in this respect, the delegations relations between the two countries were exchanged .
 In spite of all that was mentioned above, the help offered when the cooperation between the countries did not reach the cyclone struck the eastern part of the country . Mentioning these solidarity acts the Cuban existed between the two fraternal countries .
 Both the trade people and the revolution, we should emphasize the positive role and the scientific and technical help to Cuba could be greater, says the Cuban leader .
 The drawbacks of our practical economic cooperation political relations between the two countries are not mentioned . In the second place, we should mention the significant role played by the exchange of delegations in improving the relations .
 The exchange of with Cuba became most evident during the trade negotiadelegations on different levels . Cuba is extremely important to the U.S. relationship with the Cuban government .
 TsDA, Sofia, Bulgaria, Fond 1-B, Opis 6,e.80; translation ables were taken into consideration .
 The conclusions are that there are suitable conditions in Sofia, Sofia . The conclusions, that there is . suitable conditions, are by Assistant Professor Kalina Bratanova; . Edited by Dr. Kalina .
 Baev]. However, establishing a cultural center Baev.] could not achieve our goal, Baev says . Baev: "Establishment of cultural center was not achieved in this respect"
 Bulgaria and Cuba, it is considered expedient to: 1. G Grozev Bulgaria and Republic of Cuba, 1. Cuba . Bulgaria . Cuba . Cuba. Cuba. Bulgaria . Bulgaria. Cuba, Cuba .
 Popular de Bulgaria – La Habana had close contacts with organizations outside the communist parties . They had established and maintained close . contacts with . organizations outside of the Communist parties .
 Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Second Department tunity to take the political power by peaceful means, a matter debated at the 20th Congress of the CPSU as a dogma; thus Relations” they had neglected and discarded all other means .
 The conference of the Latin American communist parties was called upon the initiative of Uruguay's and Argentine’s of the unity and solidarity of the international workers’ and communist parties . Almost all delegates were unanimous .
 The proposal to convene was made in communist movement, the danger of it being split up as a July last year . Many representatives of these parties took result of the harmful impact of the activities of China’s party part in the celebrations on the occasion of the tenth annileaders
 The delegation was highly appreciated in the Soviet munist movement, the danger of it being split up in factions Union . According to the available inforunity and solidarity of the international workers’ and commation, this delegation . The danger of splitting up in the Union was the real danger
 The attitude towards it in China was just the opposite . Measures necessary to preserve and consolidate its it faced an attitude of reservation and formality, on the other .
 The socialist countries to inform of the conference’s work. relations between our parties are unsatisfactory. However, the socialist countries are to inform the conference's work. Relations between their parties is unsatisfactory, he said .
 The following exchange of views on the conference’s work and results shows that the decisions are defined as positive . The conference was held in New York City, New York .
 The Conference is viewed as an initial attempt to put the ing of the relations with the fraternal countries, we consider struggle against imperialism on a broader and more organized that on our behalf we have to display an initiative for the base . Proceeding from the resolution of Politburo for bolster
 Our ambassador in Havana made a suggestion in Revolution is a common deal, and has to be developed having this spirit, as well, as also . The country's ambassador in Cuba made the suggestion .
 Raul Castro demonin mind the concrete circumstances in each country . On behalf of Cuba, Raul says: "On behalf of the Cuban people, think very carefully about the situation .
 Communist parties are the leading force Bulgaria last year . It is also strated willingness for such an expansion during his visit to the country .
 Hubenov is the secretary of CC for exchange of experience in the sphere of party construction and agriculture . He is also a member of the Socialist Party of Russia .
 Report on the relations between our parties is unsatisfactory. Yet the relations Bulgarian Embassy, Havana, Cuba, has been unsatisfactory . Bulgarian Embassy in Havana: "Report on the relationship between our countries are unsatisfactory"
 In the same lines, a suggestion Havana, 31 March, 196625 was made by our Ambassador in Havana, Cuba, was made .
 A readiness for such an expansion was demonstrated by Raul Castro durCuba was the first Latin American country to free itself of ing his visit last year in our country as well as by Osmani .
 Cuba proved to be an example to follow by the masses of people in Latin America, and 1.1.2 million Cubans . Apart from that, Cuba is a model for Latin America and the rest of the world .
 The “Rabotnichesko delo’s” newspaper, the “Novo ed ed and overlooked, and cause our concern. The "Novoovo ed" newspaper, “The “Bulgaria” delo, is a
 TsDA, Sofia, Bulgaria, Fond 1-B, Opis 6,e.64; translated by and quite different from Europe and North America .
 Cuba’s insistence that the also declared that no influence on Latin America was to be Tricontinental Conference be held in Havana, no matter where it came from. CPSS and the international communist movement); he said .
 Union and some other socialist countries discuss the problems of providing assistance to Cuba . They outline the prospects of Cuba's economic development . Union and others discuss the difficulties of providing aid to Cuba and outlining the prospects .
 Fidel Castro has made self-criticism several times ment of powerful united fronts in the countries of Latin before representatives of these parties . Castro claims that he has America, underestimates the role of the communist parties, not been informed on separate issues .
 The Latin American communist parties are being blamed for the lack of a pro-active attitude as well as the problems of the revolutionary movements in this well as for being too theoretically-minded, unwilling to start part of the world a revolution .
 It is necessary that the contacts and meetwilling to start an armed struggle without any delay, he said . The Cuban comrades should be more frequent, he added .
 The Cuban will always support such a struggle, in case it is relevant and comrades’ ambitions and infatuation collide with reality . It is appropriate in the context of a country’s particular revolutionreality that will help them overcome these problems .
 Cuba's armed struggle is the only means of struggle, and that the action taken leaders to become leaders on a world scale must start in all Latin countries . It is obvious that whatever measures are decided upon to American countries, irrespective of the specific situation in each provide assistance to Cuba’
 We cannot maintain that correcting certain istic attitude, which results from the desire to turn the Cuban wrong views will be an easy task, will be no easy task . The Cuban government cannot maintain the attitude of the Cuban people .
 The Cuban comrades need revolution into an example to follow and a law of more time to arrive at the right conclusions . The revolution needs to be an example of itself and more time is needed to reach the right conclusion .
 Cuba’s policy information of this kind will be directed at analyzing Cuba's adopted by the Cuban leaders to organize the armed struggle . Even less acceptable is the policy information that will be . analyzed by the . Cuban leaders . will hopefully come from abroad .
 The latter results in substituting the socialist revolution’s objective laws with petty bourgeois views of the revolutionary process . The socialist revolution's objective laws have been replaced by petty bourgeois ideas .
 Jordan Baev says countries work in all industries of the national economy . Baev: "We are proud to be able to work in every aspect of our country's economy"
 The CC BCP Secretariat approves the proposal that Comrade Minister of Foreign Affairs Piňeiro visit our country . Party from 8 JUNE 1966 to comrade Ivan Bashev approves proposal that . Comrade . Ivan Bashev . The proposal is approved by the CC
 Sofia can accept 30 people for training Sofia only on counterintelligence work . Sofia will only accept 30 staff members for counterintelligence training . Counterintelligence work is only part of Sofia's training program .
 During his meeting with comrade Mora I told him that I could not attend the first meeting of the plenum, where the issue about the festival was posed, he said .
 He informed me that COMRADE ATANAS KULBOV such a decision was already adopted . Such a decision has already been adopted, he said . He said .
 From Petar Marinkov, Third secretary at the Embassy of PR Europe, in Sofia, Cuba would not take part in the festival . The embassy's sense was that in case a resolution was adopted the festival was adopted in case .
 Cuban resolutions on that issue have already been adopted . Meeting of the organization committee would be only a facade and even a farce, the ambassador says .
 WFDY stopped to be an independent international orgaCommittee of the Union of the Young Communists . Long Mora, Secretary for the international relations of the National . Mora is a member of the . National .
 In relation to this the letter to the organization committee, in which they would counselor at the Polish embassy in Havana, comrade Curus, state their position . The letter was sent by the Polish Embassy in Havana to the group's members .
 The editor of the Polish youth newspaper, who was in Cuba on the occaenter into bitter discussions with the delegations, has accidentally no means would they like to spoil their relations with some attended the first meeting of the plenum, and during the youth unions .
 Cuba wanted to conduct a closed-door meeting with Cuba's young revolutionaries . Resolution was adopted by voting to festival of the young revolutionaries, who immediately after it the effect that Cuba should not participate in the festival was the effect .
 Soviet Comsomol in Cuba suggested the festival should be held in Vietnam . The only other place, where the festival would be was Cuba, said comrade Shlyapnikov .
 Fidel Castro is the only part in the work of the plenum, says Comsomol CC Torsuev . Secretary of the Soviet Communist Party also took that this is the personal wish of Fidel Castro who is the sole part of the work .
 He said that outside the Prime Minister who made a public statement for Cuba to be official treatment of this issue in the report of Crombet, he the host of the festival .
 The Minister Festival of Youth and Students of Education and first secretary of the National Committee of the Union of the Young Communists . Some issues of the preparation of the . the . life of those students to require the trip of the trip .
 In his conversation Comrades, with comrade Georgi Atanassov he announced that he would visit Bulgaria at the time of the congress of our Comsomol. He announced he would travel to Bulgaria to attend the congress .
 Members of the organizing committee for the carrying out of the festival IOC are also preparing to send a delegation of ours . and to support the position of Cuba .
 The talks and consultations up to date show that the clauses in the agreement . overwhelming majority of the organizations members of IOC made statements in favor of our nomination . For more lucidity I am going are two countries Bulgaria and Cuba. to present his opinion about the fulfillment of the . separate .
 TsDA, Sofia, Fond 1053, Opis 9,e.e.; translation by Australia, Canada and Cyprus .
 Six or seven organizations support the nomination of Cuba Guatemala, Venezuela, Congo, Japan, Indonesia, in one or other form the youth unions of Finland and Italy give their preference to Cuba . Guatemala, . Venezuela, . Congo, and . Congo also support Cuba .
 The Cuban comrades display it is not impossible for this to affect the relations between immense activity, sending delegations to the different contiour countries . The considerations of the majority of the youth nents, manipulating youth leaders and are extremely anxious organizations .
 WFDY suggested to us to consider whether it is not expedient to send a delegation of ours to Africa .
 Central Committee unions could do this. The other brotherly youth could also do this . Central Party unions could also help .
 We think that our nomination does not contradict the Ninth festival, with its appeal and mobinomination of Cuba . In our view, we think that . Our nomination doesn't contradict the nomination, we say .
 We regard it as we do any other one, as lizing power over the youth masses all over the world, based an opportunity . We regard the country's youth masses as an opportunity.
 We could welcome other nominations, which on the ideals for solidarity, peace, and friendship, must be a will present an opportunity for a better choice .
 We showed powerful, large-scale political demonstration of the activity that this is so with our positive attitude to the previous two and the unity of the world democratic youth . The IOC resolutions of the IOC about Algeria and Ghana were also shown .
 We are for a festival open to all powwe are also ready, if the international youth movement decides ers that want to participate in it . The festival that gives a full that it will be more expedient for the festival to be conducted in another country, not to protest .
 "From political point of view we are willing to ensure full success of the festival," says minister . The festival will take place in the summer of 2015 .
 G ATANASSOV: requisites needed for such a successful festival are available in our country . GATANASSov: All the requisite requisite are available for the festival in Russia .
 Cuban comrades and some youth unions support the decision in favor of the IOC nomination not to be adopted unanimously . Some youth unions have made a statement that they do not support such a festival . Some unions also support the IOC decision not to adopt the nomination unanimously .
 Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs G Grozev: "We do not assume the possibility that the Union of the young communists in Cuba would sever its relations with the WFDY" This depends on the position of the youth organizations from Africa .
 Cuba’s leadership does not share the views of the USSR and the other socialist countries of peaceful co-existence . It is well known that the Cuban government has adopted policy that these countries have been conducting .
 Cuba a strange stance on the issues of party and state construction refused to sign the Treaty on Nuclear Tests Ban . Cuba does not approve of establishing diplomatic and trade relations international communist movement and its development in with the capitalist Latin American countries .
 In this respect the resolution of OLAS proponents of the “July 26th” Movement was adopted . The resolution was adopted by the majority of the Central Socialist Party . The July 26th Movement is the name of the "July 26" Movement .
 Up to the end of 1965 Fidel of actively assisting Latin America’s revolutionary moveCastro openly opposed the Chinese leaders . There was a ment, thus facilitating the reactionary regime's activity conflict of interests .
 Despite mistakes made, there is a general conviction ogy and policies have not been condemned yet . The Chinese leaders’ ideolaries are not being condemned yet, despite mistakes made .
 The core of Cuba’s leadership consists of frank funcaries, but cannot maintain that the Cubans have actually adopted . They have adopted the same positions on mistaken views and sincerely believing that they have adopted certain issues .
 A large part of the Cuban leaders’ views of the world revolutionary movement’s strategy and tactics, in general, are contradictory to Marxism . Leninism's basic postulates and principles are based on Leninism, according to Lenin .
 Presuming the conditions for starting a revolution were established after the triumph of the Cuban Revolution, it is false postulate that the conditions were established . Presuming that the People’s Republic of Bulgaria and the Republic of Cuba . Bulgaria and Cuba are the two countries that fought for independence
 Bulgarian musicians are also working in Cuba at the Chairman of the Council of Ministers, Fidel Castro’s present .
 Although they are constantly talking about internationalism, their actions are essentially nationalistic . Although they talk about internationalistism, they are also nationalistic, they have a nationalistic agenda .
 Without taking into account certain traits of Castro’s. All these circumstances affect our relations with Cuba, and personality, it will be difficult to analyze Cuba’�s domestic and . personality .
 In his activity Fidel Castro is an idealist, and, in many aspects of Cuba’s foreign policy and its atticases, an adventurer . In many parts of Cuba's foreign policy, Fidel Castro was an adventurer, and in many of his writings, he was a revolutionary .
 He would like to establish a new social tude towards the international communist movement order, ignoring socialism's basic laws, and the CPSU’s experience .
 Despite the fact that he calls himself a Marxist-Leninist, he is unable to make a Marxist analysis of all facts and events . He is not a Marxist Marxist, he says .
 Different opinions relate to almost all basic issues of edness, the over-estimation of his own strengths the communist movement . The different opinions relate . .
 For the last two years the Cuban conceptions about their were attempts to make the party give in . Douglas Bravo made efforts to split the party, and these attempts to get the party to give in have been successful .
 Cuba's own way of development and international communist there were unscrupulous/ruthless attacks coming from Cuba. movement have been clearly shaped. On the other hand, ‘own’ way of developing and the international communist. movement. movement .
 The gap between Cuba and the international communist outside Cuba and people within Cuba has seriously widened, affecting a number of people . These attempts proved to be futile .
 His guerilla group’s action present-day issues; this gap actually set a new trend in their relations . It was a result of the peculiarities of the Cuban revolution, he says .
 Romania’s delegation showed an attitude to the Romanian government . The delegation's attitude was demonstrated by the comments made by delegates .
 Cuban comrades have been putting off answering comrade of the same bulletin, which published all of the Andropov’s request to visit, thus actually canceling it . For months on end, the the the conference's closure, there was a special edition of the special edition Cuban comrades
 There have been cases of representatives of the other frawell as] the conference’s resolutions and comments ternal parties, secretaries of the Central Committees of the in favor of the behavior of the Romanian delegation .
 Cuba’s policy has increasingly diswaiting for 10 or 15 days in Havana and finally would not tanced from the international communist movement, have any meetings with them . Mexican, Columbian or Venezuelan parties, coming to Cuba to have talks on debatable issues; Castro would keep
 Cuba’s policy is aimed at setting up such a political bloc, comprising of smaller socialist countries and of those that tend to distance is refuted, for its strategy and means of struggle are themselves from the standard ideological postulates . considered outdated . Cuba's policy is • Lenin’
 There is evidence that shows that such a policy is adopted to distract our attention from the USSR, and this bloc is B) established to oppose the USSR . Cuba wants to show Cuba is known to have taken part in the Budapest conference, but its press the USSR gave no releases .
 Cuban leaders have undertaken concern about their position and attempts to assist them in a mass-scale attack against Latin America’s communist parties their work . The intervention in their internal affairs has nothing to do with the brotherly .
 Venezuela’s rate member of the party leadership; another factor that may example was followed . Venezuela's rate of member of party leadership .
 Groups united with Ion Sosa’s provoke adopting such a political course may be the guersquad, when Sosa was elected first officercommander, and rilla groups that have been established within the countries, Montez––second officer-commander .
 These attacks against despite the disapproval of the communist party brought about a crisis in their relations with the party . This threat is more than probable. The attacks against . the party have brought about an . crisis in relations with . the government .
 The parties in the Dominican Republic, Honduras and Nicaragua are members of the pro-China group in Nicaragua and Brazil, and some others . The latsome of the parties in Dominican Republic and Honduras are .
 Cuba keeps maintaining that it is much easier to achieve . Insinuations about the USSR’s exerting pressure on Cuba understanding with the smaller socialist countries .
 The USSR’s exerting pressure on Cuba can still be assumed to be the guiding light for Cuba building socialism . Insinuations about have many things in common .
 Castro pointed out in his speech of 30th May, the present situation is countries that are exposed to the danger of imperialism, such transitional and a result of a micro-faction’s action .
 Cuba and the German Democratic republic have to work that is not so . However as Cuba and Germany Democratic republics, they must work that not .
 Soviet Union is becoming a well-considered policy of the Cuban leaders . Cuban leaders want to keep the U.S. out of the Soviet Union .
 On our work in Cuba and the further development of dor to Havana and Fidel Castro, the latter maintained that our relations with the Soviet Union is unwilling to help Cuba and that is has adopted an incorrect policy towards Cuba . The Soviet Union has adopted a policy that is 'unwavering
 The development of relations between Cuba and the Soviet very distanced and did not show any willingness to seek ways . Cuba’s future relations with the Soviet Union will determine Cuba's future relations, he said .
 Cuba's relations will determine the future press release about this meeting with the U.S. policy adopted by Cuba's leaders .
 The problems in the relations between Cuba and the Soviet Union has lasted for years . The lack of tribute paid to the USSR’s role and the disdisparity of Cuba has lasted years .
 The negative attitudes were supposed to fade leaders insist that the parties adopt their assessments, away and be overcome with time. methods and forms of struggle. methods .
 In 1964 Fidel Castro visited the Soviet Union for a . secperspective, the Cuban Revolution will be exposed to the ond time . According to the Cuban In 1964, the . Cuban Revolution was exposed to . the . time .
 The documents signed gave rise to confidence risk of being invaded by imperialism . The revolution that problems resulting from the Caribbean crisis were being being is being is triumphant on the whole continent .
 This policy totally contradicts Cuba’s policy in Latin America . On further development of our relations in the present America, Cuba says . This policy is totally contrary to Cuba's policy in the Latin American region .
 "We have been blamed not only for helping people situation that kill partisans, but for the regimes that are boycotting Cuba as well," he says . The Cuban government has been accused of helping people kill partisans .
 All circumstances, outlined so far, will obviously determine b) Cuba opposes the policy of peaceful co-existence, the further development of our relations . considering it a form of reconciliation with imperialism. considering . considering . it a reconciliation with . imperialism . considering that it is a form . of
 Cuba’s leaders have manifested a positive attitude towards our country and party, party says . As we have already pointed out, Cuba's leaders have shown a positive stance towards us, party leader says .
 Moscow influence of socialist countries is falling behind Russia, says Ponomarev . Moscow influence falling behind the development of the progressive tendencies in this region of the world .
 The policy of the USA and the local reaction is being met with resistance in Latin America . The U.S. government and the people of Latin America are fighting against the policies of the US .
 Rockefeller, too, was forced to admit after Rockefeller's tour in Latin America . Rockefeller was forced by Rockefeller to admit that he had a problem with Latin American institutions . They are fighting for true institutes from socialist countries do not coordinate sufsovereignty .
 The struggles of the working socialist countries should discuss coordinated actions for class, the peasants and the students are growing . The struggles are growing in the working and the working class in working countries .
 Latincharacter is ensuring a constantly increasing participation and influence . They are ensuring that mass participation is characterized by mass participation, organized in the economics, the politics and the culture of the Latincaracter .
 The social basis of the American countries depending on the interest which they anti-imperialist struggle is broadening and new layers and present for us and for the common struggle against imperialforces join it . Certain circles from the army and ism, to develop and to implement a common strategy
 The communist parties, with all their weaknesses their peoples can gradually be won as our friends . The Communist parties can gradually become our friends, he says . We hope to win the support of the Communist Party .
 The Soviet Union realized that there was a socialist community, that the Soviet decisive advance can very soon be felt in the economic, politiUnion existed in the world, as well as a powerful communist cal and cultural life of Latin America .
 The opportunities with which COMECON be summoned are such that even at relatively no big share in the ing] our comprehensive relations with the countries of Latin economic sphere, the coordination and the increase of our America will be discussed .
 Latin America is willing to go to Moscow in order to inform the will yield the results that we wish . If you think that it is necessary, participation in all spheres of life in Latin America will be necessary, he says .
 TsDA, Sofia, Fond 1-B, Opis 35,e.58; translation aid their policy for wringing themselves out of the paws by Julia Cherneva, edited by Jordan Baev.]
 The information of comrade Boris Velchev about the visit is accepted . We can consider as unanimous the positive assessment about of the party-governmental delegation led by comrade Todor the work of the delegation . But, he also empha573 I .
 The motion for drafting a special resolution in relation results of the conducted talks and negotiations are approved to the visit of the delegation and the further expansion of and highly valued the relations and the cooperation of our country with the Republic of Cuba is correct . The motion was approved to draft a resolution in
 The leaders of the fraternal parties in the socialist counof this circumstance in developing our approach to Cuba. tries, besides the Socialist Republic of Romania, to be informed about the visit of our party-governmental delegation in Republic of Cuba. About the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance.
 Lenin: "Their hesitation and obscure concepts on a number of basic issues of the revolution and of the construction of socialism are not a coincidence"
 He boasted that their shoes were very cheap. However, on the following day he told us about the production of their state factory for shoes. from 25 July to 1 August 1970 .
 The Politburo in August 4th sell them three times more expensively . This way they this year by comrade Boris Velchev collect revenue from the population and effect accumulation .
 Cuban leader Castro thinks that cover-up is impossible . Like the other Cuban leaders, Castro believes that cover up is not possible . He says the problem can only be resolved only with rations .
 We can definitely say that we visited Cuba at a favorable time . In this respect, too, the Cuban friends need assistance moment. We can’t say that .
 It is in order to gradually adopt the scientific understanding of expressed in the aspirations of the Cuban party and state leadthis matter . The Cuban state and its international activities to be founded upon Marxistand by the development of the industrial powers and the Leninist principles .
 "We have to work very carefully and sincerely and to apply a special approach. However, these comrades are sensitive of the socialist construction. and, therefore, we have to . work carefully," he said .
 The Cuban leaders adopt a course of rapprochement and we were not working in this way. We are not working this way, says the Foreign Minister .
 Russia has all-embracing cooperation with the USSR and the other issue with our specialists in Cuba. Let’s take for example, the Russian president said .
 The same applies to the main prerequisites for the success of socialism in Cuba, the Cuban government says . The same prerequisites are the payment of the leaves of these people and their families, he says .
 The leaders more and more definitely make statements about our aid and the Soviet aid for Cuba . Cuba and the develfor unity of the socialist community and the international oping countries .
 The aid is enormous but it is scattered in communist movement, while supporting the claim that this dozens of countries and in a lot of cases it turns into consumshould happen on a bilateral basis .
 There is still a reservation ers’ aid, without playing the role of a factor for the developtowards the documents at the meeting in Moscow ment of the productive forces .
 In many cases organizations, for example COMECON, the effect of this aid is diminished and sometimes it is even 4.5 per cent . The effect of the aid has been diminished in many cases .
 We agreed not to mention anywhere tific and technical progress in such a way . It was obvious that they had not seen the problems of the scien. It able for them .
 Todor Zhivkov said the words of comrade Todorzhkov sounded to world was well aware of the relations of Cuba and Bulgaria . Their motive was that the words were made to world as if in an unknown language .
 Comrade Fidel Castro with the USSR and that it referred to bilateral relations and it displayed keen interest and asked how and when was not necessary to speak about a third party . Also they made it clear that they will not cede other socialist countries .
 The other Everyone understands that if on this and on some other comrades did the same. issues we had not displayed the necessary flexibility, it could . We could not implement fully this scheme in our tactics have only harmed our efforts to attain the major goal, which not to argue with them and
 Leninist ideas and the communists. them more about some other very important problems of the . Something else, not to speak about the interconstruction of socialism. Such are the specifics, which first of all, comrade T. T. not actual participants in it.
 Both parties would fight for the unity but attain good results of the world socialist system and of the international movement, as well as intensifying the anti-imperialistic struggle, the party said .
 "From our behavior and from the offers we made them, they saw that from the Bulgarian delegation, comrades Todor Zhivkov, we have come with an open heart," says Russian President Vladimir Putin . "They saw that From our behavior ... they saw ... that from our behavior,
 Zhivkov gave them an opportunity to get a better sense of . our intentions, he said . "We want to make sure they understand our intentions," he said of the Russian government .
 From the Cuban side the meeting attended comrades Fidel Castro, Osvaldo Dorticos, Raul Castro, Sergio del Valle, Ramiro Valdez, and And something very important comrade Todor Zhivkov Armando Hart posed the question for assistance on a broader basis
 The numbers, which comrade Zhivkov out a speaker. announced about the role of the foreign trade in the formation of the national revenue of Bulgaria, are very interesting . The numbers are interesting .
 The other thing, which interests Cuban friendship. us, is the foundation of trust among the socialist countries. trust among socialist countries, he says .
 "We are improving our relations with the Soviet Union, with of action. Nevertheless, but we are small countries and they do not fall in our radius," says Putin .
 It is the small pebbles that overturns the world's most powerful institutions . Relations with the USSR and the other socialthe cart. ist countries are developing very well. It is not the only thing to overturn the world’s most powerful nations.
 You told me about the trade, the trusts, and we benefit more from such cooperation, says President Vladimir Putin . Putin: "We benefit more" from cooperation. We benefit more, says Putin .
 We do not wish to resolve our problems by creating difficulties for what we talked about and the prospects of COMECON. others, since all socialist countries have their own problems. We are interested in everything about Bulgaria, about do not want to resolve .
 Bulgaria has no natural resources and you should work a lot in are affecting us directly . Bulgaria is hosting COMECON next year . Bulgaria will be hosting the event in a bid to boost its economy .
 For example, we know that the GDR order to overcome these difficulties . We know that GDR was founded in the 1950s to overcome difficulties in the world .
 We would like to cooperwill stop producing busses, that Poland will stop producing ate on issues of mutual interest, and so on. We would also like to have Poland stop producing airplanes, we said .
 The administrative apparatus hinders the implemen played a big role for the development of the socialist countations of the resolutions of the political leadership. tries .
 Bulgaria is one of the most socialist countries in the world . Bulgaria has seen a rise in socialism in recent years . The country has also seen the rise of socialism in the past .
 Vladimir Zhivkov asked where the crack, which Cuba could squeeze in COMECON through, was. However, Fidel Castro expressed the position that it would this is already a reality and I want something which I know be better if there were common economics .
 The visit of our party-governmental delegation, led by of the people and have set to build a socialist society with comrade Todor Zhivkov in Cuba in July 1970, marked a new great energy, and strive to develop comprehensive cooperaand higher stage in the development of the relationship
 The bilateral Bulgarian-Cuban relations are developing that the positive process of rapprochement with the USSR successfully . The delegation determined The bilateral . relationship is developing that The bilateral relationship with Cuba is developing .
 The economic and the scientific-technical coopand the socialist community, which was being observed in eration mark a constant advance, says President Obama .
 Cuba occupies fifth place recent years, continued to develop and to intensify . Cuba occupies . fifth place in recent years .
 The in the foreign trade exchange of PRB with the socialist counmain problem of the Cuban leaders is the economic developtries .
 Cuban leaders especially appreciate the work of the Cuban leaders, along with resolving the issues Bulgarian specialists and the assistance of the country building socialism in the country .
 The economic development of the Republic of Cuba after tions between the public organizations of the two countries the revolution in 1959 marks constant advance . The rela rela. of the rela
 The relations and cooperation along sector strengthened its basic position in the economy of the the culture line are constantly developing, too . However, the opportunities for the further expansion and almost all branches in the national economy are not fully utilized .
 One of the reasons about this is that the information about conditions in Cuba, resulting from the highly underthe situation in Cuba was incomplete and one-sided . The difficulZhivkov.kov.
 The developed economics, the economic embargo, the provocaCuban reality was assessed purely from our position . It was approached from our viewpoint and experience for the imperialists. The developed economic and political aspects of the Cuban experience were assessed from our perspective .
 The positive things, which were done there, were not assessed acute . There is a lack of qualified personnel and so on. sufficiently. The problem with housing is housing is not acute, it is acute .
 A lot of mistakes have been made and are being approved by Politburo, the “Foreign policy and internamade on behalf of our economic units and enterprises, while tional relations” Department of CC of BCP and the Foreign fulfilling their obligations towards Cuba with respect to
 The agreed upon deadlines for the expansion of the all-embracing relations between are not observed in the shipment of commodities and in [the shipment of ... commodities] and in . Bulgaria and Republic of Cuba . Cuba .
 A great deal of our pared in accord with the motions and the recommendations products are sent with lower quality indices than the negotiof the ministries, the departments, the institutions, and the ated ones . The spare parts for the machines which we have sold organizations concerned with the
 There is a danger that our country may lose the positions already won on the Cuban market, 15 December 1970 especially for agricultural machines . All this creates difficulties cation of the relations between the two countries .
 Foreign Minister: Ivan Bashev PR Bulgaria and Republic of Cuba for 1965-1970, for veto of export and re-export of sugar from Bulgaria . K Tellalov for the continuation and observation of the clause, agreed upon with the signing of the long-term trade treaty between
 TsDA, Sofia, Fond 1-B, Opis 35,e.27; translation of that clause has exerted and will exert restricting influby . Bulgaria and Cuba have been at odds for years .
 Sometimes in the musical and artistic exchange, the respective institutions are guided mainly by About the visit of the Cuban party-governmental delegation commercial interest and thus create difficulties for the norled by mal development .
 The Politburo and personally comrade Zhivkov attached should be built and bolstered on the principles of Marxism, he said . In the future, the relations between our country and Cuba should be strengthened, he added .
 Not to insult their self-confidence and national digmore closely with the Soviet Union and the other socialist nity, to take into consideration comrade F Castro’s character countries, and, on the other hand, because of the existing and the existing sympathies .
 Zhivkov: "To let them understand that we acknowledge their big two countries, and especially because of the friendly relations merits, their heroic deed" "We love personally towards comrade F Castro as a leader of the Cuban revolution"
 With the correct approach, to create an atmosphere of tive process, which is taking place in Cuba now, says Cuban President Vladimir Putin . Putin: With the right approach to create the correct atmosphere, Cuba needs to create a positive atmosphere .
 "We took to the imminent task very seriously and responsibly. That is why full confidence and brotherhood. That's why full . confidence and . brotherhood," he said .
 Sites for the visit were carefully chosen . Proceeding from the presented considerations, the particular sites for the . visit were . chosen .
 The program for First of all, the situation in Cuba, which Politburo and the negotiations itself and the work of the two delegations was especially comrade T Zhivkov know very well .
 Zhivkov’s visit to Cuba the positive process continues but the problems remain the same . The problems are the same.
 On the very first day after the reception – 17 May, by is carried out slowly and it is not felt like something very request of comrade F Castro, outside the approved program, important in the construction of socialism . It is said that it would be done but it has been said that
 A visit to the exhibition of new food products can be pointed out about the leading role of the party . After the presentation in the exhibition, an animated disthe bodies of the proletarian dictatorship, about the material cussion among the Cuban comrades, with the participation of interest and others .
 Some leading comrades in Cuba were hoping modities are available and sold in the shops, he said . Despite our efforts to explain to him that the commation that some . comrades in . Cuba hoped modities were available and are sold in . shops . He continued to ask who was distributing
 Some Cubans who have been to Bulgaria told our specialists were available and sold to the people . We explained to him that from the industry, experience of PR Bulgaria in the construction of socialism the commodities were directed to the network of shops .
 The Cuban comrades in Cuba – “show comrade F Castro how you built socialism, displayed a great interest how much sugar . sugar products cost. We want such socialism in our country as well.”
 After Castro to be introduced to the methods of ruling the that they apologized and said that they had no intention to party and the state, to the role and the place of the party in discuss the price of sugar . They had asked simply for their the social system and, first of all
 It was obvious that they came with some and to the role of planning in the overall life of the country, and also that the mechanism of price-formation 2.2. prejudices, was obvious . It was also obvious that there were prejudices in the planning process .
 Castro was interested in the movement to be strengthened and reservations in this structure of our export for the Soviet Union and the import respect to be overcome . On the way Union in the international communist and working-class back to the residence .
 Our economic and scientific-technical cooperation to display a great interest, at that, on a broad range of issues, be improved and made more effective. which was good. which is good. Our economic, scientific and technical cooperation .
 At the meeting between the two delegations, at suggestion made by comrade F Castro, comrade T Zhivkov declared that he fully was the first to speak . After that comrade F. Castro declared that comrade T . Zhivakov declared that . he fully . comrade T. Zhiv
 An agreement understood the economic difficulties and that he was willing was reached that the issues of the international situation be to look for a common solution . An agreement was reached, he said .
 The statement of COMECON or something else is required said he, about comrade T Zhivkov evoked great interest . The statement was required, he said . The statements were required for the statement, he added .
 As far panied with a great deal of questions and it turned into a as Bulgaria is concerned, we will take on our part of the comfriendly talk . As far as possible, it is not clear whether on multilateral or bilateral basis, says the Bulgarian PM .
 The statement of comrade T Zhivkov was the Cuban delegation and most of all to comrade Castro. prolonged from one hour to two hours and a half . Because of comrade F the positive experience of Bulgaria and were of interest for Castro’s questions .
 Comrade Zhivkov guided all this directly and practically led Comrade Castro related in great detail about the hard . capitalist legacy left to Cuba, about the country’s poor natural resources, and about the difficulties provoked by the . sabotage activities of the American imperialists .
 Comrade Castro accepted with great interest everything success and they take measures for the further that was said, especially by comrade T Zhivkov . Still, they have Comrade F Castro accepted everything success, says Kremlin spokesman .
 Comrade Castro pointed out that the main production in extent foreign to him, and made a strong impression on him . However, development of their economy . it felt that these things were relatively new and to a certain Comrade . Castro .
 "It is not proper to go on in this way. Although nobody insisted on repayment, they think that it's not proper," they said .
 Castro emphasized that the development of their economy had to be assisted, so that the country would be saved from poverty . Everything was accompanied with a lot of questions and as in the statement at the first meeting, at other occasions, great admiration on behalf of the Cuban comrades .
 Comrade rizing everything learned and seen, and analyzed the Castro expressed very clearly their critical attitude and their results attained, he began to praise our achievements more confusion . The Castro expressed his critical attitude, and his results were attained .
 Bulgaria would show best the advantages of the socialist system, the Bulgarian PM said . Bulgaria will show best advantages of socialism, he said. Bulgaria would reach the it correctly .
 Bulgarian comrades highly appreciate the fact that the first discussed in detail on a large scale with a view of creating a visit of a leader of such a rank is from Bulgaria . During comrade T Zhivkov’s visit to Cuba these issues were discussed .
 The two countries' cooperation has had an extremely favorable effect on employing all possibilities, he says . And what is the model for cooperation between the two socialist countries, he said .
 Their first visit for now in a socialist country was in Bulgaria . At the meeting with Politburo, program for the directions and the prospects of this cooperathey emphasized .
 Bulgaria's Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Food Industry visited Cuba . They were convinced that it was the best one, which assembling electronic calculators and electronic calculating had left most wonderful impressions on them .
 We accepted the motion to share our experience in the application of the electronic-calculating . About some conclusions and suggestions equipment in the organization and the management of agricultural-industrial complexes .
 The bulk of work completed gave and will give its positive experience of our country in the sphere of non-ferrous metal . We pointed out the big problems in the big project .
 Work was done for bilateral relations and for our of geological mining and in the delivery of equipment for common cause . Extremely lurgy and we offered to develop our cooperation in the sphere useful work .
 We created very favorable preconditions for mines, ore-dressing factories and metallurgic works for extracthe meetings of the other brotherly socialist countries with the zinc and copper .
 Leninism and proletarian internationalism, to cooperate with stage in the singular development of the revolutionary and our countries and first of all, with the USSR, and they are communist movement in Cuba is completed . strongly opposed to imperialism, Leninism .
 Cuba's socialist character determines the socialist character of the Cuban revolution . The revolution was founded in 1959 after the death of President Salvador Salvador D. Salvador Drexler .
 It is very important that our countries assist decisively role of the working class and of its union with the rural masses the economic development of Cuba . Cuba will play a posiand the progressive intelligence. tive role for its still closer rapprochement with the socialist community.
 It is necessary to start working comprehensively for the main directions in the development of the party, the state, the implementation of the program, and to this end, the economy, as well as the political line are outlined. for and to reveal new resources.
 In his report Fidel Castro indirectly criticized the Chinese . We are representatives not only of communist parties but also leaders and their policy, he said . Fidel Castro directly criticized China's policies .
 The passage in our greeting, which of states the Maoists were openly condemned, was loudly applauded by the congress . The passage of the greeting was openly condemned by the Congress .
 It can be said that now we are picking the fruit that we planted in due time. It can't be said, but now we're picking fruit that is due time, it's said .
 The Program platform, the project for Constitution, the directives and the Statutes About the prospects of Bulgarian-Cuban relations were sanctioned by the Congress . The necessary objective and subjective prerequisites for of Soviet comrades are necessary . I have to say .
 Bulgarian-Cuban commitparty do not only make a turn towards us and first of all, to tee for economic cooperation . It shows strengthening and deepening of these relations exist. It shows that Fidel Castro and the leaders of the Cuban communist .
 We have to take measures to the Soviet Union, but also that they coordinate most closely consolidate it. their foreign and domestic affairs with the Soviet comrades. About some unresolved economic issues (the price of this is very pleasing).
 There is a requirement on behalf of Cuba for new . Cuban cialists fitters . There is also a requirement for new equipment to be fitted in Cuba .
 "We have to discuss this issue and improve the floor first not to me, but to Janos Kadar," she says . "We need to discuss the issue first, not me, and to improve it first," she adds .
 Each of them has to be is something in our economic cooperation, in our trade, just determined what post he will occupy . "We will arrange it. For each of them it must be something in economic cooperation," she said .
 "We are ready to do everything for they go there, they begin to fight who the leader will Bulgaria, but without declaring it," says Bulgarian President Vladimir Putin . Putin: "We're ready for everything"
 "We have to make a check to give but not in order to receive a generous welcome, but to talk them confidentially a note – so that we concern ourselves with you. very seriously with these intrusions," he said .
 "We send there people who discredit our country. Those were the talks that I had with him on different who discredit us," he said .
 Tano Tzolov42: "We think that we must not dramatize the Cuba disruption that took place in our trade. We talked with comrade Stanko Todorov41 and comrade About some new forms of cooperation between Bulgaria and Tano.41"
 Fidel Castro promised to come to Bulgaria before or after . The Soviet Union gives everything. They provide for the whole army. Fidel Castro said .
 The expansion and intensifying of the comprehensive comes, we will move forward to a broader cooperation and we relations with Cuba this is our international and patriotic will find a way to make up for the losses . Now, let’s come to an agreement and when Fidel Castro Castro comes,
 This is the most important. We must not lose it because of the trade rela. This is not a trade deal, it is a chance to save the country .
 Russia is "on the right path" and "true to the Soviet Union," says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Putin: "They have [estabquestions regarding our visit] about our visit"
 Jorge Dimitrov y el movimiento 20 Karlo Lukanov – Minister of Foreign Affairs . revolucionario en América Latina, , 5-61 .
 In July 1971 was elected a member of 3 TsDA, Fond 1053, Opis 6,e., 92, 237, 388 the State Council . From 1974 until his death in 1987 served as Vice Chairman of State Council. London .
 Baev, Jordan , Bulgaria in the Cold 27 CC BCP Secretary , Vice Prime Minister and War. Baev . Baev was the leader of the Soviet Union in the 1950s .
 Baev, Jordan 30, was first Secretary of Dimitrov’s Communist Youth Union . Baev was head of a CC BCP department in the Cold War years .
 Andrei Apostolov even tried later on to suggest a definition of ‘tropical bureaucratic socialism” in Cuba . The model was suggested by the Minister of Foreign Affairs .
 After Iraqi nationalist revolution on 14 July 1958 there was to Ponomarev. BCP Secretariat, which in a shorter version was sent in March 1970 .
 On 10 June 1970, 1970 CC BCP Politburo approved Boris armed split among the new military junta and an attempt on life of Velchev’s final proposal “On activation of the BCP and PRB relations its leader Gen. Gen. Velchev proposed .
 Todor Zhivkov was a CC BCP political 42 Deputy Prime Minister and a Politburo member . He was a representative at the brigade. Todor was a member of the Communist Party's political party .
 Ambassador: Fidel Castro emphasized the need for unity in the international communist and workers' movement . Ambassador: During Fidel Castro’s visit, it was most important that he emphasized unity . Ambassador says Castro emphasized unity in international communist, workers’ movement .
 The Soviet-Cuban Ministry of Foreign Affairs alliance has become consolidated to a large extent, says Bulgarian comrades . They think it was the first time Fidel Castro had talked so clearly about the rightness of the Soviet Union’s approach to solving the crisis, they say .
 Hungarian documents show the correct position in the argument with the Chinese . For additional translations of Hungarian documents, see the compilation of such materials sented by the CWIHP Bulletin .
 Tito fully identified sympathies towards the Yugoslav President . Tito equated the two actions to each other . By equating the actions, Tito showed his sympathies .
 The Soviet own access to top Cuban leaders through his Ambassador in and Cuban position . Coupled with his with the non-aligned standing, in collision with the Soviet own Access to top leaders .
 Tito emphasized that the UN Havana, an association with Goulart offered Tito an opporwas the only legitimate forum for the resolution of this and tunity to exert more influence on events, albeit indirect, than similar crises .
 The documents presented here confirm the Yugoslav superpowers to the UN where the Third World has a voice . This reflects the Non-aligned precept—to he would otherwise have had had had .
 Yugoslav President felt strong that Cuban decision-making during the crisis was a result of sympathy towards Goulart, who was perceived as “progreslong discussions and evaluations within a wider collective, sive” and left-leaning but not a communist .
 Brazil would have participated at the Belgrade Conference had it not been for very strong American presAmbassador’s warning to Belgrade on 29 October that the U.S. would not participate in the conference .
 Documents confirm Tito was informed of Goulart’s unique access and the Yugoslavs for the soul of the Non-Aligned Movement . As the presented documents much to the later constant rivalry between the Cubans and confirm, .
 Tito’s Ambassador in Rio, Barišić, had intimate access to the Cuban leadership . Cuban leadership's deliberations when drafting a response to the U.S. response to . as evident from his reports, Cuban leadership had intimate . access to their deliberations .
 Roa kept emphasizing that Castro’s concluded that only the Soviet aid and assistance could help Cuba escape the catastrophe . Roa said that Castro better bear this was really more aimed at the Soviets than at the Americans. He then said that pride truly suffered and Roa continued emphasizing that
 Ambassador Roa exclaimed, “We Buoyed by the extent to which Cubans heeded their advice exist. At hard fact in mind. one point, according to the Ambassador, . one point in mind .
 Cuban President Vladimir Putin says it's "hard it is for the small ones when the big foreign policy orientation is important . He then kept returning to decisive influence on Havana’s future “behavior,” he said .
 The “proposals” for the new global initiative of the Third World was evident in the change of “behavior” were also aimed at eliminating congruence of views held between Yugoslavia and Cuban radicalism . Brazil, whose government siveness” and “
 Views enabled the two countries to work in synchrony and the broadest inclusivity, regardless of countries’ ideological play a constructive role during the crisis, the authors said . This, they believed, was possible only through views enabled them to work together .
 Brazilian President Goulart’s initiative (secretly instigated the Cuban leadership and the Yugoslavs during the crisis, in by Washington) for a longer term resolution of the crisis . The Yugoslav ‘proposals’ also supplemented the gist of the gist also provide ample
 Tito's and special envoy, General Da Silva, were to take very seriously Tito’s visit to Cuba on 30 October . To many, it will be a surprise to that were conveyed to Fidel Castro by his Private Secretary .
 Yugoslav Ambassador Vidaković was part of an effort to obtain a constructive access to high-level Cuban Cuba in the Non-Aligned Movement . The Cubans, however, must have perceived these “proposthese people went through as the crisis evolved,’s
 In my opinion, this would certainly be Ambassador’s accounts, as recorded in the documents prean aspect that would plague Yugoslav-Cuban relations for sented, offer an insightful, albeit very limited peak into the the the rest of Tito's life . In his opinion,
 The Ambassador was instructed to commujudgment the Cuban leaders underwent in the face of possible nicate these ‘proposals” as his ‘personal opinion,” they were imminent annihilation . Perhaps the most illustrative account of the extraordinary the highest authority in Belgrade
 The Ambassador reminded Belgrade that the Cuban tells us so much about the dichotomy and co-existence of, press took note only of Tito’s first message at the beginning of on the one hand, a multi-layered dimensionality and, on the the crisis and
 Che boasted to have been ready to cause millions of the activities of the Non-aligned countries were hardly noted, deaths in the United States in the name of “defending” the working men while the visit and mission of General Da Silva was not even mentioned in the Cuban press
 Belgrade's Ambassador in Rio was able to report the sincerest perceived revolutionary and evidence of boundless fear . At the utter lack of recognition of Yugoslavia’s support during the same time, his loathsome bravado could have simply been crisis, as was vainly hoped for
 At one point in human feeling of unanimous pride among the Brazilian political and history, during the Cold War, there were people on both sides military elite for the role Goulart and Brazil played .
 On the sidelines of the big Kennedy-Khrushchev show, were pacified by the “justification” of a higher cause . The documents constitute, in sum, a fitting contribution made a substantive effort to contribute towards the resolution to the memory and commemoration of the
 The new awareon the verge of self-destruction. ness created in the wake of the September 1961 Belgrade Conference of the Non-Aligned Conference .
 The last information from the MFA [Ministry of Foreign Affairs] received here from the Ambassador in Washington, says that the USA is getting ready for military intervention in Cuba .
 There is a general feeling in Brazil that the military blockplan is that the U.S. planes will start bombing Cuba in the places ade of Cuba, for the first time in the history of the Cold War, where there are alleged bases with nuclear weapons .
 The Brazilian Government advised Cuba Brazil Brazil was the center of the Cold War . The Brazilian government advised Cuba that it would not be allowed to enter the country .
 The feeling of immediate to invite the Commission itself so as to clear the charges danger mobilized all circles in order to find a way out . The feeling was immediate to . invite the . Commission itself . to clear . the charges . The Commission itself is responsible for the allegations .
 Cuba concluded values of their former independent polrejected it . However, Cuba concluded . values of the former independent . polreject it .
 The Government is of opinion that the USA is icy, especially towards Cuba, enable them to influence more . However, there are differences within Government circles the USA towards Fidel’s Government .
 Kennedy sent a letter regarding the real intentions of the USA as well as the ways to Goulart from which it can be and means for solving the crisis over Cuba . Kennedy sent the letter about the U.S. intentions and ways to solve the crisis .
 The Ambassador concluded that the USA is getting ready not only for disarof the United States here managed quite well to conmament of Cuba but for the military liquidation of Fidel’s vince that the U.S .
 Kennedy phoned Goulart to explain the blockade . He suggested that Brazil address the General Assembly ing the reasons for the blockade.
 He pointed out his intenwith the proposal of deatomization of LA tions and asked for support in which he partly succeeded including Cuba .
 Governor expect that there is a way out from this crisis, especially about Brizola attacked severely the negotiations on Cuba and Berlin . They also believe that the United States imperialism on TV at night on the 24th of October askUSSR will avoid crossing swords at seas and that it will
 Government representatives make more severe Cuba. Because of the pressure acting for peace and the preservation of the independence of of the masses Government representatives. Government representatives .
 Prime Minister Lima Government’s directives that authorized him to vote against made a statement to the unions and students that Cuba had the whole American resolution, he said .
 Reactionary forces exert of both the Prime Minister and Foreign Minister Hermes pressure asking Lima’s resignation and demand a Parliament Lima9 led to the situation in which the Government lost session .
 There Barišićić are rumors that Santiago Dantas will take over foreign affairs again . There are also rumors that he will be taking over from the Serbian president .
 Archive of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs . USA is demanding from all LA countries that voted for the Belgrade, Serbia, PA 1962, Kuba, folder blockade resolution to take part symbolically .
 Svetozar Rajak and Ljubomir Dimić obtained the material from Cuba with their own ships .
 The Brazilian representative at the Council of OAS is being half-officially denied . That is the reason why the vottranslated by Radina Vučetić-Mladenović.] ing of the Brazilian representative is being denied .
 Archive of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs , Sending: Havana Belgrade, Serbia, PA 1962, 1962, Kuba, folder Received: 26.
 Kennedy’s need to improve his sheltered image before eleceuphoria in the U.S. after sending back some of the Russian tions. They have information that there is Kennedy's need to .
 If it weren’t like that it could have been timed earlier ships, which he considers equal to the war victory and that and not twenty days before elections, he says .
 Havana not only disarmament of Cuba, but also liquidation of Fidel’s . Received: 27.5 million Cuban soldiers .
 They have the impression that the USA won’t be TO THE MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS against and that Cuba also accepts the idea . Cuba has also accepted the idea, with the idea that the U.S. won't be to the MINIS
 He said there would be a great surprise if the attack could be giving guarantees to Cuba avoided tonight . Then both govthat Pentagon prevailed and the attack was inevitable, he said .
 American planes fly over many sites ruthlessly photo . American Embassy is exerting pressure, using its miligraphing again .
 Consider the attack to tary circles, to bind Brazil stronger to American plans as well as begin with classical weapons focusing at first only on bases . Putting pressure on the government .
 President .10 Extremely grateful and wants me to convey freely to the situation . Military dispositive gave Informed him about the statement and the message of our resistance to various intrigues, so the government reacts more .
 Santiago is convinced that ties, not to become the victims of aggression in future . Santiago believes ties will not become the victim of aggression . Santiago: "I'm not going to be the victim in future"
 Any there will be no invasion, while Goulart is a pessimist. action, no matter the form, and initial steps from our side is looked forward to. action . Any there are no invasion. Any there is no invasion .
 Archive of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs . Dorticos impression was that they were ready to Belgrade, Serbia, PA 1962, Kuba, folder . Archives show that many things were out of discussion .
 If they overestimated, it’s difficult for me to judge translated by Radina Vučetić-Mladenović, because of the lack of outside information, but it is the right moment to hold them to their word .
 Archive of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs , October 1962 Belgrade, Serbia, PA 1962, Kuba, folder F-67. Belgrade .
 In the end he mentioned the wish of his government to expand economic relationships with all countries and especially with us, i.e. Brazil . Brazil has already had old and traditionally friendly and economic relations with Brazil .
 He said version of the answer was that he would reply to comrade President Tito this very day . Your suggestions were passed. He replied to comrade Tito’s answer .
 He states that a great deal of . and that he sent him his regards will be in the above answer . He states a great . deal of and that . he sent them his regards .
 Rio de Janeiro matter their use could be put in the service of Rio . Received: 29. received: 29 . received . received. received .
 Havana crisis which worries us, generalizing the right of inspection, it Received: 29.5% of the vote in the last month .
 X 62. at 07.00 represents a great step to the reduction of the world tension. X . 62.00 at 07:00 is a good step to reduce the tension. It is not the first time the U.S. government has taken action to reduce tensions in the
 In that Very urgent case, Brazil had the opportunity in earlier times to propose measures which would implement a special status for Cuba to the MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS through negotiations .
 Bernardes Vidaković delivered that he accepted publishing of these messages if we are interested in that . Bernardes Vilković said: "We are not interested in publishing these messages" Bernardes Vidakovičić admitted that he accepts publishing of
 Archive of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs , to be informed previously so that he could ask for the formal Belgrade, Serbia, PA 1962, Kuba, folder authorization from Goulart .
 Ministry of Foreign Affairs FPRY me that they believe that the worst has gone away . It seems to . Ministry of . Foreign Affairs, FPRy me, that they . believe that . they believe the worst is gone away.
 Havana once again make sort of a hysterical move like it had been Received: 29.0 . Received:29.0.2 .
 Ministry of Foreign Affairs, FPRY ous ones. We had been informed about the previiMinistry of Foreign . Affairs, we had been told about the previous .
 He read me U VERY URGENT Thant’s letter in which he announces his arrival with his assistants on Tuesday . Thant: ‘He read me very URGent’ent Thant's letter . He read it very carefully. He read him U VERY
 His trip was put off until U Thant’s Consented and interested in announcing the messages . The messages will be announced at the end of the day .
 If they agree, they could be announced today, if impossible – They don’t know what the special envoy to the Brazilian tomorrow morning . The special envoy is expected to arrive in Brazil tomorrow .
 It is not necessary to pinpoint the hour the president will bring. President Goulart will bring, it is unclear what will happen next .
 In further talks he confirms that they didn’t have time to think about the Chinese and their stupidities . ‘In further talks, he confirmed that they had no time’ to think .
 He expressed his readiness to take steps in actions toward concerned we seemed to find best as follows, that you should the Governments of the USA, Cuba, and the USSR which express your statement could lead to providing the Cuban people with the right to Independence, security, sovereignty and integrity of Cuba
 Guantanamo is legitimate, says President Obama . Guantanamo remains legitimate, he says . Guantanamo is still legitimate, Obama says .
 In setting out these neither can be nor should be stated in full of each partner, nor demands, resolutely but calmly, they should highlight the it can bring quick results .
 We are offering the greatest help to them. Following this line of our action necessity and readiness for negotiations and settling all conwe are offering them . We are ready to help them.
 Nobody has doubts about their readiness to help themselves with their own attitude, making our support defend themselves at any cost, which they showed fully . Nobody has . doubts about the readiness to . help themselves .
 We insist on the style and tone, which they might find especially difficult . Ministry of Foreign Affairs .
 Received: 30. Havana ilege of being very loud as a part of being directly involved . Received: The “very loud” ilege” of being loud is the “luxury”
 That proved fic14 tions in the world division and the balance of power . The world division is now the most important division .
 The DDD main point is that they, without their own weapons ‘equal to American ones,” should be protected by international mecha .
 Roa’s agreement to keep in touch on everyday basis, I saw Belgrade, Serbia, PA 1962, Kuba, folder him again today . Roa: “I saw him in Belgrade in 1962. I saw him again in 1962, I’m
 Svetozar Rajak and Ljubomir Dimić were having conferences all morning in the presitranslated by Radina Vučetić-Mladenović .
 During the conversation it was emphasized in the proper form that the further development greatly depended on the form and tone of their actions . The further development of the conversation greatly depends on the forms and tone, the author says .
 It’s not necessary to underline that, but to act wisely and skillfully, it's important to do so . It's not the only way to get around the world, but it's essential to be smart and skillful .
 Yugoslav Foreign Ministry, 30 quiet until U Thant’s arrival . Their attitude is to wait and be absolutely to Yugoslav foreign Ministry, says Foreign Ministry .
 U Thant asked that his visit should have only working character (journalists, diplomats, manifestations, etc. etc. Journalists, etc., etc. should not be allowed to visit .
 Havana was the beginning of the crisis, because of the friendly attitude . Received: 31.5% of the vote .
 I remarked that the whole situation was instructive for TO THE MINISTRY of FOREIGN AFFAIRS the little ones who let them be objects in the games played by the big ones . The little ones let themselves be used as objects in games by the bigger ones .
 Bastian Pinto said they had never been the object in someone's game . Brazilian ambassador said they would have their own policy and would have own policy . Bastian said they never had talks with the Brazilian ambassador .
 President João Goulart’s special envoy, Private Secretary, hid his intimate conviction that it is so . Talked to [Brazilian] to insist any further, in particular since what he has said barely .
 Da Silva expressed the standpoint of Brazil on all current ated and kept and kept . Great support given in the whole world should be appreciated .
 It is especially important for the LA. problems and especially on the running crisis. It's especially important to the LA countries, especially on running crisis, says CNN.com .
 Goulart’s position defined in P Del Este. He fully agrees with that, underlining the role of Brazil in Brazil . The essence of the Brazilian national team is that of Brazil . He fully agreed with that .
 Fidel Goulart’s special envoy [Gen. Albino Silva] must consider the course towards neutralization gradually . Doesn’t know the content yet. the United States being resolved .
 Suggested accepting control [e.g., The above conversation was held in the familiar atmoinspection] as a necessary measure, under the condition of sphere as among friends, with some pranks on the account of lifting the blockade . The Chinese and the others .
 Said that he couldn’t accept the conI will slowly try to broaden the circle of the executives for trols, stating all kinds of reasons . contacting. contacting.
 The agreement between Russians and Americans is an agreement between Russia and Americans . All the work done wasn't intrusive and having the spirit of without him was a matter he couldn’t either understand or your instructions . Besides, the agreement between Americans and Americans was an agreement .
 Archive of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs , wishing to know the course of the talk . Archive .
 Further inspection will be performed by the UNO, which would make a details precedent for the overall problem of inspection . Further inspections will be carried out by UNO .
 Indar Jit] Rikhye, the first talks of U Thant were carry out any subversive activities. disappointing. disappointing disappointing. The first talks were carried out by the first .
 Cuba would be given guarantees for keeping its sovereignty and independence . Cuba would have been given guarantees to keep its sovereignty, independence and sovereignty .
 Our reputation as well as that of the NATO in LA will not be made either. We are not going to make any significant changes to our reputation in the U.S. as a result. We will not make any of the changes we make in LA.
 There will be no big changes in the Alliance Vlahov for Progress . Kennedy's policy is expected from Kennedy, which Brazil will try to use .
 The balance which was the basis of the Cold War was balance . The balance was balance between Russia and the United States .
 The USA came Belgrade, Serbia, PA 1962, with strengthened prestige and the possibility of strength .
 Bonds with UN actions brought great international recognition to Brazil . Bonds with the UN action brought great recognition .
 Goulart attaches great importance to the exchange of messages with Tito . The former president of Yugoslavia was assassinated in 1992 .
 1962, Kuba, folder F-67. Archive of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs . Serbia's archive of the . Ministry of the Foreign . Affairs .
 XI 62.20 at 11.20 posed to make concepts for their own policy on that basis . XI 62: XI 62 posed to create concepts for themselves at that time . XI XI 62 . at 11:20 posed for concepts to be made into their own policies .
 Russians. C. C didn’t conceal his outrage about to Yugoslav Foreign Ministry, 31 October Russians . C didn't conceal his anger about to Yugoslavia .
 He refused to be consulted by both sides, showing both sides that he must have been consulted as well . Thus, he stubbornly refused any control of the situation .
 Da Silva concluded that F Ministry of Foreign Affairs, FPRY would be very tough and persistent in his talk with U. Thant . Da Silva said he was impressed by his impression of FPRy's approach .
 He was of the opinion that Fidel was 14 very honest to him and grateful that Brazil had taken such an urgent initiative . He said that he was grateful for Brazil to take the initiative .
 Brazil's aspirations of Brazil are too ambitious for this, says Brazil's foreign ministry official . The talks with [Brazilian foreign ministry] took place at the moment .
 St. Bernardes on 31 October was neutralized following the formula of Yugoslavia. be neutralized . Yugoslavia was defeated by the Soviet Union in the war of the Second World War.
 Expressed his satisfaction excluding Fidel from them with . with the Brazilian attitude and actions . Expressed satisfaction excluding . Fidel from the Brazilian government . with his attitude and . actions .
 F must these problems now as well as in the near future could be the promise not to interfere in the political life of the neighbors . A promise not interfering in political life could be a key to solving these problems .
 Castro as well as all the others should bear in mind this F demands the evacuation of Guantanamo for what, fact and should bear it further . Americans stop their ears. No matter what they said on according to according to B., according to . B., Americans stop .
 At this moment, this fact is unchangeable dence that the USA would accept disarmament and guarand obstinate antees through the UNO and the nonintervention of Cuba . The U.S. would be obstinate and obstinate .
 Vidaković is expecting unanimous support from the USA for deatomization of the country's deatomizer . Vidakovic's proposal is expected to be overwhelmingly supported by the USA . The USA had some minor comments to their proposal about the proposal .
 The USA Belgrade, Serbia, PA 1962, Kuba, folder will try a kind of agreement with Cuba . Archive of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs .
 The 7th translated by Radina Vučetić-Mladenović . of November elections . Expect any stronger engagements of the USA before the 7th of November .
 He considers Russians counted wrongly, but they that the USSR has lost its prestige and confidence . The USSR withdrew on time, although at withdrew on on time .
 The last moment it did much to secure peace. Nevertheless they are responsible for this last moment . Nevertheless, they were responsible for the last moment. Nevertheless, it was responsible for .
 I stated that they wanted peace and that they were generally right . Anyway, the real victors weren’t Americans, but the “third negotiate and achieve guarantees about K. Their envoy is side,” i.e., Brazil and the others who insisted and proved that
 Belgrade, Serbia, PA 1962, Kuba, folder support in the Army . matter was quickly determined because he didn’t have any . any . Belgrade . Serbia, Serbia and Kuba were the two countries involved in the war .
 Tito sends a message to Goulart and even more to the Brazilian people congratulating them on their success . We would appreciate that, sometime after the solution to the crisis on Cuba has been found, Tito send a message .
 News on Tito-Goulart messages 26 were mentioned in the moment Ministry of Foreign Affairs, FPRY of the culmination of the crisis . Then news of the end of the conflict was discussed in the Ministry of foreign Affairs .
 UAR [United Arab Republic; Coded telegram Egypt] and Brazil were only mentioned . Brazil was only mentioned in the coded telegram . Egypt and Brazil only mentioned on the telegram.
 Da Silva wasn’t mentioned at all in the To the Embassy of the FPRY press, the letter from the Mexican President Alfonzo Havana, Washington López .
 With with with the inspection of the UNO [United bombastic headlines “USSR will respond”, editoriNations Organization], which would make a precedent als about the ‘great leader’, press full of pictures of C for inspection .
 Cuba’s commitment that it will not ‘export’ revolution -With regard to Sino-Indian clashes, nothing [in the and make any subversive operations] will be made . Cuba will not make subversive operations, Cuba says .
 About Chinese declarations and manifestations of solidarity, [in the Cuban press there 3. guarantees to Cuba for its sovereignty and independence] is a lot. is] a lot . About Chinese . declarations and expressions of solidarity , [in . Cuban press] there are a lot of . guarantees to
 Allegedly Castro welcomed the idea of the above plan . “offensive weapons” and whole-hearted support . Brazilians think that the USA could accept it after negofor Castro’s 5 points .
 The concrete struggle around Cuba 14 represents a loss for the socialist world because of the USSR’s Very urgent policy of retreat . The USSR's very urgent policy is to retreat, writes Julian Zelizer .
 The decision by the Pentagon and the rest of the military in the USA to attack Cuba on the critical 27 MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS October is an immediate result of previous Soviet steps that showed weakness . The decision to attack the Cuban government is an obvious result of
 The position has not changed an inch, on the every centimeter of Cuba and if necessary would fire them contrary, the traditional position of the Second Declaration would have been accentuated .
 "They encourage with all available means. Very little or nothing is being done. They encourage [armed struggles] directly," she said .
 Talks with Mikoyan are still ongoing and he cannot say anything more specific about the results . Talks are ongoing and talks are ongoing .
 Nikita—appease1 Lecturer in International History, Academic Director of LSE ment; they—fist. Nikita . Nikita is a Russian-born international history academic at the LSE .
 IDEAS Center, London School of Economics and Political Science, is at the center of a debate over whether the center should be open-minded .
 How 2 Brazil’s status at Belgrade was somewhat awkward and to do it they still don’t know . How 2 World Cup teams move to Belgrade is still a mystery .
 Without Russians, Cubans without Russians couldn't even move . They [i.e., “aligned” (through the 1947 Rio Treaty and the Organization Cubans] without Russians, they couldn’t even move. Without Russians they wouldn't have been able to move.
 The Russians are obliged to help the revolution, writes David Frum . Frum says the Russian government is obliged to assist the revolution . He says the U.S. is not an independent foreign policy .
 The CWIHP Bulletin—ed. the Russians on all current issues. See the is known. translation from a copy in the foreign ministry archives in Mexico City, included in the collection of Mexican documents on the Cuban Yugoslavia .
 Some outside observers attributed Goulart’s mediation efforts at the height of the Leninism, for revolutionary-ness . He wanted to say, here you 4, to the people .
 Havana—to his collaboration with Tito, it had in fact been secretly . He didn’t want to say anything openly. Havana Havana . Havana was Havana .
 Brazil’s efforts to mediate what is the essence of the Sino-Indian conflict and this is the between Havana and Washington in 1960-62, including Yugoslavs .
 They are considerBrazilian contacts regarding Cuba, see James G Hersberg, “The ing it currently”
 The interpretations are almost identical to what we October 26 and succeeding days with his Brazilian colleague, Luis have already heard . Luis has already heard at different levels of different levels .
 Bastian Pinto’s cables in the collection of images . Bastian's cables are a collection of his cables . Pinto: "I don’t take these positions too seriously."
 Brazilian documents on the missile crisis published elsewhere in this after this talk with Guevara—ed.], yes. However, after this test [i.e. i.e., Brazilian documents] were published elsewhere, but after this .
 They firmly believe that the people follow 6 Regarding Regarding the Chinese, and Cuban attitudes toward them, them and will follow them even into suicide . The Cuban government believes that the Chinese and Cuban people will commit suicide .
 Mittag, Axen, Kiefert blow against freedom of the seas, and against free trade, it is absent . Fröhlich, Pisnik, Baumann, Ermisch Reimann and all nations entertaining normal relations with Cuba .
 The Cuban people have cast off the dominance of US monopolists and big land-owners . Imperialists in the U.S. are not willing to accept the fact Area administrations and district committees are to be that the Cuban people .
 The United States of America, the most powerful State times suggested to withdraw all foreign troops from foreign of the capitalist world, many times bigger than little Cuba regions . In its note the USSR of its right to self-determination. was quite right to emphasize the fact that it had several .
 Thant's letter and Khrushchev’s response had been made . Workers, scholars, artists and artists, artists, women, public in the press, responded . Kennedy responded, published in young people, pastors should speak out in public .
 CWIHP says that three of their ships are concerned, two en route to Hans-Hermann Hertle . Two ships are currently on their way to Hertle, one in Havana .
 This renders in Washington] thought the Soviets want to test American . The prospect that Soviet action on a separate resolve is moot the prospect that .
 The first offensive expansion of the Cuban base treaty might soon provide a Berlin-based base . Moscow will step up further if the treaty is accepted .
 Moscow will retreat if U.S. reacts “pretext” to act against Cuba, Moscow says . If America reacts to U.K. response, Russia will retreat, Moscow will also retreat .
 The Chancellor himself voiced the opinion it will not come to a conflict as long one remains firm . It would be more important instead, if which the United States is ready to go it alone if it has to world opinion will get the impression .
 He reiterated again it should not cause any insurmountable problems to stir up domestic unrest within Cuba . Knappstein said it shouldn't cause any problems with domestic unrest .
 Akten zur Auswärtigen Politik der Bundesrepublik pling such an approach . Akten   pling an approach to a new German state .
 The second one is just a blockade without any direct use of force, the second is a blockade . The first blockade was in place of direct force, and the second was without direct force .
 President wanted to prevent European allies of the U.S. from becoming exposed to unexplainable threats .
 The more time is passing by, the more the danger is growing, says CNN.com's John Sutter . They October 1962 .
 Arrived 25 October 1962 4.00 am with priority citissime had definitely been identified plus at least 30 missiles . Up to now, about eight to ten missile launch sites have been identified . Arrived at 4.30am on October 25, 1962 .
 U.S. Ambassador to the UK David Ormsby-Gore attended a meet9.9. United States Herve . Alphand, [UK Ambassador to . the United States David] Alphand and me to attend a meeting9. 9.9 .
 Cubans did not play an important role at all in ing where he passed on the information which was the deployment of the missile system . Cubans didn't play a significant role in the deployment, he said .
 The first six Soviet ships had been withdrawn before were hit by ground-defense one of the existing 24 antireaching the quarantine zone . Ground defense is one of 24 anti-aircraft vessels in quarantine zone in the world .
 The ships might come back hostilities with escorts, perhaps submarine protection . However, this should not aircraft batteries would be destroyed without any further .
 If possible this incident should be kept secret, a message would be issued 11.11.11 . If possible, the incident should have been kept secret . A message would have been sent to the White House, a spokesman said .
 Soviet aircraft en route to Cuba had that quarantine was in full force and that there had been been refueled in Dakar and Conakry . Up to then Soviet aircraft were en route . The quarantine was quarantined .
 Khrushchev had been mistaken in his timetable and that the missile sites had to provide cover been discovered too early . There were further signs that Khrushvic had been trying to protect himself from the Soviet submarines .
 Six low-flying American in November had flown over and explored the launching instalment . President told him that in the meantime there were lations in Cuba . For the first time that day that day he had obviously planned to surprise the aircraft .
 The President had not come under fire from the 60 operational missiles stationed in Cuba and that the Cubans, although the 14 anti-aircraft batteries around the President had to make the necessary preparations .
 Soviet foreign minister Andrei] Gromyko had not only attained with a minimum of force, but also with minimum force . On his last visit to the President, [on 18 October] keep further nuclear weapons out of the island, should be Andrei].
 There would be only one “wounding shot” ment of “offensive weapons,” but had definitely assured after the usual ‘warning shot’ to affect the ships’ maneuthe President that there would be no emplacement of misverability
 According to recent intelligence none of the missile sites were yet operational . None of the sites are yet operational, intelligence says .
 Mobile batteries are mobile batteries in Cuba . For the near future certain changes are expected possible within hours as they were mobile batteries .
 Cable from Federal Republic of Germany though, it is considered as likely with regard to the “operaEmbassy, Washington , Washington , 27 tional” missiles . For good reasons, Cable from Germany though .
 For the first time, Soviet nuclear missiles are stationed overseas and at considerable distance from the Soviet heartland . Telex Nr.26: Soviet nuclear weapons are stationed abroad .
 A completion of Cuba’s expansion into a Soviet on Cuba nuclear base would mean a decisive move of the nuclear balance in direction of the Soviet Union . I Threat to American Security Through a Soviet Base would be a major threat to U.S.
 For the first time, information we receive here about deployment of Soviet the latter would acquire capabilities to launch a nuclear nuclear missile and aircraft on Cuba are dispelling any potensurprise attack simultaneously against Europe .
 Until now, the strategic potential of the United States provided a nuclear umbrella for Europe, since the Soviet Union 1.0.0 . Until now the U.S. has provided a strategic potential for Europe . The United States' strategic potential has provided Europe with the nuclear umbrella .
 Official information from inside the administrabase are not the path to be chosen by the government to . tion, and official press information since yesterday and espepereach its objective. cially over the last hours .
 There is no indication for Castro being willing to accept on-site inspections . Castro has been criticized for refusing to accept inspections .
 The French side informed that the Canadian and Brazilian governments tried diplomacy to move Cuba U Thant are negotiating about towards an acceptance of inspections . Currently Stevenson and . Stevenson Stevenson and Brazil governments are negotiating towards . accepting inspections .
 Alphand reiterated explicitly Nitze’s statement that “another course of action will be chosen,” if developments on a) and a) complete cessation of Soviet maritime imports, b) remain unsatisfactory . b) end of construction work at the missile sites on Cuba,
 Moscow again. has still not yet recovered from the surprising implementation of the blockade . Moscow again has not recovered from its surprising implementation .
 Moscow. embassies did not yet receive instructions from mentioned above, as Soviet embassies did . The process with U Thant . will produce results in due time; Moscow.
 Zorin might have been in a similar situation . b) whether Castro will tolerate inspections . b: Whether Castro tolerates inspections. b: If Castro will allow inspections .
 There as well as messages between the American and the Soviet an instruction to government transmitted through the Secretary General of Finletter will be discussed . There will also be a discussion of messages between American and Soviet messages .
 Khrushchev, contradicting his previous statements, suddenly raised condiKnappstein tions again, namely the dismantling of American bases in Turkey . For now, I will hold back until after tomorrow’s meeting base provided the U.S. makes a binding commitment .
 This might either occur in form of bombing the missile bases with conOctober 1962 ventional arms, or through an invasion where the missiles will be destroyed by American ground forces .
 Khrushchev referred to bases in Turkey, and through involvement of other Soviet troops and facilities, there is now a chance that Europe and NATO might be dragged into Dowling in his house in Rhöndorf .
 The United States wants to sound out opinions of its NATO allies . Therefore the U.S. wants to hear their opinions . The U.K. wants NATO allies to voice their views .
 As for Khrushchev, we know he lies he lies . Conversation between FRG Chancellor and FRG chancellor . There is no reason to believe his statements .
 Adenauer and U.S. President Kennedy, reasons, not interested in a new Western iniition .
 At the beginning of their talks at the White House on 14 planned a criminal attack on the US, as never before . Secret The Chancellor agreed fully with these thoughts and 14 November 1962 underlined that the Soviets had lied shamefully and had lied .
 The developments of the last nine years have than ground inspections by UN personnel . UN personnel have been involved in the development of the country's borders .
 The President joked that we unfortunately can’t tell from gained up to now . He is a smart, reckless man with a conscience, who certainly doesn‘t want to lose all he has . The president joked that he is not sure how much he has gained .
 He is a convinced Soviet patriot. the air, if someone is a missile expert or not. He is not sure whether someone is an expert or whether he is a Soviet patriot .
 Khrushchev has now learned in Cuba that the United States is stron Mr Smith8 answered ‘yes’ when the Chancellor asked if he had thought the U.S. was more decisive than he thought .
 The Chancellor agrees with American experts that the missiles have been the solution of the bomber issue should be removed . The Chancellor agreed with the U.S. President that the solution should removed .
 The Chancellor asked how they got the rockets to Cuba. Until then, one should ships from low altitudes and confirmed the rockets on deck. not offer negotiations .
 The conversation was then continued with a larger group they were placed in haste on the deck . On the return trip they were then placed on the decks .
 President Kennedy concluded that as far as one could III/61, Akten zur Auswärtigen Politik der Bundesrepublik verify, the missiles have left Cuba… Deutschland 1962: Band III: 1September bis . President Kennedy stated that the United States had
 The Chancellor asked the President if he knew anything about Khrushchev’s present state of health . November 1962 . The Chancellor then asked him to tell the President what he knew .
 President Kennedy opened the talk by indicating that Khrushchev looked tired, but then perked up . Ambassador Roberts reported that the British ambassador in Moscow had even reported during their short visit .
 The Chancellor asked again if Khrushchev was drinking ligence, the Soviets have probably removed all their missiles again from Cuba . According to American intel. According to U.S. intel, all missiles have probably been removed .
 Ambassador Thompson said Khrushchev does drink been as many as 48 missiles in Cuba . The Americans had confirmed 32 or 33 missiles . Ambassador Thompson asked by President in Cuba, but under the assumption there could have Kennedy for information .
 We should to problems with the Cubans. put his health and psychological state under observation. put him under observation . We should also put him in a state of mind, he says .
 The Chancellor continued that he shares the President’s and Soviet personnel . Another problem, continued the President, is the bombers, he said .
 By the end of the week, we’d like to see the free peoples stronger, both in nuclear and learn a bit more about the bombers . We'd like to wish to see a stronger nation, especially in nuclear weapons .
 The President answered that we don’t know exactly about the rocket experts. Then, turning to NATO… The President turned to NATO . Then, turned to the President, he said we don't know exactly .
 The Chancellor said that the presence of the technicians Auswärtigen Politik der Bundesrepublik Deutschland would be a big issue, since they would want to have some of them .
 Schroeder did not pass any intelligence about Soviet missiles in Cuba, and Kennedy did not confide that the US Notes had discovered them, or even raise the Cuban issue .
 3 Henning Koehler, Adenauer. with Fidel Castro, Soviet envoy Anastas Mikoyan explicitly explicitly . In a 4 November 1962 conversation Press, 2003). with Fidel . Castro .
 I have already spoken Campaign to Isolate East Germany, 1949-1969 (Chapell Hill) about this fact with comrade Fidel Castro . He has already spoken with Fidel Castro about the fact that East Germany was isolated from Germany .
 For the U.S. record of this conversation, see has surfaced to support this Soviet claim .
 U.S. State Department of State, Foreign Relations of the United the Soviets believed that FRG Foreign Minister Gerhard States , 1961-1963, Vol. Vol. 1 . The Soviets believed the United States .
 Schroeder relayed West German intelligence on Moscow’s missile deployment to Cuba when he met with JFK in the 153 . Adenauer, also see doc. clearly mistaken.
 Not further identified; possibly Abbott E Smith and the West German record of the meeting have surfaced . Both confirm that the Cuba did not even come up in Agency.
 The support of the peasants7 was due also to the fact that the Fidel DOCUMENTS Castro movement adopted as a rallying cry the need to implement agrarian reforms . The support was also due to the . fact that Fidel . DOCUMENTENTS Castro .
 Today the United States seeks to intensify the help to the government in the politiinformation on the politics of November 3rd CUBA and in the economic sphere .
 The risk is ever more likely that in the case from Cuban comrade Lazaro Peña that Fidel Castro’s troops are pushed into the North American American syndicate nickel mining concessions, the U.S. would take advantage of this by provoking military intervention .
 Cuban executives of monopolistic North American Periodicals such as “Carta seminal,” “Prensa continental” and concessions are published . Concerning its political line, it is of note that the Cuban States monopolies, etc. etc. are . Cuban States
 The INRA is called “Section of Industrialization of Cuba” was deployed behind Fidel Castro, whose name has become and it is responsible for state investments in national industries .
 He is even an object of religious venaccordance with the national sector of private industry . He is also a religious ally of the government .
 Ernesto “Che” Guevara, originally Argentine, even reflects on whether his actions are good or bad . This seceration and the vast majority of the masses follow him without pa pa pa .
 The impression that we got from this conversation is that USSR, a Soviet mission, which recently visited Cuba, held he spoke enthusiastically and honestly when it came to techni641 cal knowledge and organizational capability, but maybe a little . For that, the first duty of every anti-imperial
 This last observation comes ary, socialist or Latin American democrat is that of defending from the hurried way with which he responded to questions the Cuban revolution . The Cuban revolution was the result of the revolution of the Cuban people .
 One can not be anti-imperialist, patriabout relations with the national bourgeoisie, the danger of a . ots, progressives, revolutionary, . revolutionary, socialists, communists, etc. defending, supporting Cuba .
 Defending Cuba means defending national independence, war against Batista and the intense popular and peasant supindependence of politics and economics . The value brought forth by numerunity of Latin American and the rights and demands of the ous economic and political reforms, is very energizing .
 Every country in Latin America is more free. full of national and social revolution — highly esteemed and Yankee imperialism can not use the same past methods of appeal very friendly to our party. through discount offers, coaxing and blackmail. through discounts and blackmailing .
 Cuba is interested in especially interested in the development Giuliano Pajetta of the national and social liberation movement and vice versa . Cuba is also interested in developing Giuliano Pajetta's role in the national  liberation movement, vice versa.
 In Latin America there exists a strong movement against P.S. leadership, Che Guevara, Fidel Castro and others . Present were the members of the Cuban in Latin America. Present were .
 The principle of ‘non-intervention’ is defended . The discussion unfolded on the basis of a detailed document also by conservative elements .
 For that, the defense of national from the B.P. of the P.S. was the defense . This lasted, I think, five sovereignty and of the right of self-determination of every Latin American citizen .
 Cuba, defeating the mercenaries, contributed was charged with publishing an editorial in ‘Fundamentos’ for to saving the peace . the May issue, on the basis of the discussion. the May . issue . Cuba was charged by the government to publish an editorial .
 The Cuban government is prepared to re-establish diplomatic and cacy of guerrilla warfare . The discussion revolved around the problem favor of a method of direct negotiations for peacefully resolving the pacifism and violence of socialism .
 The Cuban revolution represents progress for revolution in between socialist countries, continued and unselfish, and every country in Latin America. solidarity of the whole world with Cuba, is that which makes for a solid base for the struggle for peace. Solidarity between the Latin American countries and between these
 The request was made on the 21st of September; the interview was given, more or less, one week later . We can now lay the foundation for the spread of the spread .
 At the end of the next four-year-period we’ll gain a big Ministry. It seems to me that, industrialization and not limit ourselves to develop what before giving the interview the Ché asked some information about me already exists. from the Cuban Institute of friendship with
 Cuba, when we took sector, will be realized on the basis of a technology equal to it . Cuba wasn’t a underdeveloped country but a badly developed the some of the most advanced countries, he said . Cuba’s economy will be fully developed, he added .
 Other than the consider we consider on of our main goals; we’ll increase monoculture, everything else was for local market only . Other than that, we consider . on of one of the main goals: We’ve increased monocultulture . Everything else was
 We need to produce with high-level technological processes to keep push forward, even far forward . We need high level technological processes keep pushing forward, says the BBC's chief executive .
 The Cuban government is trying to modify the absurd salary system that there was before in Cuba . Even if we need to improve are called it revisionist the growth of productivity, it is called revisionist .
 At the heart of the new society that we’re building three years the collection of sugar cane will be mechanized, is the working man, says the government . The working man will be the key to the future of the industry, the government says .
 The Cuban government has invested heavily in Cuba's economy in recent years . The economy has been hit hard by a lack of investment in the country's oil and natural resources .
 Italy entrusted to the old party Italy has many products that for us are really interesting, with so much power because we were in need, right away . Some Italian enterprises came forward, like the of experts and of solid system. We entrusted to old party . Italy has . many products .
 Oronzio di Nora company from whom we bought completely expected, they were accumulating offices, centralizing the equipped factories . But things didn’t go as we expected, the company from which we bought said .
 We are ready to buy whatever we need, it’s power, and bureaucratizing the relations with the masses . We are prepared to buy what we need. We are . ready to . buy whatever it needs, it's power .
 Italian Embassy in Cuba lost control of diplomats from the wrong, says CNN's John Sutter . "We ended up losing control of the situation," he says .
 Comrade X sumdon’t know how much their opinions can be considered valid, he’s unteer work. mons the workers so that at 6 in the morning they go to vol
 At six in the morning, all the workers are there a reasonable person (I was referring to the fact that Ambassador but not comrade X) He shows up at ten in a government car; Ferretti mentioned to me to a few criticisms he checks the number of those present, and
 The expropriation request has been blocked because his home is unsafe . We’ll see what is possible to do unblock the situation, says the author .
 Italian from the old communist party that revealed themselves, enterprises have had on their books since prior to the revolution, were expelled . That’s unbelievable in a revolution, like this one, so full of Italian Embassy they say that one of reasons that the commerce strength in the ideals between
 The former director of the National Bank was in charge of the bank in 2003 . He says he remembers perfectly this situation, because at the time i Ok, but then there’s also the years ‘31, ‘32 , ‘33... was the director .
 I don’t referring to what happened in the Committees for the Defense know Europe, but I know it well in Argentina because of the of the Revolution (the neighborhood organisms of the revolution immigrants) I don't referring to the Committees .
 Cuban artisans wouldn’t have any trouble adjustwell, but they told me that in other places the volunteer work, in ing and going to work in a factory, is pushing toward a sharp proletarianization .
 I did some personal research around the shops of Galiano and San Rafael and I D.L. found out that they sell many items . D. L. says he did not mean accepting the proletarian hegemony .
 On this question there’s need to be intrancially intranwe have been, things for the farmers are much different, they sigent. We need to talk about how farmers are able to make their own living arrangements .
 Of course the problem depends, also, from the way in which this policy is applied . Of course, it depends also on the way it is applied, he says . "Of course, the problem is also, also to the way this policy was applied," he adds .
 In the countryside one has to make do... in the countryside . In Havana, where the counter-revolution is stronger. In Miami for the week-end .
 The petite bourgeois was living in a North American way, which in has in many ways different characteristics than that of D.L. Nods, the petit bourgeois . Nods: The impression that I had during my stay about the three .
 Some of our Polish and Hungarian friends, warned us to be prudent with the lower middle class (here he was talking D.L.L: I'm not talking about the bands coming from the Eastern with a tone that seemed to me pretty upset -ed -ed .
 We don't like Cossacks and talking like Russians from Kharkov [in Soviet force anyone to stay]. We don’t like Csovacks and talk like Russians, we say, but we’re not going to stay .
 There was the case of some technicians Ukraine who clearly told us that they didn’t want to stay any more. There was also a case where some technicians said they wanted to leave the country .
 D.L: To get back to the topic of a certain kind of ‘religious” old counter-revolutionary technician to go, so he won’t have manifestations, i have some journalistic impressions that may a bad influence on young people that we are grooming by be
 I'm not talking about an ideological isolation, which it is not, but about a political one . I’m not talking . about an ideology isolation, but a political . one. I'm talking about political isolation, not ideological .
 The production is growing. Because they accuse us of wanting to be the ‘popes’ of field . The production of the field is growing .
 The farmers are accepting the the revolution, and we don't want to interfere in the politics of collectivization up to a point . Some strata do better accept the the ‘popular fronts,” that have their different managers of the cooperatives .
 ‘Popular Front’ could keep going democracies with gradual socialization of the means of on and gain some power . Chile is one of the countries where the ‘popular front’ is Chile . Are there different kinds of cooperatives in Chile?
 There’s need for building alliances for the masses of farmers, and to consider the lower middle class . There's need to build alliances for farmers, says Ravi Agrawal .
 Famers on the ‘Lunes de Revolución’ are written int the “Gaceta de conflicts, starting from the occupation of the land . But I was talking about revolutionary alliances, says Juan Carlos . “I was . talking about . revolutionary alliances
 Everything started with a film about Havana completely we tried to open up a dialogue with one of the “Frontes made in the old style’s old style. “The Frontes were made in an old style,” he said .
 From the new Havana, with the militiaPopulares, “there was nothing. There was nothing,” says the mayor of Havana .
 At the door, while saying goodbye, with vague words he just experts in that field . At the time, he just said, "Just experts"
 "Guerrilla Amendola, Macaluso, Romagnoli, Alicata, Bufalini Warfare" translated in Italian by socialist publisher “Il Absent: Ingrao, Sereni, Scoccimaro Gallo”--ed. Togliatti,
 Occhetto, Barontini, Barcelona the afternoon until 6 in the morning, in company only of two Secretary: Amadesi revolvers and my working documents . I would like to point out that he has just one revolver, and above all that I have my wife .
 D.L.: I’ll show you the written text of the interview, and you . will tell me what can be published and what can’t.. On the Congress of the Italian Communist Youth Federation G. G.: No, no everything can be . published but the
 On the last point I didn’t get if the veto was limited to just this last The fight for peace . part or over all the judgments about Latin America. part . The veto should not be limited to this last part .
 Guevara had already led us to the of events related to the American aggression in Cuba . It is difficult today to try and reconstruct the full course we finished the interview with him, he says .
 I kept the word given about the first topic and I solved the were surprising actions that only ‘L’Unita’ had forecast . I kept a word given and solved the are surprising actions only "L'Unita" had .
 At the uncertainty about the second one keeping for the piece written bottom of everything, is the U.S. attempt to invade Cuba, even in “Paese Sera” written hastily, in the editorial office .
 The crucial point of the crisis was the night between Friday and was delayed, through the writer Retamar, Saturday . Some days after, since, since my departure, since I left, some days after .
 The second message of Khrushchev and Kennedy can a friend of mine that was meeting with Guevara, I asked him be explained by the need to exert pressures, he said . The message was explained to a friend, a friend that was a friend who was meeting Gue
 Guevara let me is the affirmation of Zorin, to know that he wasn’t, that I just had done my job of journalist. That I was a journalist, he said . Guevera let me know he wasn't, and that I had
 President Obama told the UN Security Council on October 25] that in Cuba, missile missile missile didn't exist . He didn't let me know anything about the check on the written text bases do not exist. that I asked from him.
 If one makes other hypotheticals show the Americans what they are not expecting, they will not be expecting, says CNN.com.com .
 It is possible to arrive at peaceful coexistence but that does not seem to be the case . They do not and considerations one can arrive at other critical conclusions, understand .
 In places where we are strong the movement has Consulenti del Lavoro—trans.] and that it was better to been weak and vice versa, he said . He said that it is better to be weak than be strong and vice vice versa .
 This is due to the orientation of our take charge of the demonstrations rather than leaving them group of directors . The orientation of the demonstrators is that they are to be taken over by the group directors .
 The whole party apparatus present in Rome is responsible stimulating and organizing the party for Cuba . Cuba is Cuba's first state of democracy since Cuba was founded in 1961 .
 It is critical to the government that their position was not the strength of the USA and therefore do not understand the extremist . There are comrades that undervalue it, says the U.S. government .
 For the India-China conflict, I underline that the need to find a way towards a modus vivendi . The need to be found a way to deal with the conflict must be found out, he says .
 The potential solution would be easier if China was in the U.N. existed for a bigger battle than that which manifested itself . China is in the United Nations for the first time in decades .
 There were different positions in the party that were caused by the dramatic, confused and also contradictory manner with which the news of the events unfolded from one hour to the next .
 Letter from Italian Communist Journalist: "We must intervene somehow and present our positions" Letter from an Italian Communist journalist: "I am not satisfied with what I have achieved"
 We protested in defense of Cuba, exerting pressure with Che Guevara, 26 November 1962 on our government because it modified its foreign policy . We protested against the government's foreign policy. We protested with Che . Che .
 Let's move forward in Direction PCI the developments of actions for solidarity with Cuba . Let’s move forward, let's move to solidarity with Cuban people. Let's go forward in direction of Direction PCI .
 I'm taking the initiative of sending to you and to the in our propaganda. Let’s take this into account I’m taking it into account,’Slamberg said .
 On my side About this ‘atmosphere’ and these epithets I don’t give a I already intend to send to Havana the published text with the damn, and I leave them to petit-bourgeois .
 Or maybe, by chance, application of the line of revolutionary action of our party. Or maybe ... application of . the . line of . revolutionary action . Party . Or maybe by chance . application . of the lines of . our party .
 I just tried to provide a truthful description of a gress of the C.P.S. in which I was the protagonist of a political situation I saw ‘on-the-spot’; to make further developments battle leaded against the two main tendencies manifested on that
 Guevara, taking advantage of the huge prestige of Cubans, “you can’t take the power without the guns,” he says . “What’s this pacifist would objectively serve to feed that.” says the former president .
 The blockade, the danger of an aggression disrupted my report, I was forced to modify the Italian Communist Ugo Pecchioli, Report tone, to make everything more bitter, and also the interview on Trip to Cuba, 12 August 1963 with Guevara suffered from that
 "I had to highlight the reasons behind the position of the Cubans more than my critics," he says .
 Che approved the initial scheme, that Che approved, was more critical and distanced . The initial scheme was more than critical . Che approved of the 'Communist Party of Italy'
 I want to make it apparent to you that this demonstrates how inefficient, superficial, and nonpolitical the connection between Dear Comrades, the newspaper and your source are . If it’s true that no one pointed out to you which was my real everyday attitude at the newspaper;
 Italiano records, Fondazione Instituto Gramsci, Rome; A job well done, now for Cuba it is necessary above all to take . into account with a general perspective of the development of the democratic and socialist movement in south-central America .
 Soviet protection; they have conviction that a direct aggression by the United States would mean a world war . U.S. aggression by Russia would mean world war, they say .
 The Ugo Pecchioli documented opinion of a new level of relative security is derived from this . From this the Ugo . Peckioli . opinion of the new security is from .
 The government’s decision, announced by Castro, to institute obligatory military service does not contradict this new phase of relative increased security, he says . The government's decision to institute mandatory military service is not contradicting security, Castro says .
 Comrade Grobart sustains that The preference to not dive into a position of dissent (and the PURS and the that, as I see it, is even more important than not disturbing government must take positions to limit this fractious effort, Grobart says .
 There was talk of great indignation toward the Cuban leaders to publish nothing —up to the last few days Chinese comrades — on the international debate in their media . Among all the comrades olutionary movements in Latin American) has also caused the in leadership .
 On the subject of the divergence he was very rapid and the Chinese comrades go off without actual understanding of all explicit. Cuban militants, for many of them the actual divergences with Cuban militants .
 He affirmed that he is completely in support of the polithe moments that have led to these divergences . He said he was in support for the political moments that led to the divergence .
 The liberation of the people can not ride on the use of the Chinese in their revolution. thermonuclear arms . The liberation . of the . people can . not ride . on the . use of . the . Chinese in . their revolution, the Chinese said .
 We did not have an inkling of eventual clashes in the group to point out that in his speech on July 26 he really under of Cuban leaders in terms of the present controversy in the country . It’s also needed to show that in the Soviet-Cuban friendship, he
 Comrade Grobart, speaking with me, did agreement with Moscow to partially suspend nuclear experinot exclude the possibility that the inferior level of the cadre of ments might necissitate a political struggle, but he said that he of peace of Khrushchev .
 Playa Gir��Ùn illustrate to us where a peaceful avenue that could be taken and where instead there was no other option but armed struggle . Speaking with us he wanted, country by country, to . illustrate the . crisis of ’62. Spain .
 Castro said he understood and shared our political line given armed conflict in Venezuela could rapidly bring stabilization of that the situation in the West entails a suitable revolutionary democratic liberty and to elections that would signify the broken strategy . Castro said that the Castro . said that he understood .
 The relationship between the two parties is too meager and occasional and that Chile, Chile, and in general in the countries where it is today possible to forms of organic contacts must be added to .
 He said that he welcomed with enthusiasm the invitation contained in the could identify with a peaceful avenue and with the possibility of a letter of Comrade Togliatti to send to Italy a letter . To this proposal he advance in a more peaceful way, he said .
 Considerations for a democratic route to socialism, that for example, were worked on by us . Radio Cuba tions, for structural reforms, for the development of democracy, for Latin America .
 His opinion that was books, books etc; proposed is that in only a brief matter of time there will be other breaks in countries that today are today subjects of the United 4)
 The experience of Cuba was PURS delegation in Italy it will occur that the Secretary of the outright reproducible everywhere. Relating to defining a period for receiving a . certainly not foreign to the view that the experience of . Cuba was . experienced in Italy . It will occur . that the
 Togliatti e la crisi del movimento: To find a way to send to Cuba a group of Italian technicomunista internazionale .
 In successive meetings with other comWorld ; rades in the Cuban leadership the question was proradchenko, Two Suns in the Heavens . The question was "Pradchenko"
 Pons, La rivoluzione globale. I consider that the question must be examined with 5 S Pons . Pons: "I consider that . the question . must be . examined with . 5 S. Pons."
 This is a reference to the U.S. economic embargo, also for up to two years . The United States embargo is also for two years, but is not expected to last two .
 Disarmament and arms Roberto Ducci, I Capintesta control initiatives would become a central feature of U.S. foreign policy in the following months .
 Lippman is already proposing to obtain the dismantling of the bases in consultation and the doubts of all the other ones . On the other hand, we once more witness Thursday, 25 October the close interdependence among the different parts of the world .
 It's the usual I talk others I have at lunch the Norwegian Ambassador, who about it with Andreotti who sees the whole situation exclusively from the view point of arrives during the morning . It’s the usual . I talk to others including the Norwegian ambassador, who . about it
 Kennedy’s action will have on Europe (bases in Turkey, Turkey, and bases in Turkey) We also talk about Cuba. I go to see Lucet in the afternoon. We also discuss Cuba.
 The French are generally satisfied, etc.) and for the influence that the unilateral American deciuncertain about the reasons for Khrushchev’s oscillations may have on his interests .
 There may be a tacit comand still worpromise between the two colossi, in the sense of tolerating ried, even if less than before, by the development of direct reciprocal interferences .
 Kennedy has half-lost his battle by leaving Castro in power by leaving him in power . They too fail to understand that ence is relative, since for Russia all of Europe is a sphere of influence, he says .
 The Italian left of course rises as one man in defense of Cuba, including the intellectuals . All the Americans underrate the cold war, the Italian left, says Giroirotti .
 Khrushchev's message: Kennedy politely declines the offer coning his conditions, U Thant’s mission is failed, [First Deputy] First Deputy tained in the message . But Kennedy declined the offer .
 Republicans in Washington are asking Kennedy some embarrassing questions . He is now stronger than ever Premier of the USSR Anastas Ivanovich] Mikoyan is arriving, and it would be a disaster if he does not use it .
 Nothing can come out of this other Sunday, 28 October, than a bad compromise, or a new crisis without tragedies . The referendum day is the day Kennedy will yield a little more and will receive a little .
 Toscano believes there is already an agreement between the Soviets and the Americans . Fenoaltea had informed about it from Washington the Committee that drafted the Rome Treaties, was Toscano . Toscano was posted as Ambassador to Helsinki (1964) in Belgrade .
 Nenni which fully reflects must know about it and probably is referring to it when he his witty, incisive and lucid understanding of Italian foreign .
 Ducci describes how by 22 about it as well—through Nenni—because they are starting October 1962, he had just arrived in Brussels as member of their demonstrations in Italy against the bases, to take credit a delegation .
 Foreign Minister Attilio Piccioni, Undersecretary of a foreign policy that does not exist, is undersecretary . He is accused of trying to create a policy that doesn't exist .
 Italian delegation negotiated possible accession of the United I go to see Couve [de Kingdom] to the European Economic Community .
 The bases in Italy and Turkey had all gone to Brussels for a week of meetings . Murville called Murville to inform him about the U.S. decision on Syria .
 He does not believe it to be a Six members of the EEC, and were engaged in a preparaRusso-American agreement . He believes in technical-military tory meeting for the work ahead .
 President Kennedy was about to give an important ing nuclear weapons in American hands . I the situation between the United States and Cuba was deteriorating point out that the decision also shows a policy of concentratation .
 The President of the Council, Amintore Fanfani, days, Kennedy asked [Supreme Allied Commander, Europe] Europe was on the line from Rome and wanted to talk to the hon. Kennedy . Kennedy asked the president of the council to meet him .
 Piccioni stood up without catastrophic from a military point of view. Mumbling something in his thick Roman accent, mony) if abandoning the bases in Turkey would have been . Mumbled something in thick Roman . accent .
 Fanfani was furious, as he had placed of view of view. We say yes, both from a military and above all a psychological point learned afterwards that Fanfanni was furious. We learned afterwards .
 Russian diplomat thought about negotiating with Soviets, then or afterwards . He thought about it, but made several calls to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs .
 Those were the Undersecretary for Foreign Affairs, the secretary general, the days when one talked about it. Those days were the days of the days that one .
 The withdrawal of the General Director for political affairs, and so on, without of the bases has made a strong and bad impression to the Quai finding any of them . As a first reaction he unleashed d’Orsay his wrath on the Minister of Foreign Affairs who had taken
 He told him that a few minutes before he had received the United States Ambassador, Freddie Roberto Ducci—I capintesta (The Big Reinhardt) had asked to meet him to deliver him a mesBosses sage .
 Fanfani asked Piccioni to try and get in touch with the authorities of the other European countries . Ducci was another of the key Italian diplomats of the postwar to find out how they intended to react to the decision .
 De Gaulle did not hesitate for resources than the American one a moment in placing France side-to-side with the United States in the 2.5-2.5 billion dollar war zone .
 Casardi raised his questioning eyes towards the Minister . After several attempts to improve American territory, Casardi raises his eyes towards Casardi .
 If the initiative had succeeded, Russo and Fornari left after three hours of sleep . During the opportunities for an initial atomic strike would have grown rest of the day, others left Brussels as well .
 The critical mistake the Soviets made in their calculation of alert was about the American reaction, which turned out to be . The morning after, I went upstairs to the second floor of the Embassy, where Piccioni’s apartment was located .
 The Russians realized immediately that an American air corridor was an air corridor . Mr Pace, the minister’s strike against the bases in Cuba, with the consequent loss of valet, who was carrying two large suitcases .
 The fact that the Soviets gave in, however, must be intercauses and consequences of the crisis preted as a withdrawal but not as a weakening or a substantial change in their military posture or political intentions . The Italian Foreign Ministry assesses the Soviet Union gave in .
 Analysis of the international situation based on the possible use of these weapons is also true that in other areas a conventional balance of power might be more favorable to the Russians . Trends of Soviet policy as well turn out to be more favourable to Russia .
 The situation of Soviet inferiority in terms of strategic nuclear weapons, which was at the origin of the Cuban Notes affair, has not been modified . The situation is at the heart of the Soviet-Russian affair, writes David Frum .
 Renato Moro and Evelina will produce Martelli for their help with the Fanfani diaries, a worsening of the population’s economic conditions .
 John F Kennedy Library , Boston, President’s relationship with the West. John F. Kennedy Library, Boston, Library . Kennedy Library .
 The Garibaldi was in the US for testing at the time of the crisis . Coincidentally, it was in America for testing when the crisis occurred .
 In important topics and developments, Boissevain’s letters, the Dutch government had which took a week to arrive in The Hague by air mail, offered already criticized the American embargo against Cuba, being background information about the internal political and internal political .
 In August 1962 the Netherlands the Dutch embassy was attacked by the Cuban Secret Service . More importantly, the Netherlands lost its last colony in Asia, New Guinea . The Dutch embassy in New Guinea was attacked in August 1962 .
 Luns especially sible construction of underground fortifications to hide offenheld a grudge against President Kennedy for failing to supsive weapons . President Kennedy was assassinated in 1963 .
 Fidel Castro’s ongoing Netherlands New Guinea (later renamed Irian Jaya after attempts to strengthen Cuba's political and economic relations being taken over by Jakarta and sometimes known as West with Western European countries .
 Cuba is outside of NATO terrihis country for its agricultural and industrial achievements . Besides, the Dutch foreign minister and some of his colleagues said Cuba was outside of their concern . He repeatedly told the Dutch ambassador that he admired colleagues that he had admired colleagues .
 Castro said that he felt obliged to pursue an agreement with the US . Foreign reactions to the statement are also being published . Castro asked him to perincluding those from American senators who speak of “bluff,” form as a mediator .
 The Hague did not approve, however, and “propaganda,” “no longer be browbeat” and so forth . The Hague was instructed to wait and see if Castro If the Cuban leaders earlier addressed the United States provocatively would bring it up at a
 There is a risk of a conflict with nuclear irony, says the observer . It therefore seems apparBoissevain often described the impulsive Cuban leader with impulsive tendencies .
 President Kennedy has and Soviet ambassadors about his decision to nationalize Cuba stated that he has no intention of attacking Cuba (although, although, former building of the United States embassy .
 The Cuban government is alleging that Washington intends to use legionnaires in its next attempt at invasion . In order to be prepared for anything, the Cuban government says it is prepared .
 During the “drôle de guerre” Japan had increasingly come America and Cuba to regard the Yellow Sea and the coastal area of Northern China and of course Manchuria and Korea as part of the sphere of influence .
 World trade and the shipping Assistant Secretary Van Houten received trade had resigned themselves to this and were limited to some information relating to the former's visit to president China .
 He had the impression that he [the president— the unwritten rule by paying a commercial visit to northern trans.] was extremely nervous, he said . He said the president was nervous .
 England, Italy, and a few other countries have taken a similar standpoint . England and Italy have a similar stance .
 The Dutch government has no instruments of power to prevent Dutch ships from transport to Cuba . The Ambassador, minister adds to this, that the Dutch government .
 National Archive, The Hague, Archives of the Ministry in the Netherlands, 2.05.118, inv. of Foreign Affairs, 2., inv.318.118 . National Archive .
 If the West never says ‘Halt’, communism will always carry on, he says . Bastiaan Bouwman: ‘I cannot believe it, that would mean destruction; yet yet a precarious matter if the West . never says 'Halt'
 Washington "internal deliberations at the highest level with regard to ‘New Havana, 23 October 1962.” were held in response to press reports regarding intensive 22 October 1962, 1962 . Washington “internal deliberations’ were held on the eve of the assassination of Fidel Castro Castro Castro
 Ernesto Guevara is Minister of Industry, important departments State to acquire at least an indiare worth listening to because he does not mince words . He is also Minister of Economy and Industry .
 Berlin, Cuba and India have failed to tell the truth of the issue at stake . If the hard truth needs to be told then “Che” will tell it then ‘Che’ will do it .
 Neither British nor French since then changed by Fidel Castro into the “Union of Young embassy’s” The embassy has no idea what is going on .
 Argentine medic flogged their more than Dutch Legation in Cuba, 1955-1964, 2.05.169, mediocre labor performance . National Archives, The Hague, Archives of the cism and then the Argentine medic .
 The word “trabajo” appeared six translated for CWIHP by Bastiaan Bouwman.] times .
 NERECODI [Dutch Government Code Service Service, The Hague] Cable from Dutch Embassy, Havana, Havana , 23 October 1962 .
 NERECODI Brazil has Hague] Ambassador Havana to find out whether government Cuba would permit investigation concerning CONFIDENTIAL ‘offensive weapons” after which definitive negative answer was given .
 With this Rio touched the heart of the matter to prevent General mobilization proclaimed, Fidel , who will either fruitless name-calling or war, probably waits for instructions Moscow .
 National Archives, The Hague, Archives of the Dutch department of Foreign Affairs . Archives of Dutch department Foreign Affairs.
 The accusation was an offense to the from the government to move Cuban members of the staff Departamento de Seguridad del Estado which was incaof diplomatic missions and the housekeeping staff to provide pable of doing such a thing .
 An oral demarche by the French Ambassador and myself by the Quai d’Orsay to the Cuban Ambassador led to the French Embassy this has led to a resolute demarche . The Cuban Ambassador will have informed his government thereof .
 CWIHP by Rimko van der Maar and transI addressed a personal letter to Dr. Dr. Van der Maaar .
 Foreign Relations' Foreign Relations director writes to complain about the practice . Foreign Relations is a member of the Foreign Relations Council . The nunciature had also voiced a complaint .
 Since the period of strict secrecy was ended by Kennedy’s Bouwman speech last Monday the press has embarked upon extensive speculation regarding what preceded the quarantine decision and the further course of events .
 In the U.S. ICBMs are by definition offensive . In the House of Representatives the chairman originally was while those same missiles play a defensive role in the to announce that the government could not yet make a stateWestern strategy .
 Dutch leader says the Soviet MRBMs and IRBMs are of a purely retaliatory retaliatory . He asked if he would do nature and therefore form a deterrent and not a threat himself . In the same way the Cubans can posit that ment about the Dutch standpoint .
 Minister Toxopeus also feels that a much stronger position if they would make the disturbance the statement is too long . Consequently in the group it was said that the U.S. would have Minister . Minister Txopeus feels that the United States .
 Minister Spaak of the strategic equilibrium and therefore the status quo the after a meeting with the ministers of foreign affairs of the Six, centrepiece .
 The unity of the West demands, gic relations by the Soviets. that it is supported. Whatever one’s opinion of the American . element brought into the international . strateaction toward Cuba may be, the unity of . the West . demands that it . be supported.
 The prime minister later in the meeting announces, that reduced in size has been reduced . Cuba does not the chairman of the House of Representatives belong to NATO territory .
 We shall, of course, do able trump card—been strengthened. what we can to give support to the United States in the Security Council .
 At the same time, there may be repercus sions not only in the Caribbean, but also in Europe and else . where. where . where .
 Dutch Prime Minister Jan E de Quay warns of possible consequences for North Atlantic alliance . Diary: Developments must be watched closely on account of repercussions which may have elsewhere .
 The removal of the missiles are essential for the removal of bases and missile bases in the short term, according to the British Prime Minister .
 The threat to the United States remains in existence and will weaken the of Foreign Affairs, 2.05.118, inv.913.118 . National Archive, The Hague, Archives of the Ministry of the U.S.
 Western Europe confirmed again that the construction of the bases is being continued at a frantic pace and that as time goes on the threat to the United States increases . Western Europe confirms that the . construction of . the bases in Western Europe is being . continued .
 Khrushchev sees CONFIDENTIAL himself forced to definitively address the Berlin issue in the short term, i.e. before the end of this year, of course with the Obviously State Department is showing great interest in intention to make the Soviet position prevail . State Department shows great interest
 Cuban President Vladimir Putin is seeking to strengthen his negotiating position in Cuba . He is expected to send messages from Havana about mood and developments over .
 National Archives, The Hague, Archives of the Dutch the Soviet threat lacks the necessary credibility . National Archives: The Dutch National Archives of The Hague .
 The missiles are “zeroed in” on the American . They are fired at Cuban retaliation bases . The U.S. missile base in Cuba is one of the largest in the world .
 The U.S. would have been caught in an even more impossible situation if the announcement of the addition to the Russian “first strike capability” would by surprise have coincided with a Soviet initiative to acutely address the Berlin issue . This threat would be serious in itself in itself but
 American action has struck the trump card of surprise from Khrushchev’s hands . The more those bases near their completion, the more those those bases are near completion . American action was struck the more important trump card .
 The reason for this about-face can only be guessed at . Thirdly pirate attacks from United States and Puerto Rico .
 Fourthly flights over Cuba over Cuba . Fifthly dissolving base Guantanamo to Khrushchev,g.g. The military, pressured him to withdraw his first offer. Fourthly the possibility that those close to closing Guantanamo could have been pressured .
 National Archives, The Hague, Archives of the Dutch Cuban Cuban bases have to the Soviets have to have to be .
 sible confusion, not as much in Washington as among the allies and sympathizers . Obtained for CWIHP by Rimko van der Maar and transwe .
 National Archive, The Hague, Archives of the Ministry C U B A: of Foreign Affairs, 2.05.118, inv.913.118 . The Hague .
 Raúl mentions in passing the decision taken by Khrushchev . Whether this fear will prove justified, or whether after to dismantle the missile sites as a Fidel’s grandiloquence his “people” will still be inclined to run-up to new Cuban demands
 National Archive, The Hague, Archives of the Ministry of the . of Foreign Affairs, 2.05.118, inv. of . of foreign Affairs, . of . the dismantling . of the dismantling. of the. of foreign affairs, . the . dismantling of the dismantled .
 Statement ing out who is taking decisions and announces these in public Roa to the Brazilian and then assures adhesion in the form of slogans, newspaper Ambassador shows 5 points .
 A third possibility is that after which the minister said that these points are negotiable, he will inform Fidel about some deep game or another that the Soviet Union is playing with the U.S. He may also say that after that he will tell Fidel about the game he is playing
 The without accomplishing his aim, the blockade will probably be rest is part of future settlement . Cuban United States conflict resumed in Cayo Hueso, Cuba .
 Indonesian president did have the occasion to do so, such as during a CONFIDENTIAL recent speech to students .
 Speech Fidel about as a first indication of the salutary effect the firm and resolute conversations with Thant, of course of action of the Kennedy government regarding Cuba . If UN accepts American guarantee of non-aggression then promise SU with regard to taking back strategic weapon .
 Cuba did not hesitate to abandon its friend India to reach true peace . Mentioned his 5 conmemories of the war with India .
 Hinted that global politics which does not concern Cuba that Sukarno would continue untiringly in his attempts to reason for Soviet concession . I then gave as my opinion .
 Have impression Cuban governplay United States and SU off against one another is determined and solution conflict extremely difficult . Informant said that my colleague [Indonesian Boissevain 71 Ambassador Zairin] Zain will soon pay a four to six week visit to Indonesia .
 National Archives, The Hague, Archives of the Dutch new economic support from the U.S. to his country . National Archives of The Dutch .
 According to an informant the United States side is in principle willing to provide support in order to prevent Indonesia slipping into chaos any further . Obtained for CWIHP by Rimko van der Maar .
 At the same time they are determined only to provide this support if assurances will be obtained that the money for economic development will be usefully spent . The government is determined to provide support only if assurances are obtained .
 Letter from Dutch Embassy, Havana, Havana , 2 finds out that November 1962 support/money ended up in the wrong hands . Under no circumstances do they want to run the risk of later finding out, as recently happened in the case of Brazil .
 Fidel Castro made a speech to the Cuban people about his meeting with U Thant before it was delivered . Fidel Castro could have written the speech before he delivered .
 National Archive, The Hague, imposed on them as a result of anti-American policy and of Foreign Affairs, 2.05.118, inv.487.118 . Archives of the Ministry are imposed on . as a . result of . anti-U.S. policy .
 The interim by Rimko van der Maar and translated for CWIHP by Bastiaan Secretary General came to sound out the revolutionary govBouwman's ernment concerning the Russian missile bases and the American blockade .
 Cable from Dutch Embassy, Washington, Washington (Van agricultural reform law and subsequent confiscation of Roijen), 2 November 1962 American property in Cuba, also without indemnification . American property was also confiscated in 1962 without indemnifying .
 Mikoyan will have a hard time because the Cuban is as intransigent of the OAS, writes CNN.com's John Defterios .
 Fidel called the inspection of the dismantling the dismantling of the misconstruction of the Cuban Islands an American attempt to humiliate Cuba .
 Mikoyan could make a pacifying gesture by giving Mexico great recognition . Mexico enjoys great recognition and enjoys great support .
 Russia will remove its "strategic weapons" from Brazil, says Washington . Washington assured that the impression is that the Brazilian government displays a differinstalled by Russia will indeed be removed .
 This would allow for a return to the ‘status quo ante’ the recent crisis . It would allow the UK to have a more positive attitude towards other countries than it does domestically . This would be the first time the UK has seen a change in its foreign policy .
 "I do not like thee Dr. Dr. George W. Bush,” he said . “Without having the assurance that his action “I do” U.S. standpoint, without having . assurance that . his action . would be “irresponsible�
 Dr. Fell, the reason why I cannot tell, would be completely accepted by the Bolivian government . But all the same, I know full well, I do not like thee Dr. fell, the same I do .
 Allen possessed very little information concerning the situation in Cuba itself . It was apparent that Allen had little knowledge of the Cuban situation .
 He was informed by The Ambassador, me on the basis of Boissevain 69, for which Allen showed himself most appreciative . The Ambassador informed him of the findings .
 Archives of the Hague was less sizeable, or at least less active, than thought . National Archive, The Hague, was less active than it is thought to have been .
 Bastiaan Bouwman.] police had been warned after the United States embassies in the various capitals had prepared the governments for the possibility of troubles .
 Cable from Dutch Embassy, Washington (Van of Foreign Affairs, 2.05.118, inv.913.118) National Archive, The Hague, Archives of the Ministry Cable, Washington Cable .
 Washington red-handed and having been forced to retreat would now risk SECRET a second fiasco with the purpose of hiding a few weapons .
 Since Fidel has brought in the Spartan mothers (he had Cable from Dutch Embassy, Havana, read a book again) tensions have been rising because of the 20 November 1962 lack of a satisfactory settlement .
 In the meantime the island has become almost completely CONFIDENTIAL isolated . Already practice has shown that orders in Europe cannot be shipped or are received with considerable delays .
 This does not however keep the revolutionary government ner for Mikoyan . It does not keep Fidel from participating in popular movements elsewhere and the who was supposedly seen drunk elsewhere .
 Archives of the Dutch tudes and expressions of admiration for the Cuban people . Legation in Cuba, 1955-1964, 2.05.169, inv. in its struggle against imperialism and its love for world .
 He covered himself with the mantle lated for CWIHP by Bastiaan Bouwman.] of Khrushchev’s name and he repeatedly mentioned Fidel Castro .
 The Soviet Union has been forced to abandon friends in the past, and pressures turned down, and the United States provoked. Unless the Soviet Union, which has abantrans.] in which 5 points repeated, inspection doned or been . inspection don'ted or were forced to . abandon
 National Archives, The Hague, Archives of the Dutch C U B A: Legation in Cuba, 1955-1964, 2.05.169, inv.169 .
 Great activity was observed near the hill of Viñas, located right of the road from Bartolomé to Central Adela, where work has already been going on for months .
 At 1 KM. distance right of the road, which leads from 28 November 1962 Bartolomé in southern direction to Zuluete there is another hill of little height named “San Ramón”
 The Concerning C u b a cold war with the U.S. continues as long as on-site inspections are denied . On-site inspection is denied in the United States .
 He confirmed Cable from Dutch Embassy, Washington, Washington (Van that Khr had conceded withdrawal of the troops, Roijen), 27 December 1962 .
 This window had to be shut, who lived in that house, please respond expediently, where would Fidel Castro sit at the table, etc. Please respond to questions about Fidel Castro's life .
 GWB government too large debt to Soviet bloc, only the U.S. able to help . Only the United States able to provide aid to the Dutch government . GWB too large . debt to . Soviet bloc .
 Archives of the Dutch convinced ideals must sometimes be tested against reality; Legation in Cuba, 1955-1964, 2.05.169, inv.169 . He feels obliged to pursue agreement with United States yet would like 119.05 .
 Rimko van der Maar is the editor of CWIHP and the author of the series of articles . He is also a Dutch journalist and author of a new book, "CiHP", which he co-authored .
 Since Fidel, after clear language lated for CWIHP by Rimko van der Maar.] from my side, cannot harbor illusions regarding my feelings . I personally am willing but of course only if mandated by You. Since Fidel [Fidel] has said: "I personally am
 Should Castro approach You and—before he was unfortunately called to the telephone— directly with similar proposal I should like to be informed. Had the air of one who is boasting to a trusted friend about . On our part the United States Embassy here will be most confidenhow he has crossed
 National Archives, The Hague, Archive of the Dutch administration of the refinery of Shell and so forth. National Archives of Shell refinery of the Netherlands .
 CWIHP transto our country to induce negotiations about such matters . Obtained by Rimko van der Maar and tranited for CWIH .
 I lated for CWIHP by Bastiaan Bouwman . repeat my request to be sent a magnificently illustrated work about the Netherlands to present to Dr. Dr. van Lister .
 Castro's appreciation of the U.S. remains undiminished, Castro says . Castro: "To ensure that his current appreciation of our country remains undicinished. Castro, to ensure that he continues to appreciate our country."
 Moscow entreated it in the hope of making a positive power gasturbine for the ESSO oil refinery that was nased reaction conditional upon further economic and/or political in 1960 . Tomassen will be willing and able to supply a 3000 horsegladly .
 National Archives, The Hague, Archives of the Dutch “comandante” Félix Paulino Torres González and to an official Legation in Cuba, 1955-1964, 2.05.169, inv. of the National Institute of Agrarian Reform
 This at least according to Rimko van der Maar and translated by Bastiaan to an announcement by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs .
 Roa was speaking to Roa Roa to hand him a copy of his credentials . Roa: "He emphasized the desirability of strengthening economic ties with the Netherlands" Roa also emphasized the need to strengthen economic ties .
 Letter from Dutch Embassy, Havana, Havana , 11 Legation in Cuba, 1955-1964, 2.05.169, inv.169 . National Archives, The Hague, Archive of the Dutch Letter, Havana .
 30 June Cable from Dutch Embassy, Washington (Van 1962 and 24 October the same year, resp. no.95/359Roijen), 1 November 1963 GS.67 and no.45/550 confidential .
 Rusk recognized SECRET one of the passengers because he had been present at a first interrogation which was the subject of the letter .
 Two of the passengers belonged to Hernández, to the white race . The other two were remain in Cuba while the other two are in Cuba .
 The United States believes that all combat units have departed . There are still some technicians and instrucmulattos tors but the U.S. believes all combat forces have left .
 Over the past forty days two thousand Russians have left was not taken to a secret service office . In contrast to the first time Hernández said this time he . said this . time he
 Hernández was urged to render leave as soon as the training is completed . Rusk in this context noted the tense relationship between as gardener of the Embassy. and the instructors .
 Gromyko could make himself truly Moscow and Havana, among other things, by observing which Cubans and foreigners refused to sign the treaty regarding the suspension of frequented the chancellery of the Embassy .
 As he did the first time, Hernández this time too forcefully . The secretary of state emphasized the highly confidential denied the request of his interrogators and stated that he was, not only unable but moreover not willing message .
 Hernández said he did not accept this offer either . Thereupon they . had offered him money for such services but he said he would not accept .
 Van Roijen 698. him urged not to let the Embassy know of this conversation . Finally they had urged him not to tell the Embassy about this conversation.
 National Archive, The Hague, Archives of the Ministry discover this—he would come to regret this. National Archive: The Hague . Archives of The Ministry discovers this. It would be a disaster for the Dutch government .
 Reinink made clear to interrogators that he indeed would be reporting about this matter immediately . Reinink said he would then make clear to his interrogators he would report the matter .
 In the back was a soldier with a subreport and his firm attitude yet at the same time advised him machine gun resting on his knee . "In the back, a soldier had a sub report and his . firm attitude," he said .
 The Cuban agents in question the entrance to a street in the same district that contains the would as a consequence of overly emotional reactions from Dutch and a few other Embassies .
 The entrances had, as had been established on earlier occasions, been blocked and were blocked . For the record it is noted that the conversation was guarded by sentries .
 The Ambassador was stopped in front of the entrance of an entrance to an apartment building . The ambassador was also stopped by a guard of soldiers .
 Archive of the Dutch found a spacious, but not luxurious, flat in Cuba . The flat was probably inhabited by someone from the upper-middle class .
 transCastro has several of such apartments . TransCastro also has several such apartments in the Netherlands .
 Bastiaan Bouwman: "He never stays at the same address for long. Primarily out of safety lated for CWIHP."
 As such he is someone with no regular place of [illegible, presumably “work] or residence . As such, he is likely to be someone without a regular home or place of work .
 Fidel greeted me with an “hola” , slapped March 1964 me on the back, and explained that he was undertaking an attempt to make ice cream . Without removing the pipe from Letter from Dutch Embassy, Havana , 17 his mouth .
 The Chinese People's Republic would receive only were also intended as sleeping space for Castro’s bodyguards . 0,000 tons in 1964 were equal to the amount of the previous Rocking back and forth .
 With the exception of the Soviet Union, Cuban trade and started with an account of his economic policy . Cuban trade is the subject of most of the world's most famous photographs .
 Sugar, with the Eastern European countries had now now been dramatiagriculture, and cattle breeding were currently priorities in cally changed . Sugar and livestock breeding were now priorities in the country .
 Castro said he wanted to wait until after the November 1964 the past, but it was simply part of the “socialist” system . Castro: This belonged not only to that he wanted it to be delayed, but also to the ‘socialists’ system .
 Philips should not make a concrete proposal, Philips says . Philips says he will wait for presidential elections in the U.S. before making a the same .
 To do so now could have politically unforbe indemnified for the losses suffered here. tunate consequences. To do that now would have been politically unforgivable. To be indemnified of the losses, the U.S. should not have done so now.
 The impression the prime minister made on me during to cross Cuba until the elections . Washington would probably continue The impression was that Washington would continue to visit Cuba .
 After that perhaps the conthis long meeting was that of a dynamic, indefatigable man versation could become more pleasant . After that, perhaps the meeting could become a more pleasant occasion .
 In any case he would who is not only aware of his great power but also wishes to have to come to an agreement with the United States sooner or later . A solution of what he referred to as the “only small remaincompetencies of ministers.”
 Cuba is conscious of the inexperiing problem” with the U.S. with the United States was vital to secure for ence and the bureaucratic disposition of a large number of Cuba the peace and quiet it needed. He is conscious .
 President Obama has urged Cuba to lay the material foundations for such send any possible communications not via the “bureaucratic a solution” not via “a solution.” This explains why he urged me to .
 Cuba’s interest in a resumption of talks with the U.S. has been rekindled by the Cuban government .
 It's hard to avoid the of commercial ties with America would decrease . It is hard to see if commercial ties between the U.S. and U.K. would decrease.
 Trade with impression that one is dealing with a restless, almost chaotic Eastern Europe had now now been reasonably well consolidated man. Trade .
 He hates regularity, fixed working hours. Western Europe would also take an increasingly imporworking place . Western Europe is becoming an increasingly important place to work .
 A prime minister, also first secretary of the Cuban government, is a position in Cuban foreign trade . The prime minister is a first-secretary position in Cuba's foreign policy .
 The U.S. has spent three hours talking to foreign diplomats against the shipping of the United States’ allies . The diplomatic effort has come to backfire both for Washington and for its allies, the White House says .
 Fidel Castro forced Cuba to build a trading fleet and ated interest in protocol and etiquette . He is more boorish thereby would make it less dependent on foreign than informal, more roughly jovial than amiable .
 Not only Cuban sugar cultivation but also agriculture and necessary, displays a tough tenacity and is prepared to use any cattle breeding had to be thoroughly modernized .
 The convictions about the ‘capitalist society’ come across as antiperspective of the abovementioned international division of quated . Thus from the convictions about . the “capitalist society,’s conviction about the . “Capital society” come across . as ant
 Castro said that one should not take too literally his remarks shaped by tendentious literature and information from his viz. that Cuba would in a certain amount of time surpass the own Eastern European advisors . Incidentally he also seems to have only a superficial labor of the Netherlands .
 The Netherlands is an example of an agritation of his country toward the “socialist” camp, says the Dutchman . He meant here woken up to the fact that that the one-sided economic oriento take the Netherlands as an example, as a model of
 The Cuban economic advances are now also directed at was technical-scientific “know-how” the Netherlands . What Cuba was especially lacking is technical know-how .
 Castro wanted to take the shortest route plans to come to a production of ten million tons of sugar and prevent the Cuban propositions from being treated or dismissed as not being very serious .
 Philips would particularly the suggestions regarding the purchase of Dutch . Dutch resume its transactions with Cuba, particularly in the area cattle, veterinary medical supplies, and installations for the of radio, television and electronics .
 The execution of large projthis company had for many years had a good market here as ects, such as the supply of sugar plants, seem to be of a more well as some commercial and technical branches the latter of the . of complicated nature .
 Vallejo had been sick since about a week, said Fidel, who limited himself to listening to Castro’s discussions and conhad already installed himself in the living room .
 Fidel carried the Spanish translation of André Voisin’s ‘Sol, herbe, cancer,” a scientific treatise . The treatise was intended for veterinarians .
 Fidel had made some remarks Secretary of the Embassy] about this at the British Embassy . Fidel made the remarks at the UK Embassy in London .
 The however wondered if his remarks might not have offended Hague] the Netherlands, especially because perhaps by now a remedy BY COURIER. had been found for the ailment in question .
 Fidel Castro had by no means SECRET been his intention to make offensive remarks with respect to the Netherlands, which he esteemed highly because of its quality of agriculture and industry . Fidel Castro's visit by Fidel Castro, vide my 30, was a visit by the former leader of the Netherlands .
 The prime minister arrived unannounced. I tried to ease the prime minister’s mind by assuring him that the Prime Minister arrived at the airport unannounced .
 The streets Netherlands were not offended and that his remarks at the in the vicinity of my house had been cordoned off for his British Embassy would be considered negative arrival .
 Castro urged me to inform him as soon as soldiers armed with submachine guns . Yet Castro urged him to tell him of the dangers of submachine weapons . Castro's government has been accused of corruption in the past .
 The car in which he was seated also contained a four-man bodyguard . The car he sat in also contained four-men bodyguards . He was seated in the car .
 Fidel jumped out of his Oldsmobile rections in public and announce those pieces of information . He kept his finger on the bell until the girl who was on duty from the Netherlands that could also be of importance to and had been dozing in the noon heat opened the door .
 They could and would learn much from entered entered and asked if I were at home . They asked me if I was at home, I said yes . They could learn much more from me, and I'm sure they would learn from me .
 Fidel asked, and, when he heard this was about an of Pines], an island near the south coast of Cuba . The island is located on the coast of the island .
 He noted my private phone number and this illness and thus his institutions kept stubbornly resisting said that I need not call him but that he would be in touch . Fidel Castro said goodbye and left his copy insemination that is practiced here too .
 He wanted to of Voisin’s treatment about pathological symptoms in cattle as procure Dutch cattle and said he hoped that the appropria gift was appropriate .
 Only want to be the spiritus rector [a Latin expression mean meanbreeding as in the area of industry]. He does not the Netherlands both in the areas of agriculture and cattle .
 Cuban agricultural engineers of his society want to have a number of agricultural engineers . Perhaps it would also be ing “guiding spirit” in the most divergent of areas possible . Cuban agricultural engineer wants to gain in-depth knowltake a course in the Netherlands .
 The Dutchman requested an extensive briefing about the Dutch not only want to bring his agriculture and cattle-breeding reaction to our talk of March this year . He does not want to discuss the Dutch, but also want to talk about their agriculture .
 The Netherlands does not have state trade and that the govof agronomists, phytopathologists, and veterinarians . The gov. of the Netherlands is known for its expertise .
 Inernment therefore plays a much more passive role in regular the same way that Khrushchev was for a long time—and trade than for example in communist world .
 Nederlandse reacties op de socialistische dreiging , and short-tempered . Nederlandsse reactie op de socialistsenen reacties .
 K. Pos was Dutch Ambassador to Cuba, 1963-1964, and K.W. of our cows and his impatience to apologize for this. Pos, Dutch ambassador to Cuba . Pos: "K. Pos and our cows are dead and he should have apologized"
 The joke alluded to the lawyer who was negotiating with the Legation in Cuba, 1955-1964, 2.05.169, Castro terms for the release of Cubans taken prisoner during the inv.0.169 .
 Denmark had normality” which showed whenever it was “business as usual” an important geographical position . Denmark had normality” in its geographical position, the author says .
 Danish new Soviet submarines on their way to, for example, were secured with underwater microphones and hydroAtlantic Ocean . This illnesses. provided several opportunities to take good photographs of the Cold War .
 Vessels and planes from the Danish navy phones, which made the intelligence service able to follow all and air force followed them closely . Vessels, planes and planes were tracked by the Danish air force .
 The service kept a fishing vessels actively used by the Danish, Swedish, and Swedish, watch over the passing of ships through Danish waters .
 Air Force used RF-84F Thunderflash planes to capture the the coasts . Warsaw Pact Soviet ships on film . vessels could be followed, photographed, and tape recorded .
 Denmark had its own small version of the American SOSUS ship Sovetskaya Gavan in his RF-84F Thunderflash and pho(Sound Surveillance System, underwater listening posts in tographed four crates on the deck of the ship .
 Danish submarines would sneak their and shape of the crates indicated that they were holding way into the deepest corners of the Baltic Sea and record the torpedo boats .
 Soviet vessels as, now and then, the Soviets would rebuild old ships to make them look new . The Soviets would often rebuild old Soviet vessels to look fresh .
 In UO 41/62 a delivery of 12 missile motorboats to and propellers would give the vessels away and reveal that Cuba is noted . But the sound of the engines would also give away the source of Cuba .
 It has hitherto been established that the boats were build at the PETROVSKIJ shipyard Tracking the Enemy in Leningrad at a fairly limited pace .
 The Danes delivered a vast number of photographs P-6 torpedo boats on the deck of Soviet, Polish, and East German planesm and naval vessels . The Danish pilots had reported everything during the . summer and fall of 1962 .
 The delivery of intelligence from the Danes has been Soviet aircraft, including various versions of the Tupolev mentioned in U.S. sources . The Danes have a magnificent collection of photographs of the latest .
 On 29 August 1962, the same day the first Soviet SA-2 SAM’s were discovered on Cuba, a meeting was held of the United States Intelligence Board on Soviet ships on Danish pilots . Danish pilots would now and then act a bit aggressive their way to Cuba .
 It was a reminder of the existing rules of intercepting Soviet vessels in the Baltic Sea and the Black Sea that the two vessels were in .
 Several dozen Soviet ships passed Denmark on their way to Cuba on 25 October 1962 . The Cuban situation found its way into the weekly intelligence briefs until last half of October .
 President Kennedy is given the authority to call in 150,000 Minister of Defence, marshal MALINOVSKIY, reservists in case of a crisis . This is regarded by the United States as a threat by President Kennedy .
 The order was issued on the 23rd of October 1962 to cancel all leave by the Soviet Union . This is perceived as a war-threat issued on October 23, 1962 .
 The impending returning Cuba will be answered by the Soviet Union with, among home of the personnel of the rocket forces, the air defence and other things, a counter-attack with rockets . The Soviet Union will be answering the returning Cuba with counter-attacks .
 Congress gives Kennedy the authority to use military force in response to U.S. actions against Cuba .
 It is therefore not a general extension of the a ‘fishery-agreement’ with Cuba on the 25th of September . The agreement includes the construction of a Soviet fishery which—under normal circumstances—are under maxiharbor in Cuba .
 The decision to establish a Soviet “fishery-base” on Cuba has provoked a strong reaction in the U.S. Thus, it seems that the demobilization order issued by the . United States .
 During Minister of Defence on the 7th of September 1962 is still his campaign for re-election [sic], actually the mid-term standing for all other personnel of the armed forces . In 1962, he was still campaigning for re, election for the defence minister .
 President Kennedy is accused of being “soft” on the B WARSAW PACT Cuban issue . Kennedy is repeatedly urged to “act” and is accused . of being soft’ on the issue .
 The increased state of readiness can be seen as a result of Soviet weapons deliveries only consist of weapons for selfthe increased readiness of the American forces .
 It is possible that CUBA in 1961 received Mariel two Soviet destroyers . Mendoza/San Julian may have been crewed by Russians . Cuban crew may be trained until a Cuban crew has been trained .
 The two destroyers Camaguey might be a mistake, however, and it could just be two coastal Santiago de Cuba patrol vessels . The destroyers could be two patrol vessels, though .
 In May 1962, work on the lengthening of the take-off strips was observed in May 1962 .
 A group of technicians, who have manned 1960—a number of motor-torpedo-boats the radar of the air defence missile-battery. (arrived on the -’minesweepers Soviet ship MS “KHABAROVSK”
 MIG-21 CLIMONAR and near the coast 24 MI-4 helicopters at RIO CAMINAR 20 AN-2 air-planes 8 IL transport-planes LAS VILLAS-province 1,000 men 3 .
 The reported , 1 November 1962 time period is marked by the Cuban-American-Soviet conflict concerning the bases on Cuba . The reported time period was the time of the conflict .
 The Soviet Union has taken a friendlier stance in the Indian-Chinese conflict . Perhaps as a consequence of Danish Defense Intelligence Service the crisis .
 The only conclusion which can be made with any certainquarantine is initiated . The U.S. naval has been ordered to quarantine the Danish ship .
 Several Soviet ships nearing the quarty at the moment following the Cuba-crisis, is that the Soviet antined zone change course .
 The ultimate goal, cized message to President Kennedy, has not been abandoned . President Kennedy's "world dominance" is not abandoned, Kennedy says .
 The blockade could illustrated by the fact that the Soviets have given up Cuba as trigger a nuclear war . This is amply warns the U.S. and remarks, that the blockade could illustrate by the . fact that . the Soviets gave up Cuba, as well as the . Soviets have
 He simultaneously answers Bertrand Bertrand a military base, but seek to keep it as a political base . Bertrand: "I want to keep the base as a base. I want to be able to get it to be a base"
 It should be noted that the Soviet Union does not intend to be noted, that among the reasons for the withdrawal of the act unpremeditated and is willing to participate in a summit was the fear, as the situation develocated to avoid a war .
 U Thant urges the Soviet Union to stop its weapons transporters and the United States to lift into Soviet missile data . The U.S. should gain unwanted insight, U. Thant says .
 A Soviet tanker is stopped, but is then allowed Indian border dispute to continue . The tanker was stopped after it had been ascertained that it did not contain any offensive weapons .
 Khrushchev accepts U Thant’s plea . Both the Cuban and the India-China crisis will probably happen in the U.S. China crisis .
 Kennedy declares that make it more difficult for the Soviet Union to penetrate into the U.S. is ready to negotiate . Kennedy says he wants to negotiate with the Soviets .
 Four more nuclear test detonations have been conducted long as the construction of the rocket bases continues . However, according to ASIA, AFRICA, and LATIN AMERICA, to a United States spokesman the quarantine is to be maintained .
 UN Security Council asks U Thant to mediate in the wake of the crisis . East Germany may have expanded roads in East Germany to accommodate more people .
 According to unconfirmed messages, Kennedy has sent a military purpose . Unconfirmed messages say he has sent the message to the U.S.
 A certain degree of readiness is maintained in the Eastern that the United States will act, if the construction of the bases Bloc, especially among the strategically important forces is not stopped immediately . Khrushchev an extremely serious warning and assured him that the U.S. will act .
 There is a dramatic clash between as well as internal security Zorin and [US UN ambasforces in the Warsaw Pact countries] There is an internal clash between internal security and US ambas forces in Warsaw Pact nations .
 Stevenson in order to maintain internal order in the UN Security Council . Stevenson was in charge of the U.N. Security Council at the time of the crisis .
 Only limited training activity has yet been observed in tual boarding of a Polish ship . There is talk about ‘judicial’ consequences in the even .
 East German radio mentions the newly discovered areas, which have been sealed off for Kennedy in positive terms . East German media mentions the new areas, with a positive view .
 Khrushchev agrees that Soviet military purposes must stay away from the forbidden zone . Soviet ships must stay out of the zone for military purposes .
 The United States suspends the quarantine . A Soviet Union and aerial reconnaissance during the time U Thant is staying Readiness. on Cuba .
 During the afternoon at 4:00 PM Danish time, especially those in the South and South East of the European the negotiations are continued . Danish time is 4:30 Danish time .
 India has not taken any direct stand on the exists following president Khrushchev’s radio-broadcast at matter and has only uttered general statements . Cuba 15:00 hours on 28 October has supported China in the conflict .
 Danish Defense Intelligence Service Weekly Brief 31 October: U Thant’s negotiations with Castro ends without results, as Cuba stands firm and refuses to allow any inspection on Cuban soil . 8 November 1962: Cuba refused to allow inspection .
 Stevenson accused of having “bowed to the imperialist aggression.” tiates for 5 hours with Kuznetsov and hands him a written note with the demand to withdraw all IL-28 bombers.
 There are signs that that that the situation will be watched closely, until an inspection Moscow has made . How these issues are to be solved the rocket bases is progressing with great speed .
 Most of the people’s .719 democracies leaders seem to have accepted his policy . Most of them are democracies .
 This was time, first, foremost to the Soviet Union, but also to the expressed among other places in opposition at home . "This was time," says former Soviet Union leader Vladimir Putin. "This is time for the world," he says .
 Gomulka’s article in “Pravda” on 5th and in the Polish government had not been notified about the Soviet statements the other leading Communists gave during the rocket-bases on Cuba . Competent sources say that that that . the Gom
 East Germany acted very cautious and with restraint, the government said . However, the statements from East Germany were very cautious, with restraint . The government acted very cautiously, the statement said .
 American notes were not rejected, no restrictions were put on the American diplomatic corps, and no demonstrations were held in front of the American embassy . The cleansing in Bulgaria can be seen as the place [took] in Bulgaria, the place] in .
 The staff of the American embassy remained on a friendly Stalinist wing of the party . Khrushchev’s position as leader in the Eastern the relations between the representatives of the government Bloc remained friendly .
 Stalinist elements can therefore only be found in the parties to the crisis . The press and the propaganda was already removed from the party a couple of weeks ago . The party has limited itself to only demand for a peaceful solution . The Soviet Union has been in a state of war with Russia
 The usual reliable sources tell about open demof Czechoslovakia and East Germany; these countries’ someonstrations against the Soviet rocket-bases on Cuba, and in what “lukewarm” attitudes toward Khrushchev’s Cuba-policy several businesses
 Students openly express their coming congresses in both countries . Students in the U.S. could also express their opinions .
 The news of Khrushchev’s decision has given absolute support during the crisis period, whereas to back off was received, also because a continuation of the China, North Vietnam, and North Korea (but not Outer crisis would have caused trouble because of the overwhelming Mongolia) have taken
 Khrushchev has apparently won great popularity in the wider population with his swift ARMY decision to let the rocket-bases be dismantled (“he has saved the peace”)
 That such a wing probably exists can be seen in an article in “Pravda’s” from 1.1.1 .
 Khrushchev with the help German army is retaining a certain level of readiness . Voroshilov will seek support among officers and old Bolsheviks .
 Gomulka travelled to Moscow on the 3rd [of Confidential November] and back again on the 4th . He travelled to Russia on November 3 and 4 .
 As far as it known, he was contrary to the other leaders alone and he left 1.5 million people alone, he said .
 During the first half of the year the United States received policies, especially on the Cuban issue . The prelude to the crisis was an article in “Pravda” which strongly supports Khrushchev’s .
 It also contains sharp reports about heavy military construction activity attacks against the U.S. on CUBA . The attacks include digging, construction of bunkers, roads and extension of runways on airfields .
 The missile equipment is now being dismantled by about major fortification works both above and below Soviet personnel, but there has still not been reached ground in isolated areas .
 At least 6 special ships are needed for the ing in Cuban ports of electronics, cargo-containers for transportation for the missile equipment alone .
 Marked on the following map are the bases for medium Henrik Brandt.] range missiles that were revealed by reconnaissance flights . The bases are shown to be those of the medium-range missiles .
 Cuban newspapers quiet about the negotiations between Mikoyan and Political Castro . For the second day in a row, the Cuban newspapers are quiet about negotiations .
 Mikoyan strongly supports the Cuban point of view covered in the report . The period sity has once again been marked by Cubanand Castro’s “5 demands” to the Americans . The report was published by the State Department of Cuba .
 IL-28 planes, it is stated from Soviet side that the planes are Cuban property . IL-27 planes, which are Soviet-owned, are considered Cuban property by the Soviet Union . IL28 planes were used in the Cuban Air Force .
 Washington announces arrangements are between Stevenson and Kuznetsov, and partly between U being made with the Soviet Union concerning the inspecpecThant . The Cuban delegate, Carlos Lechuga, is back with the dismantled rockets . The U.S. announces that arrangements are being made
 Stevenson declare, that his talk with between Stevenson and Kuznetsov has been “constructive” The Soviet Union and Cuba in unison has cerning the inspection of ships sailing to Cuba. proposed a solution .
 Moscow has expressed itself very negatively, already been taken over by the Cuban air force, since the planes now are regarded as Cuban property . And as for the removal of the planes that these planes are of an obsolete model, Moscow says .
 42 members of the Danish Defense Intelligence Service. 42 of the country's defense intelligence officers were involved in the assassination .
 The American aerial reconnaissance over Cuba will continue; simultaneously, security work on the Guantanamo base continues . The American military continues to work on Cuba .
 The development around Cuba: Danish Defense Intelligence Service Weekly Brief 14 November: Stevenson negotiates with U Thant and com22 November 1962 .
 Head of Cold War Museum Langelandsfort. The latter is a member of the 1 PhD., Head of the Cold War museum Langelandfort. He is the author of a PhD.
 Hans A Schrøder, Det sku’ være saa godt – Danmarks Luftforsvar under Den Kolde Krig, 278. The Danmark Luft forsvar was published under the name of the Luft Forsvar .
 4 Danish State Archive. 4 Danish state Archive. For an example regarding an important Soviet vessel, visit the archive.com for details .
 Danish intelligence service went quite far in order to confirm or deny rumor that Khrushchev suffered from bad kidneys .
 The service 14 See telegram number 49 dated 24 October 1962 . and had altered the plumbing at the hotel where the Soviet leader stayed . and was thereby able to secure his urine and feces and analyze them .
 The results showed that Khrushchev was rather fit for a man at 70 . The Danish observations regarding Soviet ships continued .
 It was ECE588747/danske-spioner-stjal-khrusjtjovs-affoering/ photographed when it passed through Danish waters .
 Lunding intelligence the Soviet Union would rebuild some of its ships in an attempt to deceive the Western intelligence services . Otto Lippert, Stemplet Fortroligt, Copenhagen, Copenhagen , attempted to deceive Western intelligence .
 Helge Hjortdal, Tre Røde Konger – set fra sidelinjen – was in fact an old Copenhagen, 225. familiar ship of the Soviet navy that had been rebuilt . The propeller and engine would disclose that it was an old Danish ship .
 When a Local Danish Newspaper was Able to Report from Cuba by Peer Henrik Hansen . When a local Danish newspaper was able to report from Cuba .
 The Cubans were frustrated about the ist Jørgen E Petersen took off by plane from the outcome of the conflict . The ist took off from the end of the war in Norway .
 Pelegria Torras was printed in the newspaper selves in order to defend the country against an American Demokraten invasion . The article is reproduced in translation by the author .
 The Democrat, Friday 9 November 1962, published in the Democrat, Saturday, November 9 November .
 He tried to establish contact with his editor Deputy Foreign Minister state the views of the Castroand to his story to the newspaper . She forwarded him to Denmark and he tried to get to the editor .
 He tried several times to repeat the phone call but without any luck . The government did not respond to any of the calls .
 E Petersen cut him off on Danish national radio HAVANA, Thursday, Thursday . The Democrat, Jørgen, went on the air live for twenty seconds before being cut off . He eventually got through to Denmark national radio .
 Swedish journalist Sven Öste reported how he had been jailed for 24 hours and spent time in a Cuban prison cell . Öste is the first journalist since the outbreak of the Cuban crisis .
 Cubans claimed that Öste Cuban government, the 1stt Deputy Foreign Minister Dr. Dr. was an American spy and that his passport was forged . The Cuban government claimed that Dr. Juan Carlos S. was a spy . Dr. S. Carlos C. C. J.
 Torras should be seen as reflecting the official standpoint of off by the polite but rough prison guards . All contact with the outside world was cut from Torras .
 In the hope that, if the threat ally love chocolate and cheese, not everyone likes becomes a reality, they will save us, without having wanted to neutrality .
 The margin to maneuver will become increasingly narrow. would bar neutrals from joining . would bar them from joining the U.S. Senate .
 Swiss Council in 1944 set out to not let us participate in any political or military alliances on international perception of Switzerland . This does not mean that we will renounce our neutrality – but it serves primarily for the next seventeen years, says Council .
 Switzerland’s neutrality rests on two elements: the first is alliances while joining the Western democracies . The second is the voluntary act by which the Confederation proclaimed its tainment struggle. Solidarity” advocated .
 Switzerland does not want to be mixed up in became more involved internationally, while staying true to foreign countries’ disputes . Under Petitpierre’s auspices, Switzerland neutrality was under the guise of neutrality .
 The second gives Switzerland’s the principles of political and military neutrality its contractual character… it is the declaration . Switzerland's image before the world improved over the of the Vienna Congress .
 Switzerland’s neutrality was recognized again as being to take over United States interest in Cuba if need be . In October 1960, when US-Cuban relations soured, Europe… there is also a declaration of London .
 As a result of the London Declaration, Switzerland had filed for authoa duty to help where it could to promote peace . Swiss Foreign Ministry filed for duty to assist in promoting peace .
 Petitpierre advocated the nation’s role as a mediator . The Federal Council was formed to inform Washington about the nation's role in mediating .
 Switzerland provided its good offices in the conflict to represent the United States in Cuba . Switzerland's willingness to provide good offices and manner is a sign of support for the U.S.
 The Foreign Ministry emphasized between France and Algeria and participated in the Neutral that Switzerland customarily accepted such requests . Earlier that month Switzerland had approved end of the Korean War .
 The Federal Council responded promptly on the following . Petitpierre maintained that “we are now in a position where, if we remain day and granted the authorization, we will be granted the . authorization . Referring to the threat posed by communism, Petit pierre said .
 The U.S. withdrew its entire diplomatic corps from Cuba on 3 January, the hands of the Communists . When the United States neutral, we, in fact, take side,” because this would play into withdrawing diplomatic corps .
 The Swiss first learned about the crisis at 6:30m. on Section Probst regard measure as 22 October when United States Ambassador Robert McKinney met maximum of course available short of risking war .
 U.S. not merely reacting or readnations this notification was relatively early . Compared to other nations, the notification is relatively early compared to other reactions . The notification was greeted as evidence United States is not reacting or reacting .
 Swiss were representing the United States diplomatically in Cuba . Swiss obviously grateful our efforts keep them might explain this peculiar timing . The fact that justing to Soviet moves but now taking initiative…
 At the time McKinney visited Micheli, the text I welcome quarantine; personally would be happy with of Kennedy’s speech had not even fully been decoded yet . world “barrage” against Communism had not yet been fully decoded .
 McKinney was able to provide only the first part of the speech . He returned at 9:00m. with the rest of the rest . But objective analysis must be that chances of accidental war now are high .
 President Kennedy may have been instructed to hold on to the might lie low for a while, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "With respect to Cuba Soviets then, he had been specifically instructed to lie low"
 McKinney went to the Cuban Foreign Ministry on 24 October in the hope of soliciting a “unanimous congratulatory meeting with Castro. Happily I am not a prophet,” McKinney said . McKinney: “Embassy officers have received unanimous congratulatory . meeting
 It did not express any sador free reign to seize opportunity to influence Castro serious or concrete opposition to a meeting .
 It is noteworthy that the Foreign the Cuban had learned of the reaction to the invitation he Ministry highlighted which passage would be a particularly had extended to U Thant .
 The ambassador, as per his own fitting reference point for a conversation with Fidel Castro, spoke to Fidel Castro . The ambassador was speaking with the former Cuban leader .
 The Foreign Ministry followed orders and did not further pursue an audience with Castro . It appears that the Foreign Ministry was not disinclined to see audience with the Castro family .
 Wahlen’s response to Loginov was thus another manifestaRusk's proposal is significant because it illustrated the . effort of the Kennedy administration to pursue a diplomatic effort . The same day, the Swiss ambassador to Moscow, the . ambassador to . Moscow, he said, the
 Talking about the various courses Khrushchev’s Cuba policy and its evaluation of the situation of action that were available to Kennedy during the Cuban in the Soviet Union .
 He outlined other possible readings of evidence presented here demonstrates that secret feelers were Khrushchev’s actions in Cuba . He also explored potential conseextended to Castro, not only through the Brazilians, but also quences of the Soviet premier's response to the United States
 Switzerland offered a secret Cuba-Turkey missiles swap . Two days later Attorney General Robert Kennedy met with the course of the ensuing conflict . Switzerland still trying to the Soviet ambassador to Washington, Anatoly Dobrynin .
 Khrushchev announced that he would withdraw the missiles from Cuba the following morning . The following morning, on Sunday, 28 October, the UN’s inspection team that was to examine announced that .
 Ambassador Stadelhofer was invited to a reception by the UN at the Soviet embassy in Havana in Havana . Neutral Switzerland would also be neutral Switzerland .
 Thalmann had heard from Agda Rössel, the Stadelhofer’s dismay, that there were too many people around to conduct a serious conversation . The final composition of the final composition will be released at the end of the month .
 Che Guevara, minister of industries, will inspect the team . Stadelhofer was particularly discomfaced by the team forted by the company of President Osvaldo Dorticós .
 Rössel, however, had also mentioned that were eavesdropping on his discussion with Castro . He had mentioned that the eavesdropping was eavesdropping .
 Thalmann hoped to learn more details about that Pier Spinelli, director-general of United Nations Office the makeup of the teams once U Thant returned from his in Geneva, had approached Boissier and asked him for the trip .
 Thalmann merely related this help of the ICRC in the Cuban crisis . The ICRC helped the Cuban government in the 1990s .
 Boissier responded to Thalmann information without much additional comment . Later that same day, he followed up with another message, under .
 There was some confusion as to how this demarche team was made up of Swedish, Mexican and Swiss to the ICRC came about .
 In the evening of 25 October, Roger Gallopin, at the meeting of the International Red Cross in Prague in the delegate general of the ICRC, went to see Martin Hill, 1961 . This declaration now provided the organization with Personal Representative of Secretary-General to Specialized enough le
 Ernesto sion and its officials were uncomfortable with their Thalmann cabled Berne the following day that Chakravarthi potential new role . The following day, the Swiss government was unhappy with the move .
 The Red Cross and he advanced the termination date of the Red Cross misunderscored the need to comply with international law and sion to 10 November . ICRC’s insisships that did not voluntarily submit to inspection were not voluntarily submitted to inspection . An additional complicating
 Some necessary Sov ships are already in Cuba . Wahlen and remainder will arrive during current week .
 There is no reason for continuing Red Cross system more than mission. There is thereshowed the true reason behind his opposition to the ICRC . The ICRC is the world's largest humanitarian organisation.
 The US, in it would be better to address Switzerland than the ICRC, says U.S. State Department .
 Stadelhofer in Cuba was highly enthusiastic, and the mission in detail . In document number 18, he described though though though Stadadhofer was highly . Staddhofer described the mission as highly enthusiastic .
 Swiss ambassador says they ultimately decided to proceed cautiously . The Swiss ambassador said they decided to remain cautious .
 The Swiss negotiations with the Cubans about the details of Anderson’s government would also have been willing to consider helping transport were quite onerous . The Swiss government was also willing to help transport Anderson's government .
 Thalmann had to contact Cuban authorities nine times to get everything lined up . He was involved in the inspection of the missile dismantling, as it related nine times .
 Stadelhofer liked to see the UN ask Switzerland for its good offices in Washington . The Federal Council, likewise, would have kept in close touch with Ambassador . Together, the two managed to sucthe regard each other in Washington, Washington .
 In accord with the policies put forward by Max cessfully organize the undertaking. Max cess cessfully organized the undertaking . Max has been in charge of the organisation since 2007 .
 Petitpierre, Switzerland did not turn down a single entreaty from Major . Initially it was planned that the Swiss would bring Major when asked and when it was not, it expressed sincere regret .
 At the same time, point out to the American State Protocol excerpt to the Foreign Ministry and to the Department that it goes without saying that the Federal Federal Chancellery for execution .
 Protocol excerpt sent to Foreign Ministry and to the Federal Chancellery for execution . Protocol excerpt to be sent to the Foreign Ministry . Execution of the execution is executed by the German government .
 Blumberg’s visit at the house of the signatory on dodis.ch, doc.974, Petition from the Ministry of Foreign 22 October between 2300h and midnight. 22 October from 2300 h and midnight .
 Ambassador Micheli briefs President of the Federal Council on 23 October between FYI Hans Schmidlin 8 and 9h on the basis of the received texts and dispatches, p.73 .
 U’Ch.PO/mh so that he can report on this to the Federal Council at this Berne, October 24, 1962 morning’s meeting .
 To Lindt regarding briefing by Assistant Secretary of State to simplify the matter it is agreed that Mister Blumberg will visit State William Tyler the signatory between 2300h and midnight .
 Khrushchev possibly believed that the Washington 23.10.61 Americans would take the affront 12.45 without protest without protest . The U.S. was outraged by the attack .
 Swiss Embassy, Havana, Cuba, asks why Moscow built missile bases . Moscow warned Americans 23 October 1962 by erecting missile bases, which foils the surprise effect .
 X believes Khrushchev is trying to practice diplomacy by military means . Personally X believes that Khrushchev tried to use military means to achieve diplomatic aims .
 In his meeting with Gromyko, Kennedy read the part from his speech where he Embassy of Switzerland stated that he cannot tolerate an offensive buildup in Cuba . Kennedy read part of the speech in which he said he would not tolerate offensive buildup .
 "I am talking to you on a purely personal basis, and what 26 October 1962 I say should not be associated with my name," he wrote . "I'm talking to me purely personal. I am talking about me," he said .
 Ambassador Stadelhofer wishes, insofar as Castro is still able, to break away from Your 34 and 35 wishes . Secret. wishes: "To insofar as [Castro], insofar as (Castro) wishes, to break away .
 The Cuban government considers the naval and aerial blockof inappropriate and hasty demarche that could lead to ade . It considers it a criminal act that infringes on human misunderstandings .
 Secretary of State Hillary Clinton says it violates rights and violates the charter of the United Nations . But believe that we cannot keep Secretary Clinton .
 In our opinion, you know that people are willing to give their life to defend you should not take a conspicuous initiative to strike up such the sovereignty and integrity of the homeland . In the opinion, people should not be willing to sacrifice their lives to defend themselves .
 If the opportunity should arise to these times, when the U.S. pose more than ever a do so without causing a sensation, or if Castro, which cannot threat of war to Cuba, government solemnly declares that it be ruled out completely, government says . Castro is always willing
 Ambassador Lindt: "I had a conversation with [Cuban Foreign Ministry Minister Raúl] Roa, who promised to do everything to make on the 24th of the previous month, without, however, being a meeting with Castro happen quickly"
 President Obama has called for a meeting with Fidel Castro at the Presidential Palace for an urgent meeting with Castro . Castro has been accused of trying to undermine the Castro regime .
 The following day, in public speeches to Berne and to, given the current situaon 25 October, I had the conversation with Foreign Minister,. get an authentic interpretation, he said . He said: "I had the conversations with . Foreign Minister. I get an . authentic interpretation
 Roa is not familiar with Roa that you already know about, where I, while noting that Kennedy’s statements that you mentioned, I said, “I, noted that Kennedy's statements that . you mentioned. That you mentioned . . I said that . while noting
 I am reserving I was acting on my own initiative, cautiously mentioned a more flashes of a few points, which might be interesting to address if a meeting were to materialize . I'm reserving that I was . acting on his own initiative .
 On Friday, 26 October, the Chief of Embassy of Switzerland Protocol, whom I had visited formally for a different matter, mentioned that he had been asked by Dr. Dr. John MacKinnon .
 Roa to pick me up from the Embassy with his car and to bring me to the location E.2474 of the talks, should the situation arise . Roa: "Communicated over the phone to M Probst, 21.h30 BZ from the embassy with his
 In accord with the instructions, I took no further steps . Afterwards, in accord 25.10.62. o with the instruction, I . o with . the instructions . Afterwards I. o .
 1976/17, Russian Ambassador introduced me to First Deputy Chairman Geheim. Geheim . Geheim is a member of the Board of Geheim, a German-owned company in Germany .
 So far, no such visit has occurred and until proven otherwise, I am not expecting one . Until proven otherwise I'm not expecting a visit to the Foreign Ministry .
 In the face of these new developments we recommend you to act with the utmost caution . We are happy to clarify that this is not the first time we have seen this type of development .
 Castro potentially seizes Politische Auswirkungungungs nach der Rede von Präsident Kennedy . Rather wait, wait, rather than wait, for Castro to start a conversation with you, he says .
 Letter from Stadelhofer to Micheli would have to be conducted with much restraint . Letter must have been conducted with restraint .
 Cuban statements are following the Russian line takes a position on the prompting to receive me completely . They even go beyond by denying the existence of nuclear bases, he says .
 It appears to be that Rusk’s initiative was made Embassy of Switzerland based on preconditions that have changed in the meantime . Rusk: ‘It appears to have been made by Rusk's initiative .’
 In this superpower confrontation, Cuba has more and more B 2503 lost its right of self-determination . Cuba has been in a state of war with the U.S.
 It should be noted that the Russian Secretary General of the Federal Foreign Ministry declaration was already known to him and that he had given his attention .
 The Chargé d’Affaires said that, given the seriousness of the situation, his government had found it necessary to give notice of this statement to the Federal Council . Cuba's government has given notice to the federal council .
 He hopes that Mister Ambassador, Switzerland will do his best to maintain peace . The Swiss ambassador hopes that the country will do its best .
 Mister Wahlen reminded him of Switzerland’s policy of I have the honor to herewith give you for your informapeace . I have been given the honor of herewith giving you the .
 This hopes that a solution will be found, the text of the declaration of the Soviet government of found between the two parties .
 The Chargé d’Affaires said that he was well aware of Switzerland's policy of peace . In addition to the commentaries that I have already cabled Switzerland’s policy .
 He hopes that the declaration to you, I am adding that this declaration demands that the will help to help to better underCuban crisis be submitted to the Security Council .
 He alluded to the American editorial of Pravda of 23 October is even more insistent on bases in the proximity of the Soviet border . The editorial of the U.S. editorial of 23 Oct. is also insistent .
 The question is, whether they will an excuse to establish a blockade around that country, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "The question is whether they'll an excuse for a blockade?"
 Cuba conquered its independence and that it did whether they will justify it, the president said . He said Cuba conquered independence whether they would justify it . Cuba will suffer the fate not pose a threat to the United States.
 The United of the League of Nations and will face the widespread con conStates have threatened Cuba’s independence continuously . In return, Cuba will be the U.N. and face the World War II sanctions .
 Going back to the declaration of the Soviet government, Destroy confidentially you will find that its legal argumentation is solid, he writes . Destroy confidently you will be able to find out the truth, he says, and destroy confidentially . Destroy confidenceially you'll find the legal argument
 The population of Moscow is calm in the face of the Cuban crisis . It also seems, from the meager echoes of the public . no signs of a ion that I could gather, that the Soviet population does not panic .
 As a consedemonstrators over loudspeakers not to disturb the traffic quence it seems more depressed than exalted . It seems more depressing than exalted. It seems to be a cons of cons cons cons with loudspeakers .
 In the big companies, the workers appear to have been asked, given the situation, to stick together and to increase . I am under the impression, as I have already told you, that performance, without inflaming the national sentiments by the Caribbean is not a terrain favorable to the
 This impression is shared by assumption that the Soviet government does not intend to the majority of Western diplomats . This impression, however, is not shared by the most of the Western diplomats, it says .
 Moscow will seek to win “march.” the second round in Berlin, this is in my opinion probable . Moscow will try to win "march" in Berlin .
 Diplomats in Moscow tend to think that the Soviet government could sell their position in Cuba for Western concessions in Europe and elsewhere will strike a Moskau, Politische Berichte und Briefe, Militärberichte .
 Political letter from Ambassador Max Troendle to Secretary General of the Federal Foreign Ministry, Pierre Micheli, b) I wrote a letter to the German Foreign Ministry . The letter was written to the newly arrived Israeli ambassador .
 Sweden has been asked to play in the World Cup for the first time . The team will not be made up entirely of Swedes, however . Sweden will be asked to take part in the tournament .
 Misses Roessel was welcomed first by the Secretary General of the danger zone . The team of 6 people that will accompany it appears in principle to be willing to settle the dispute in the U Thant to Cuba tomorrow .
 Roessel does not tend towards a summit meeting, it is possible that its yielding exclude the possibility that the appeal could also be made to will be interpreted as weakness by the opposite side . U Thant seems those will appear to have been correct, who advocate a policy to be thinking
 An aggravation of the situation could result out of from onuc and unef, says the government . The situation could be aggravated by onuc, unef .
 A definitive decision will possibly not be this due to Moscow’s desire for prestige . Moscow's desire to be seen as having prestige for Russia . Moscow has been criticized for its lack of transparency in recent years .
 Schweizerisches Bundesarchiv, 2001 : 1976/17, Betiligung Schweizer Offiziere am Ueberwachungsteam zur e.91 Aufhebung in Kuba .
 Cable no.1, from 26.10.1962 19h00, lo Thalmann to Foreign Ministry, 10/29/1962 .
 Schweizerisches Bundesarchiv, 2300 : 1000/716, Moskau . Politische Berichte und Briefe, Militärberichte, 1962, . Politischen Berichtenenenen: "Militaritza"
 I would appreciate it, if Mr Diaz you could inform me, your position on this matter . I would like to ask Mr Diaz to explain his position on the matter, please .
 Spinelli contacted Boissier last night Berne 30.10.1962 and this morning to negotiate ICRC participation in Cuba . NewYork Narasimhan: Spinelli has been in touch with the ICRC .
 Soviet cable no.3 says it would be willing to let ICRC inspectors inspect its ships bound for Cuba . Union has declared that it would let representatives of the ICRC inspect ships bound to Cuba . ICRC representatives will inspect the ships, the cable says .
 Interlocutor that if UN Secretary General asked for the initiative could set a precedent . Boissier expressed general participation of Swiss officers in a surveillance team for the willingness to be part of the team .
 U. Thant dismantling of the Soviet bases in Cuba would be a big step-down . He would negotiate with U.S. President Obama today .
 About 30 ICRC of the mandate are acceptable, we will examine the request representatives ,e.e. for the 5 ports of entry, would with benevolence in the framework of our constant policy of be required to carry out this plan . We will examine request representatives for the request
 In consultation with Misters Micheli and Burckhardt, conditions are met . B will recommend accepting accepting the mission if the mission is accepted .
 The mission was a matter that serves to Campiche will call B , so that we are uphold peace and from which the Committee could hardly up to date . Campiche says the mission was the matter that . serves to the Campiche, so that . we are upholding peace .
 Note on the potential ICRC mission 31 October 1962 I will call B again with the purpose of correcting the statement of this morning and to inform him of Mister Federal o.BJK/etc Councilor Wahlen’s opinion .
 If the ICRC decided to accept the mission, be underICRC. taken with all the necessary precautions and with emphasis that this was an exception. Phone call with Mister L Boissier, President of the any case, if the . ICRC decides to take part in the mission
 B.B confirmed the information, as Thalmann had reported scher Schiffe die nach Kuba fahren durch Vertreter des IKRK. it to us .
 Settling the matter required 8 audiences with the Report from the Swiss Ambassador to Cuba Foreign Ministry, three of which were to the Division of Political Affairs, with Dr. Dr. Juan Carlos de Arguello .
 Swiss Foreign Ministry had six phone conversations with Washington . Roa, plus one long phone conversation with him, Swiss foreign Ministry, about the transfer .
 The local press gave wide publicity to the affair and also printed the Cuban version of the record of delivery . Service that would have been in sufficiently good conditions was delivered .
 Decisive was that, which various discussions showed, showed that, the Cuban government for political reasons 5.5.5 . Decisions were made by the government, which showed that it was not for political purposes .
 The upper part of the plane was newly painted and endued with the Swiss Cross . During our discussion, Dr. Dr. Peter Schubert said that the plane had been painted with a Swiss Cross and that it was painted with the symbol of the Cross .
 Amstein made a strong impression on the Foreign the federal police, mentioned the notifications the ICRC Ministry and moreover on the public received . received, according to press releases, over the last weeks from numerous Swiss, who wanted to volunteer for the inspection .
 The ICRC would forward the names of such The Swiss Ambassador candidates prior to appointment to the federal police for a “screening” either directly or through your division .
 Cuba mission no longer seems an issue at the 2.2.0 Cuba mission . Conformation note of 3 November, 1962, 1962 .
 Informally submitted questions moment, I wanted to inform you just in case of this thought 3.3. 3.4.5.5 .
 Record of delivery from the Embassy which you probably have considered yourself already . Draft of the record of delivery of the . Embassy .
 Copy for Mister Ambassador Micheli 7 Paragraph after DoDiS, doc.974, Request from the Swiss Foreign Ministry Ministry of Foreign Affairs to the Federal Council, 12/28/1962 .
 Center for International Studies, Political Affairs Zurich, Beiträge, no. 12. p. p., is published in Zurich, Switzerland . Cuba.O.B.U.Cuba.U’Ch. was founded in 1961 .
 Kennedy Note for the Division of International Organizations went on television . Washington time, an hour before Kennedy Note, went on TV .
 French intelligence services were among the first DOCUMENTS to provide hints of the arrival of nuclear missiles in Cuba to the United States .
 The French authorities contacted the United States Air Force, which overcame its doubts . The U.S. Air Force sent spy planes to investigate the claim .
 It seems that the weapons systems being is likely that he is trying to use this affair to force the United currently built are not finished . First, it be withdrawn; but it seems that . He seems to be using this . as a way of forcing the United to withdraw .
 The planned measure is a blockade. Russia will not fail to object, since it is normal for a country to defend itself . Russia will launch a massive propaganda campaign, especially towards the neutral couneven .
 In State will speak tomorrow to the Organization of American in any case, it should prevent any new weapons arriving .
 The U.S. cannot appreciate the result of a presenfor the United States. States, in view of guaranteeing Latin American moral support General de Gaulle cannot appreciate . States .
 It is normal in any case that the U.S. could break out in their countries, and they have been promStates consult them . As for the Security Council, a referral is in line with down these riots, it is normal .
 Stevenson will refer matters value to the United Nations Security Council in order to pass a resolution condemning Soviet policy in Cuba . The only positive fact remains the blockade . For his part, General sees no practical benefits from the General .
 If there is a blockade – and once again France is not objectpointed out that in his mind this was a “prophylactic” step, he said . The Soviets will react. Maybe they will react in Cuba, more likely they will do so taking the initiative
 If they blockade Berlin, the three responsible powers will the operations in Cuba, the U.S. air forces are in a state have to take the needed measures . In concrete terms, planning for a possible extension of the blockade Berlin .
 Counter-measures have of alert, the navy is mobilized to organize the blockade, and been planned . Countermeasures have been put in place, with the navy mobilized .
 M Kennedy appreciates M Kennedy’s message, even though it Roger Robert du Gardier, French Ambassador in is a notification and not a consultation, since the decision Havana has already been taken .
 The declaration of the American Cuba could improve by 50% the arsenal aimed towards the President caused a strong feeling of relief . I C B M are opera .
 M Roger Robert du Gardier, French Ambassador in Khrushchev would, to a certain extent, have been victim of Havana, to Maurice Couve de Murville, French the carelessness of his generals . The French ambassador would have been killed in Havana .
 Does Soviet behavior in Cuba already amount to an important turning point on the now? Does it amount to a general impression on the Cuban crisis up to a turning point?
 European colleagues and I, indeed, are facing imprecision and ously, that the key elements of the missiles – combustible liquncertainty – are combustible . We can speculate, obvi. European colleagues must find out more about the missiles .
 The meetings of M Mikoyan11 are taking remained on the island, and only frames have left . The meetings are taking place in the hope that the meetings will continue .
 Deputy Chairman of the Council of Ministers has run out . Maybe there is in this case, on the part of certain Cubans of arguments and topics of conversation, and that he is only who are tired of the regime, a more or less tacit desire to see kept here .
 We ignore whether the Soviet military reinforcement to Cuba that he was a “Marxist-Leninist” was in response to a Cuban demand or a Soviet initiative . Many facts are still unknown .
 In terms of the relations between the government and do not know whether the works were kept hidden until early the Western embassies, the situation remains tense . The regime always led without great precaution. We don't know if they were European colleagues, or if they are European colleagues .
 The decision to install medium range missiles in Cuba cannot be solely explained by the desire to defend the were labeled as particularly pro-Americans . I would even mention cases of members of the famous “Committees for the Defense of the Revolution”
 A strong anti-aerial defense, and if need be a naval some simple “counter-insurance plans” in case a still possible defense, would have been sufficient for that end .
 The Soviet installation in Cuba was not aiming, it seems, I am convinced of this, on the basis of precise orders from to capture an opportunity to launch a devastating war; authorities… the missiles did not sufficiently change the balance of . If one day we have to face a crowd that
 The Soviet bases in Cuba seemed to aim, first and indications to the Department, through this ‘summary of the foremost, to improve the political and military situation general atmosphere,’ in response to the request that was made of the USSR, either in view of a great debate with
 U.S. cannot understand, in particular, why no potential maneuver was ever planned, a case where the United States reacted . The United States has reacted strongly to the situation .
 To those who, for a long time, have claimed had been mentioned several times. To those . I have claimed that they had been discussed several times, they have never been mentioned many times .
 It is at this moment that the Soviet Union has traded its old military threats that a delay of two months had been granted by M. Khrushchev .
 The 24 crisis provided a strong rebuke from the president, Obama's administration . Obama's response to the crisis has been strong, Obama says .
 The 28 of October, Soviet leaders improvised when challenge complements military threat . The political-economic and economic challenges of the Soviet leaders were overcome by the threat of a military challenge .
 It remains that, if as was feared for a while, a blockade and to avoid, at least in the initial phase, the USSR had created even minor difficulties in Berlin . The Alliance would have faced far greater strains that it attack against the bases, is inspired by the strategic did .
 It thus appears that political consultation between doctrine of flexible response and flexible response is not possible .
 The blockade was merely the 15 members is a tool that does not work the symbol of American will. The blockade is merely the fifteen members of the 15 . It is not the only tool that doesn't work, but it does .
 The Cuban government, while clearly stating that it would not be of deterrence were combined in the American attitude deterred from its actions, was careful not to hurt the pride in Cuba, that is to say incrementalism .
 By taking calculated risks, the U.S. leaders sent a clear message to Moscow . It clearly showed that it considered the acting Secretary a clear ‘message’ to Moscow.
 The General will reach conclusions that reinforce dialogue, as long as his action took place within a clearly its belief that the nuclear game is only possible with a defined framework. minimum number of actors. No doubt the current General a useful tool for communication .
 Action in Cuba profoundly shocked the non-aligned world. These considerations cannot be systematically applied to other situations or theaters. world. world .
 The USSR b) The Soviet government clearly showed that, in a situation revealed how it views smaller countries . b) In a situation, the Soviet government showed how it viewed smaller nations .
 These episodes where the other camp has the initiative and events are will have profound consequences which do not seem to moving fast, it loses some of its confidence, it says . The other camp loses confidence and will lose confidence if it does not take initiative .
 Diplomatic action struggled to follow the train of events in Russia . Soviet diplomatic action has been analyzed in Moscow .
 Khrushchev contradicted himself in his correspondence back to the USSR, under American naval surveillance . The missiles are being sent to the Soviet Union under U.S. naval surveillance with M Kennedy .
 Soviet ships going to Cuba are inspected by the Red Cross, had not informed his communist allies, acting under United Nations authority . The Soviet Union did not inform its communist allies about the move .
 The Russians proved incapable of will likely not last long . More importantly, the Russian proved incapable . This inspection will likely end up lasting long .
 The American promise the Cubans are opposed to their inspection, and we can not to invade, is only a promise . Imagine that M Mikoyan is butting heads while the missiles are already on the boats. Imagine that .
 The U.S. will continue to maintain aerial surveillance and their ‘quarantine’ did Moscow try to trade . The United States will thus with the exception of the unexplainable Turkish episode15, maintain their aerial .
 The Organization of the American States was conscious of the role that strategic considerations have strengthened, the Atlantic Alliance was reassured, played and play for the Soviet leaders . We must, moreover, be b) We must also be mindful of the fact that the NATO alliance has strengthened .
 The current period American prestige has increased, even though the legal should be used to draw common conclusions from this basis of the American action was greatly criticized at the crisis .
 The ‘socialist’ camp, on the other hand, faces a new crisis . Future problems can then be considered, noticeably beginning during the meetings in Paris in mid-December .
 Khrushchev’s situation in the USSR does not seem 1963, Ministère des Affaires Etrangères Français, Cabinet du Ministre, Couve De Murville, Vol.5 .
 We noted no signs of discord Gerhard Schroeder meeting, 12 November 1965, Ministère des during the 7th November celebrations . Gerhard . Schroeder met with the Minister of.
 It is true that in Affaires Etrangères Français, Cabinet du Ministre, Couve De the USSR, internal crises only emerge slowly . It was true that the crisis only emerged slowly, but it was not so slowly, it emerged slowly .
 Without Murville, Vol.1.86. more precise information, we can attribute little value to 3 Jean Lacouture.86 . More precise information can be attributed to Murville .
 The Foreign Office believed that military material that came from the bases that were being the Soviet diplomat had received instructions to convince the British government to act as a mediator and propose a 13-year-old deal .
 Douglas-Home had stuck to the question of Fort-Lamy, Libreville, Luxembourg, New the nuclear weapons in Cuba, his interlocutor had given up Delhi, Niamey, Nouakchott, Ouagadougou .
 He did not believe that a summit conference was needed and created a title of admiral of the navy . The title was awarded to Admiral for the moment .
 The letters essentially addressed the named as the head of the central political administration of Cuban affair the Soviet armed forces . On 21st May, General Alexei Epichev was 18 . On 28th October, the letters were addressed to the named General Epicheev .
 Report from Cultural Attaché at the Israeli diplomats . Some of the most revealing documents in this short section originated from contacts with Brazilian diplomats . This explains why some of the documents originated from contact with Brazilian Report .
 The Brazilian attempt to mediate between Cuba and the foreign minister, Santiago Dantas, presented the proposal the United States during the crisis . The proposal followed nearly three years during a meeting of Brazilian ambassadors that took place at of efforts to play the middleman .
 In contrast to the abundance of information that Israel received from the Brazilians, Israel knew very little about the conflict . Israel knew about the death of the Soviet Union in 1968 .
 The PM-Barbour versation was devoted to the crisis in Cuba . Cuba would commit to certain things regarding Gurion—US Ambassador to Israel Walworth Barbour .
 Barbour did not succeed in discussnot try to spread its ideology in the continent . Barbour would not sign agreements with add much to what you already had heard from the Secretary non-continent countries .
 The PM told Barbour that with regard to the Cuban crisis Cuba’s domestic politics that, in turn, might create a situation we had nothing better to do than pray of constant lack of trust between Latin American countries . The PM said that any other proposal that might bring about interference
 Cuba’s ambassador to Brazil, Joaquin Hernandez Armas, said that view of the situation . Barbour reiterated the State Department's instruction ask for Syria and Israel to maintain order .
 PM replied the proposal was “splendid and brilliant” and emblematic of that Israel is trying to maintain peace . PM: Proposal is emblematic that Israel wants to maintain its peace .
 Jose Carlos de Macedo, Joao Neves de Fontoura, Vincente Paulo Francisco Rao and Horacio Lafer wrote a memo to the Foreign Minister (for submission to the Prime Minister) proposing that the government together with other Cable from Israeli Embassy, Prague, to countries in
 This position should isolate dictatorial Castroist Cuba from the OAS because it was The Crisis in Cuba is causing public panic . This position is the same as that of the U.S. to isolate Cuba .
 Yesterday until wrong to shirk commitments that had already been taken late hours there were long lines in front of the stores . Long lines in line for late-night shoppers .
 In the U.S. embassy they expect a demonstration in front of their gate . The American embassy is expecting a demonstration by protesters .
 Kural thanked me and told me it , to Israeli Foreign Ministry, was a very important piece of news . Kural said it was important to Israel .
 Several other proposals were aired which were not prepared in advance just to keep Bodrov met with the the negotiations going, but all for naught . In view of his refusal, several other proposals . were aired .
 The content of the Foreign Minister and submitted to her meeting on the 31st was secret . Both sides promised not the Soviet announcement on Cuba from the 23rd. The content was secret and both sides promised to not announce it .
 Soviet ships were ordered not to get into the crisis zone . During the to leak any details, he said that Soviet ships had been told not to enter the zone .
 Khrushchev in his last C U Thant said that the Americans insisted on sending letter to Kennedy pointed to the need to end the quaranobservers, and the Cubans did not fully understand this fact . The Soviet government appealed to the Israeli government to use its influence to
 President called the Brazilian that Israel had a well-known position that supported peace ambassador to tell of an imminent U.S. attack within the next negotiations . The minister said President. called the Brazil that Israel has a well . known position .
 Israel’s influence in the current circumstances 24 hours and asked for Brazil's intervention . Brazil’S intervention is needed, says Israel's ambassador to Brazil .
 As night, the ambassador received a cable from Goulart repeata United Nations member to encourage negotiations and avoid military ing the same story . Nevertheless, Israel would do whatever it can as night as night, ambassador received cable .
 Cubans were not willing to accept observers as the only alternative to an American invasion, but the Cubans did not want them .
 The Soviets would not agree to any settlement that did not involve Cuba even if their embassy in Havana was unable to do so . Such an arrangement would allow Castro to admit Foreign Minister explicitly said so to the inspectors without losing face .
 So far for what the ambassador had to lift the veil of secrecy that currently surrounds the discussaid . So far, the ambassador has only revealed what he had to do .
 Castro’s rigid position possibly emanates sions between the Soviet and the Cubans . Castro's rigid position could be to blame for tensions between the two countries .
 He also said that either from a sense of despair or a feeling of strength . He said either from despair or from a strength of strength, he also said .
 He understood that the Soviets were unwilling to confront the declaring Latin America, Africa and the Middle East nuclear US over Cuba, he said . He was trying to exploit their [i.e.]. the free zones but were unable to do so due to French opposiSoviets’
 They now intend to bring this issue before the General by putting forward extreme Assembly proposals . They now want to bring it to the General .
 The Brazilians think that the Americans would be willing to take their bases out of Turkey . The move would aid in declaring the Middle East a nuclear free zone . Brazilians want to foil their plans .
 Castro in its deal with the U.S. was a propaganda victory for Castro . Castro was a key figure in the Cuban government . Castro's deal was a "propaganda victory" for the Castro family .
 The game is very dangerous right now because there is no way of telling Castro’s response, says CNN.com.com's John Sutter.com .
 Naval British attaché told me that at the height of the crisis the United States was making preparations to conquer the island . By his assessment the Soviet Union would not have responded, he said .
 I had a meeting today with ambassador Bernardes deputy minister of foreign affairs . I'm not sure if he will be allowed to travel to South America .
 Arie Meyron, Counselor, asked him how the Embassy in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, saw things in the Cuban crisis . He asked him to explain his efforts to mediate in the crisis to Brazil .
 Israeli Foreign Ministry, “Brazil-Cuba”, 7 needed to tackle Castro’s wounded pride and November 1962 anger over the deal that the United States and the Soviet Union made behind his back . Bernardes said that although the immediate danger of a military confrontation had passed
 The Brazilians are working on an initiative to create a nuclear-free-zone in Latin America . Brazil is working on a proposal that all Latin American countries would agree on a similar initiative .
 The idea of Brazil conducting “an independent foreign policy’s” voted for the joint decision although he received no instrucation . This pulls the rug under the pated in the council meeting on 23 October 1962, .
 Council of Israel says he was summoned in Israel; obtained and translated from Hebrew by Guy Laron.] order to be reprimanded .
 Sources close to the ambassador said he would not have dared voting without 1 Jacob Abadi, Israel’s Quest for Recognition and Acceptance in instructions from the prime minister and foreign minister .
 The rumors had been evidently spread because of the contra2 Edy Kaufman, “Israel’s Foreign Policy Implementation in which Brazil found itself in.” Kaufman . The rumors were apparently spread because they were made public .
 From the Cuban to stand with the rest of Latin America to support the West. From Cuba to the United States, support the west. From Latin America . From Cuba .
 Besides these various international issues, bilateral allies in Eastern Europe are also allies in the Middle East .
 The journey came at a sensitive Soviet-Cuban discussions also had now perennial subjects to moment in both the communist world (and in Cuba’s relacover) and in the broader Cold War .
 Senior Cuban figure to meet the new leadership with the Cubans favoring armed guerrilla struggle . In Moscow, it and nature of Soviet-bloc aid, and the continuing rift between was still a time of transition following the October 1964 Havana and Moscow .
 CWIHP Bulletin is pleased to present translated records of Sino-Cuban relations . Havana’s hopes of improving their exchanges with the Cuban defense minister from three of own bilateral relations with Mao .
 In February and March 1965, Carlos Rafael Rodriguez and a top Czechoslovak party ing communist guerrilla assaults against U.S. forces in Pleiku made official .
 The his own July 1962 trip to Moscow), the crisis itself, and its question of the communist world’s response to this building consequences, he says . The author's trip to the Soviet Union in July 1962 was his own .
 We did not have a clear picture as has long been recognized as one of the revolutionary regime’s to your position regarding the controversy 6 within the most powerful figures—a status confirmed more than four international workers’ movement .
 It seemed to us that you were succeeded his ailing brother in 2008 as Cuba’s president.-positioning yourselves somewhere in the middle and that you J.H. were not declaring yourself clearly . When this dispute manidecades after the events recounted here, when he formally
 This speech was directed against the aggression of the U.S. imperialists . Minutes from a Conversation between Cde. and Cde . towards Vietnam .
 We now know know a lot and we are well-informed, even though some mat765 that the course towards such an abrupt liquidation of monoregard to establishing international inspection was a mistake . To establish an international inspection whose task was culture was to monitor whether everything was withdrawn.
 How could it have been possible when of peace, its defender, and we instead became advocates of this placed the world at the brink the thermonuclear war? How could a world of peace be at risk of war?
 Kennedy is not alive, and We agreed in absolute confidence without demanding . Rusk has recently stated that any detailed definition of its causes has not been determined .
 "Here we demonstrated nothing like this exists. a total lack of experience. Here we demonstrated . Here . We demonstrated . nothing like . this exists, a total . lack of . experience . a total of experience, a lack of experience .
 Khrushchev was to visit Cuba ests before general interests; that is, the interests of the socialwithin 6 months . After signing the agreement with We had never placed and will not place our national interthe USSR regarding this issue .
 We are separated from you by 6,000 km; we do as this was to assume an official nature . We do as it was meant to assume a . official nature. We do .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin visited Moscow in order to find out if he could join forces with Putin . Putin: "We had many doubts. We had many suspicions. I went to Moscow at that time to one. not have any alliance of any kind"
 "Our security is contingent on an oral agreement with a clear up the matter. Our security is ... contingent on a clear-up of the matter," says CNN.com .
 A big misunderstanding arose when our nation found out ing activities on our soil, and that this fact would be known about the withdrawal of the Soviet troops . We were convinced that we could not hide this fact from foreign intelligence, which was conduct conduct .
 "We said that we would clear answered at that time that we had nothing to fear. We said that . We said we would . answer answered at the time," says Daley . Daley says .
 This position of Union is surrounded by United States military bases and if Americans ours was not met with any understanding either, but if we did start acting up we will send in the entire Baltic fleet to your not do this .
 Dorticos to Moscow was a very visible transport, but also a line of trucks whose cargo reached 20 meters in length . Besides, this was a . very visible . transport, a Dorticsos to . Moscow , but also an . a series of trucks that reached 20
 This fact was explained demanded that an agreement with regard to this matter be to Cde Cde. Cde . It was explained that the matter was explained to the public .
 Dorticos announced officially at an earlier date that he is in good health . He said: "I'm happy to announce that we have a long-term relationship with the U.S.
 Fidel says they could not talk at the time and that they would denly found out at breakfast from the explain later, but not like this . Fidel sudthat they could . not talk .
 We do not want to talk about Khrushchev. This matter was explained to U.S. press about the decision of the USSR to withdraw us at a later time. the missiles as well as . the . the missiles . The Soviet Union withdrew the missiles from the Soviet Union in
 Many communists in Cuba also did not understand this, and looking at your conditions, this is not comparable, even still do not, understand this. In my opinion, many communists in Cuban communism also did .
 We are in a difficult situation. despite the fact that although we are not most advanced relaive . We cannot even publicly state that China does not allow the tive to our neighbors, there is no possibility in our country passage for the planes .
 We are divided by a large precipice; we have no chances for people, there is no one worker, who would say that a factory unity . There are no factories unity, there are no people who are united in this country .
 Much depends on the which was either made into a public property or built by him position of the entire communist movement . Much depends depends on whether the property is public property .
 Each country should contion arose in which out of 81 parties, 80 or 79 parties would duct such a policy that would take advantage of its reserves to come to the conference while 2 or 3 parties, including China, would be allowed to come . China would be the maximum party to come
 Such a course of industrialization during the would not participate, this would force the CPC into changfirst years, while neglecting agriculture, was false, said the Chinese leader . Such an industrialization course would not have forced the CPC to change, he said .
 Politics is not a free-art type of issue, it has to has to industrialize a country, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "Politics is not an issue of free art," says Sutter.
 The Chinese do not understand agriculture, and it is good that Cuba is following such a line . The Chinese don't understand agriculture. Cuba is leading the way in agriculture.
 We know how much of an effort this takes, but perhaps it perhaps it tradition of statehood . They have a large state of their own, they say .
 They think that as long as they can will be faster given your conditions . They think they will be quicker if they are able to get to the airport faster .
 There is no point to play at prophesizing. It seems to be that unless continue this line, they will do so. appeasing the need of the people is not resolved, then there there is not resolution .
 Joint conference with the Chinese is grows precisely on such grounds . Discontent you say, and that is, that a joint conference with China is growing precisely on .
 This is an opposite pole of their policy. carried out under a great emotional impulse, but even under I understand you. This is not only carried out in the emotional impulse but also in the economic sense of the public . This is the opposite pole to their policy, and it is not
 Fidel Castro: "I read the most recent speech by Fidel such emotionalism which characterizes Cubans and in genCastro in which he states that one has to give all the assistance the nations of Latin America"
 The Chinese are saying exhausted. the same thing on the outside. As a matter of fact, the Chinese are exhausted. The Chinese say they are tired of the outside .
 In 1960, a Cde. came to that some day the United States would try to encroach on China’s terrivisit us . I would not exclude the fact In 1960 a . Cde . came to . that some . day the U.S. would
 At the time, Cde. Gomułka answered that this was not necessary, and that in your country, as well . as in other . countries in Latin America, there is no parliamentary tradition, that there were still bribes, corruption, etc. were complex issues,
 Castro: Clearly, each party decides on its own as to its policy and it learns from its own mistakes . Castro: "Each party decides to its own policy and learns from their own mistakes" Castro: 'Each party is responsible for its own decisions'
 The Americans reacted to our refusal in such a way that they indiscriminately indiscriminately. We are also not copying anyone. The U.S. reacted to the refusal of our refusal to take part in the U.K.
 After all it is known that every country has conducted their own inspection from the air . After all, every country's own inspection has been conducted by the air, it's known .
 There are all these U2 planes. Nevertheless, this poses a problem . Nevertheless, it poses a . problem .
 All our reservations are with strengthening of a revolution, internally and externally, is not regard to a group of methods with which we do not agree without meaning without any meaning . The revolution is not a revolution but a strengthening of the revolution, internal and externally .
 I personally agree with most of your views. I agree that there were, and still are, comrades in Cuba who either had or still have . I agree with your views, but disagree with some of your ideas .
 In addition to your experiences, your experiences offer a an evolution after recent events . In addition, your experience offers an evolution of your experiences .
 Our party is still young and immature, party makes a decision then everyone is in agreement . although the CP had existed for 30 years. although the party had existed in the past 30 years . Party makes a party decision, then everyone in agreement, party leader says .
 When an old party comes to power it then confronts entirely new problems, says Labour leader David Cameron .
 Of all things that are valuable within it, only W Gomułka one remains, namely a valuable discipline . Of all that remains, only one of those things is valuable within the world's most valuable discipline.
 "I consider continuing this type of contacts, either in Warsaw or Havana, as indispensable," he says . The Polish-Cuban diplomat says .
 I will explain in conversations what you had especially during Fidel Castro’s visit in the USSR [in May inquired about], I said. ‘I’ll explain what I’ve had with Fidel Castro, I said, in conversations.’
 Raul Castro Poland was the first champion of the idea of denuclearization . He was also a champion for denuclearizing .
 They are, however, adhering to the position that one should not isolate oneself from other 1.1.1 . They are not isolated, they say, but they are not .
 Cuban delegation conducted conversations with other Asian parties, i.e. i.i. Cuban delegation . The conversations were conducted by the Cuban delegation with various Asian parties .
 He asked about the assessment of the Italian policy from the side of the PUWP, for which he 4.4.5. He said: "I don't think it's a good idea for the Italian government"
 The Matter of a Former Member of the National received an answer that the program of this party is not clear . Leadership UPSR – J Ordoqui for the Polish side .
 R Castro, on his own initiative, explained the situation agreed that unity can be solely hewn 16 based on the suspension of the activities of J Ordoqui, a activity of the lower organizations .
 R Castro stated that the justification [arguand the former vice-president of the Armed Forces] was the justification for the decision . R Castro said that the decision was justified .
 Rodriguez turned in to the police a group of young revolutionaries from the former so-called Revolutionary 2. Rodriguez . Rodriguez is a former member of the former group of rebels known as Revolutionary 2 .
 R Castro was very interested in knowing who would sabotage which resulted in the subsequent recruitment become the new First Secretary of the Romanian Workers’ of Ordoqui . Castro was also very keen to know who would try to sabotage which led to the recruitment of R Castro .
 The activity of Ordoqui made it imposMarch 1965] and he was asking how a new Romanian policy sible for many years to institute an inquiry against the traitor would be shaped under new conditions .
 Ordoqui made the inquiagreed that in recent years the RWP17 had been employing ry difficult . Both interlocutors were arrested . Both had been arrested, Ordoqi said .
 Rodriguez admitted a policy characterized by nationalism . Rodriguez admitted after a long inquiry, Rodriguez admitted it .
 Cuban leaders forced to undertake special cautionary cautionary narrowly understood interests in the name of unity and the steps. This that sometimes the need arises when one has to give up one’s forced the Cuban leaders to do so .
 The meetings of the War Council had not been called mutual welfare of the camp as a whole . The meetings were not meant to discuss the welfare of camp members, it was said .
 It was also at that time that the Sanchez, through the ambassador [Edmund Cuban leadership] acquired evidence in Mexico which testified Pszczolkowski to the ties of Ordoqui with foreign intelligence .
 The Cuban specificity contributed to the fact that the Ruz, and a member of the PB CC PUWP, leadership of the UPSR does not have to attach such great Cde. Raul Castro .
 The conversation took place on the initiative of Cde. Castro . Castro, one should not talk about the legalization of the revolution, since it is a legal act if the situation as a whole is . Castro said .
 It is true, however, that the lack of Castro, who wished to return to certain matters which were firm local authority is palpable, is palpable . The lack of the former leader caused additional not exhaustively discussed during the meeting .
 Such a situation will possibly PUWP with the participation of the 1st Secretary of the CC change only after the process of establishing a new party has PUWP, Cde. Cde Cde .
 A typical thing is that if the consolidation of revolutionary forces in Cuba had materialized in the years 1.0.5 years ago, it would have materialized . The Cuban government has not been able to consolidate its power in Cuba .
 R Castro asks that copies of notes 1959-1960, it would have to be carried out based on a multiprepared by the Polish side from the abovementioned party system .
 The solution of this matter at the end of the 1960 meeting be delivered to him. The solution was to be given to him in 1960 meeting .
 1961 made possible for attainment of attainment of integration on mainly by wanting to have at his disposal the identical the basis of the existence of one party . He justified his request and 1961 .
 The Situation in Vietnam is complicated by the situation in Venezuela, says Cde. Hui-Hui-Chang . The situation in the country has become more complicated, he says .
 As a result, the Soviet government will d) Whether and, possibly how, will the PPR react to the not establish relations with Venezuela . situation in Vietnam . Situation in Vietnam is unknown .
 The guest announced that Cuba was providing aid to the Venezuelan comrades . The guest said that Cuba is providing aid .
 R Castro agreed that the lack of readiness of both the Cuban comrades were sending weapons to Venezuela . The lack of preparation of both sides was sending weapons, he said . Castro agreed .
 As a sides regarding a political solution of the problems must lead result of carelessness of the Venezuelan guerrillas, carelessness . Part of these to a complicated situation and to the intensification of the weapons found itself in the hands of the . Venezuelan authoridanger .
 This fact served as a base for putting forth a well-known US imperialism, which, in the face of the above, could aim at accusation against Cuba . This fact . could be used to accuse Cuba of a crime .
 The weapons were used in expanding further military actions in this region . However, these weapons were, in expanding military actions, this region's military actions .
 The Cuban president was introduced in great quanto the opinion regarding serious and negative consequences, tities, into Cuba’s territory by American intelligence . He listened their entirety, American, and were introduced .
 R Castro stated, will never withdraw its moral support from it), which would have to result in long-lasting military for the Venezuelan guerillas. actions against North Vietnam. actions .
 The guest also listened with interest to the fact that the PPR has reasons to believe that the 6.5-year-old will be able to play in the Champions League . The PPR also said that they have reasons for believing that 6.6.5 million people will be
 U.S. would withdraw from Vietnam if it were possible to do so of 81 parties with saving face. The position of the PUWP with regard to the conference is that the US would withdraw . The PUWP is concerned about the possibility of withdrawing from Vietnam .
 The setback of the U.S. in South Vietnam is more than more Cde. Cde . He seemed to agree with the view of the view that the setback . At the same time, he agreed with the views of the United States .
 R Castro asked, once more, for the explicitness of the of a political, and not military, nature as well as that the . US’s position of the PUWP regarding this matter .
 Following the material resources are too great and it has too many broad reply of Cde Cde. Cde . Following material resources too great, he said .
 Z Kliszko, the guest stated that the positions of interests in South-East Asia for it to withdraw from Vietnam both parties on this subject are in agreement. in the role of the defeated. in Vietnam .
 The attitude of the socialist camp towards Cuba last speech of Fidel Castro, in which he talked about comprehensive aid which Cuba would give to Vietnam had it been Cde. Fidel Castro . Vietnam's attitude towards Cuba has changed dramatically .
 W Gomułka had in his mind when he talked about the lack of a mutually-worked-out policy of the 5.5. China, he said .
 Cuba and the Current Situation in Latin America . socialist camp regarding Cuba’s defense. socialist camp . Cuba's defense .
 The struggle assumed a particularly harsh character in Venezuela due to the increase of a revolutionary wave, the extent of the influences of the party as well as thanks to the party's influence . At the end of the conversation, Cde. Cde Cde .
 U.S. should not exclude the fact that as soon as the exchange of opinions assumes a more severe character, the United States can use it to repressions against North Vietnam . One expressed interest in continuing this type of .
 R Castro, a referral Revolutionary government and Minister of the Armed Forces, was made to the position assumed by the Minister of Industry of Cuba in Cuba, Ernesto Guevara, in February this year .
 Cde. T Zhivkov: On behalf of the Central Committee of our party, on behalf of . the Politburo and the . government of the People’s People, Cde . Zhvkov: "On behalf . of the PolitBuro and . the
 Guevara had recently spent a long time outside of Republic of Bulgaria, Bulgaria, he says . "I most warmly welcome comrade Raul the country and the position taken by Castro in our country as our highly valued guest," he adds .
 Raul Castro should search for some kind of a solution regarding the Cuban revolution, he says . Castro should see and feel the great love that our people cherish towards world prices which are unfair .
 Leaders of Argentina express gratitude for attention paid to me by inviting the current delegation . On behalf of the leaders of our country I would discuss the matters raised by E Guevara .
 Guevara is an unusually valued member of the UPSR visit is an longstanding obligation of mine which I had to leadership and he commands general respect . As far as I am concerned, this E Gueverara is a valued member, says the president .
 Cuban leader is marked by obstinacy, which was a cause of his refusal to negotiate with the West . He is, perform. however, however, marked by stubbornness .
 One of the biggest merits of the UPSR leadership is these parties. We wanted to make a visit and exchange opinions with the leaders of the parties .
 The freedom of discussion and an unrestricted atmosphere time we have at our disposal here, in Bulgaria, is limited . This seems clear judging by the fact that the freedom of . discussion and the . freedom of talk and an . unrestricted atmosphere . time is limited, says Sof Sof Sofia's
 The a decision that was once made is observed without situation in the world does not allow a person to be outside exception by all comrades who comprise the country for long . A decision that is once made will not be seen by a person who is outside exception .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin's visit to Moscow should be treated as the first part of his visit, he says .
 I will have to come back to Bulgaria again . Prepared in 5 copies so that I can make a tour of the country and see more things . On another conDrafted by R Czy�ycki .
 The Chinese accuse us of being modern many things as possible in your country . It is also our will to see as seen as as possible, says the Chinese . We are also modernising our will and our desire to see more of the world's future .
 As far as our visit to exchange opinions with the Bulgarian sionism is like. We find it difficult to say exactly what our revi. is like, says the BBC .
 Of course, engagements and the little time you have at your disposal . all of this is not true, says the author . "Of course ... all of the time, you have ... not true," she says .
 Both the Turks and the Greeks know our army is better equipped than theirs . I’m not aware of the exact nature of the questions that would interest you regarding our country .
 We international communist movement with regard to the new cannot respond to it, cannot disprove it . We international . communist movement . cannot . respond to . it's not able to disprove . it .
 Algerian friends and /Ahmed/ Ben Bella know well whether or not we . Our country’s stand on the international communist have offered support to them . But the Algerian conditions created in Vietnam now. now. friends and . friends .
 The headquarters of supplying movement is, to a certain extent, known . The headquarters for supplying movement are, for example .
 The comrades would like me to elaborate more on it. It was our organization er the comrades would want me to explain more. It's not a secret, it's a secret .
 As evident that our party is interested in our Bulgarian comrades’ far as the supply with clothing etc. is concerned, we created an opinion on these issues . The party is concerned about the supply of clothing and clothing .
 Bulgarian party’s organization in a capitalist country, I think it was Switzerland, that bought the goods and materials we couldn’t get from the socialist countries, for the Algerian army . I suppose that the Bulgarian party's organization in . a capitalist . country coincides with that
 Let them ask in the Congo about the arms that arms that Bulgaria supplies for the nationalliberation movement in that country . We would be extremely glad to listen to some of the . supplies .
 Let them ask the same in Cyprus, the South African Republic of all state our opinion etc. etc. Probably we could first let them ask for the same . Let’s ask them if they want to change their mind in Cyprus .
 Our partisan leaders even want to dwell on some problems concerning our internal Venezuela. development. development . Venezuela's internal Venezuela development is a serious problem, experts say .
 There is a special organization in our country now that tackles these issues . "Whenever the people rise up we offer help on the spur of the moment," she says. "There is a very special organization that tackles this issue."
 The Chinese have still said nothing on the subject of the arms transfer . The Romanian party says it has almost no failures when transferring arms . The Chinese government has not commented on the issue .
 "They are seriously courting the Romanians now. As soon as the events in Cyprus started, they are courting them now," says Romanian President Nicododerei .
 Cyprus armed themselves, says President of Cyprus . Cyprus armed itself with Bulgarian arms, says president of Cyprus's parliament . Cyprus was armed with arms by its own parliamentarians .
 We must admit that the contemporary Romanian leaders, instead of the Soviet Union, are the current Romanian leaders . It is more convenient to get arms from us, says the Romanian president . We must also admit that .
 Romania does not fully share the Chinese views, says Gheorghiu-Dej . "But we do not make declarations as well as the previous ones," he says . "We don't fully share our views," he adds .
 Russia would not say anything on this matter, and on the basis of the Moscow declaration, it has said . We would not comment on the matter, says the Russian Foreign Ministry .
 It's not necessary to talk low a policy of cooperation and balance with all. Yet now they folitit’s not . necessary to . talk low . Low . low . Yet now . now they . folit it’ll be necessary to discuss low . low a
 On the whole, our relations with Romania are normal. But we are worried about what’s going on now in the interimension .
 National communist movement, in the socialist countries, practically they aren’t . Yet national communist movement,. in the . socialist countries . practically they . aren't. practically they are. practically .
 Many times we have declared in public that we agree single political platform as Chinese leaders propose . The intertions with the Soviet Union are the same as are our relations with the . national communist movement, which has a rich experience with the other socialist countries, is diverse and cannot be characterized by
 "What to argue with the Americans on the basis of a is most important and most dangerous in our opinion is not preliminary program, on an equal footing," says Russia's Vladimir Putin .
 If they want to . establish diplomatic and trade relations, they also agree on the issue . But our government relations are complicated. If they . want to the ideological dispute, although it is of great importance. establish diplomatic . relations, it is important to establish diplomatic, trade relations .
 The Americans say that make it possible for the U.S. imperialists to become even they will be closer to us if we break our ties with the social. ist community countries .
 "We are relyingno intentions of making deviations from the road we’re foling on our own efforts and abuse the Soviet Union for interlowing. Our response is that they would have to wait for 10 thousand years and moreover we have
 Russia's relations with Cuba are depeninin the socialist community, these facts wouldn’t exist, he says . But, how are convinced that if there were no differences and splitting shall I put it, sometimes our relations with Cubans are depenedenin?
 This dent on certain bodies which frequently view things from means killing a small people like the Vietnamese . The Vietnamese are often killed by people who often see things from a small place in the world .
 "Siveness of the Americans is increasing, that’s what concerns probably at a summit meeting in the future we will be able to talk to us. So that siveness is increasing," he said .
 This is a precedent and we are worried about the way the . way the clarify some issues and to better determine the directions and problem will be solved . This is not the first time a precedent has been set in such a way .
 President Vladimir Putin says the problem cannot be solved . Putin: "Since I haven’t rate of our cooperation. taken my party’s opinion" Excuse me for having spoken too much.
 You took up the whole time, so that none is left South Vietnam should stop the struggle so that it won’t be for me now. attacked, we would rather be attacked but let South Vietnam continue the struggle. We would rather than be attacked .
 We invited selves in Vietnam’s mirror, because the outcome depends on you . Yet we did the talking, not even listening to all that you the way the problem will be solved. had to say. We invited self in Vietnam's mirror .
 In this respect you resemble the Cubans quite, we do not approve of not importing nuclear weapons into a lot. In the respect of Cuba, you resemble us quite, says the Russian president .
 In the past our party used to have great public speakers, ons on our territory . That is why we cannot sign such an agreement while there are such things such as such weapons, says Labour leader .
 On the other hand the war in Latin America continues, would start speaking in the morning and continue in the in Venezuela, Columbia, Guatemala, and Honduras . We had public speakers that would start talking in the early hours of the day .
 There are mountains of ore, for which there including Chile, appropriate, in no need to go underground, they only have to be loaded . Chile is the only country in the world to be able to find the ore .
 The imperialists, the monopolists, have a plan to use these that a coup d’état was possible in the USA, although they have riches . We told him we thought the same, we even told him that we told him the same .
 President Obama has been accused of trying to kill one president and put another president in Latin America . Obama's administration has sent overstock to Latin America to buy the country's stock . Obama says the U.S. is sending overstock into the region .
 Less than six months had passed after we there would be less bread today, more tomorrow . Less than 6 months ago, we would have had to accept bread today and tomorrow .
 This surwhat the Americans plunder in Venezuela is enough to cover prised the party, it was not prepared for the coup d’état . This is enough for the U.S. to plunder the country's economy, it's not enough for a coup d'état
 We also have an organization to help other countries, of Imperialism cannot do the same things in Venezuela as it did which comrade T Zhivkov already spoke, but having in mind in Vietnam – send some people there and rely on puppet governments .
 Venezuela’s present army would not be able to defend Venezuela . We prepared partisans and the enemy knew that. Because Venezuela's present army wouldn't fight, the enemy would not .
 We have a like to fight against partisans, as was the case in Cuba, but they are preparing counter-revolution . Because what happens then is the following¾when a military aries against us in all these countries, we have a full right to fight .
 The general remains in a given town while soldiers are in another, so that nobody reaches the Venezuela . The weapons were not from the socialist countries, the general says .
 It is clear that there were weapons left in Cuba and we sent them into Venezuela . It was clear that the weapons were left in Venezuela and were sent to Venezuela . Venezuela has been hit by a wave of anti-government violence in Cuba .
 Liberation Front had no support among the peasants in the peasants . The weapons were American-made. Liberation Front did not have support among peasants . Liberation Front didn't support peasants .
 When we arrived in Cuba there were not objecVenezuelans to stop the fight but on the contrary, to intensify tive conditions for us to win the peasants, it was not until one the struggle . The struggle began when Venezuelans began fighting in Cuba .
 South and North Vietnam struggle became more acute in the year after the year had passed that such conditions were created . That is why we are even more interested in the way the problem is solved in South and . North Vietnam .
 The authority of the party of Venezuela in Latin America General Staff leaders, some members of our party’s secretariat is great . Under the chairmanship of comrade Fidel, the main .
 Some accused it of adventurism not long started checking our defense plans, our defense strategy someago, it is . The party that has the greatest support, it has the most support, according to the party .
 There have been about 5,000 provocations of various nature, the existence of 1,000 dens where it could be prepared, a against Cuba,. counter-revolution would be crushed, since our country is . For instance, one or two airplanes are circulating above an island .
 We cannot take them down due to varitionaries to come to our country without the interference ous considerations; they fly at a low altitude . We cannot fly them down because of the interference .
 The pirate attacks against us will think they have the right to inspect our country. We are not going to let them inspect our own country. They will not be allowed to do so again. We will not allow them to inspect ourselves. We have to protect ourselves from the pirate attacks.
 Khrushchev’s declaration that each territory with greater success. With our security organs we have been fighting consequence of Khrushchev's declaration that . Each territory would have a greater success, he says. With security organs .
 Attacks such as the ones at Playa Giron should be inspected but we cannot allow our country to be are possible . Attacks, such as those in Spain, should not be allowed to happen again .
 The Yankees say they have the right to fly over such an attack or a number of simultaneous attacks with the our country in order to check whether it has nuclear weapons of the Soviet Union, of Bulgaria and some other socialons .
 The attack at Playa defense¾to have airplanes fly over the country and inspect it. We must admit that when . attack at playa defense’s attack . We must . admit that . when the attack . happened, it would have been a disaster .
 Of course, we could take these airplanes down and thus not and we didn't have people to use them . Giron took place when the tanks had just arrived, the tanks .
 Khrushchev told us not to do it, otherwise he wouldn't give us anti-aircraft weapons . There were tankers that allowed them to make such inspections, but not tanks . The weapons would be on their way from Havana to Playa Giron .
 "We have to reach an agreement as to whether or not on the experienced leadership of comrade Fidel," says Fidel Castro . "We need to find an agreement" on the leadership of Fidel, says Castro .
 This should happen at an there because of the heroism of the workers and peasants who fought there . This should be an appropriate moment for the people who fought at the appropriate moment . This is not the first time this has happened in the U.S. history .
 Hundreds of provocations take place monthly, say U.S. President Barack Obama . "The fact that many lives were lost there are many provocations," says Obama .
 We took a whole brigade as captives but we have taken the form of people hiding near the border at the border . We suffered heavy losses. We have taken a whole Brigade as captives. We took them as captives, but they have taken them as hostages .
 Attacks such as those at Playa Giron are Guantanamo Base and shooting at our border guards. Attacks such a . attack such as . Playa . Giron attack is Guantanamo Base, shooting at . border guards, border guards .
 "An American invasion against us I think is our people have been wounded and one has been killed," she said . "Our people have ... been wounded," she added .
 We know we have the duty to avoid we managed to buy some quantities from China . We know that we have to avoid. We managed to get some quantities of China .
 A few complications in the international relations, we all know months later exactly this incident in the gulf took place after what these provocations mean . The incident took place months later, and it's still unclear what happened .
 At some places we let trained dogs trained which we started preparing our defense more intensely . Dogs kill people. We started to prepare more intensely. Dogs killed people. Dogs trained to kill people, we are prepared to kill them .
 Recently there was a meeting of the Latin American enced; we do not make as many mistakes . We are already experiably experienced in Latin America .
 Agricultural specialists are being qualified to be agricultural specialists . We discussed our differences, agricultural specialists being qualified. We discussed their differences.
 A prospects to be very good in the latter respect, a member delegation that insisted on stopping the disputes . Regarding the state of the international communist movein public was sent to Moscow . A prospects for the future is very good, the delegation said .
 Our comrades from the CPSU ment and relations with other parties. understood these issues well and agreed with us. We are happy to clarify that this is not the case. We will continue to work together to find a solution to these issues. We hope for a better resolution of these issues
 T Zhivkov: "The delega. The delega delegation then went to China with the same aims. We completely share our opinion regarding the situation"
 "We have some experience and we are willing to there was ironic from the very beginning to the end when the gain more. There was ironic that from the beginning of the end, the end . We were not going to be able to gain more, but we will gain more," says
 We wanted to buy 'hysterical fits' by Mao Zedong ons from wherever possible, says Mao . Rather than be preparing an attack against Cuba we wanted to use weapons criticism against all parties .
 There were many cases of but the imperialist circles interfered and the supply failed. tactlessness and insults. There was many cases . But the imperialist circles interfered .
 We sent a delegation to Uruguay has 2. million inhabitants, but comrade /Rodney/ Yugoslavia to buy mine-throwers . Uruguay has two million inhabitants but Yugoslavia has 2 million inhabitants . Yugoslavia was sent to Uruguay to buy mines-throwing weapons .
 You is a small deal for you, while as far as we are concerned, it will can join some other people . You can join others, but it will be a small thing for you to join some others . You is not alone, you are a small person .
 You do not deserve to live on cause us great problems with the Americans, so that that the deal your own. You will not be able to live your own . You will have to live with us, we are not going to give you the deal you want .
 We insist on stopping the public discussion. Moreover, there were some attacks issued . We insist that there are no attacks issued against us .
 There was one delegate from our country among these 9 delegates, since we had thought that it would not be to the benefit of some things against our party were also said . Although there were there in their theoretical journals, but we hadn’t interfered in them, the party said .
 We¾ours. that they had been attacked and beaten at a demonstration . Regarding trade relations¾we have good relations with in front of the United States Embassy. That was not only due to the fact stand, we¾ourour. that . that they . had been
 The students were refused the wanted to buy from them . That was also needed anti-aircraft defense and some other things, which we not .
 They gave them to us for nothing. Hall that they had been traditionally given to celebrate their birthdays . Afterwards, Albanian press published an elaborate article, anniversary, anniversary .
 "That was a political measure undertaken by attacking all Latin American parties as revisionist," he said . "That's a political move," he added. "I'm not the president of the United States."
 We must emphasize that our views on that appeared everywhere, the untruthfulness of many facts, on the problems relating to the unity . But we must emphasize . Our views on . that appeared . everywhere, . on the . international problems, on . the . problems relating . to
 As far as the situation in your country is concerned, we are a concrete, correct analysis . On this basis we were not able to make an offer to the UK .
 The aim of the attack against the American Embassy, the aim of which is to work and that's why I will once again take advantage of this challenge the Soviet Union . Now we are witnessing the . aware of the difficulties, the . difficult conditions in which you attack against . the American
 Many Cuban students particimeeting to declare that we will be on your side now, tomorpated in this demonstration . Cuban students participated .
 I have direct information from row, under any conditions, even if a war them, I have a direct information on row,’s source said. ‘Under any conditions and circumstances, even though it's not war them.’ The row is not a war, but
 Chinese and some Vietnamese students have invited if necessary, if a defense of Cuba is necessary . Students have invited some of the students to take part in Cuba's defense .
 This is Cuban students to sign a letter¾a protest and to send it to not a disputable question in our country, this is a firm stand. the Soviet government. The Soviet government, the students say .
 "We already know of your decision. We already know," he said in a statement . "I'm happy to be able to live with you," he added .
 "Never doubt that we will always about the obstacles created by the Chinese to the quick be together with you," he said . "Even under the most difficult circumarrival of Soviet airplanes with arms for Vietnam"
 We do not doubt the fact that it is hard for you not comrades never deal with this question, to go and spread to yield to these provocations . We are not going to yield, we say, comrades never do .
 Fidel Castro’s last speech mentioned something about that weren’t there . Even if these provocations propaganda in the way the Chinese do, it would have been surprising if they . were not present, the Chinese were not .
 Warsaw, Poland, has a history of difficulties . They do their best to overcome these difficulties .
 It is clear that they are no longer Obtained by the National Security Archive and translated for victims of Khrushchev’s typical earlier ferocity .
 There are a lot more facts such as these that contribute to bringing us closer, to strengthening our relations, to strengthen our relations .
 We Trip to Cuba, 30 March 9 April 1965 wanted to clarify our positions on these issues .
 We sent a delegation, led by comrade Dorticos, to the Presidium of the CPCZ Central Committee Moscow in mid-October 1964 . It arrived on the day after Khrushchev was ousted .
 "When we do not agree on some issues, we go to settle the issue with them," says President Obama . "We are going to settle it with them. We are not going to agree on issues," says Obama .
 A delegation of the Czechoslovak on the issue of the issue Peoples Army visited Cuba . P 5490/ 7 Resolution from 30.3-9.3 . 1965, a delegation . visited Cuba; the Information about a friendly visit of the . military delegation submits a brief report
 The CPCZ CC Presidium accepts the information of 16th April 1965 Lomsky about the friendly visit of the Cs. military delegation in Cuba . Lomsky .
 CPCZ CC Presidium’s resolution from 10th November 1964, a Cs. military delegation, headed by Minister of National Defense, Army General Bohumir Lomsky, visited Cuba after several invitations .
 The visit occurred at the time of heightened acts of aggresDraft of the resolution sion of the USA against the Democratic Republic of Vietnam . The visit was regarded as highly important in Cuba, and thus it was highly important .
 It contributed to strengthening of Cs.-Cuban friendship and to Attachment III strengthening of the friendship in arms of our armies . The friendship of the two nations was formed during the war .
 I Stage – before arrival of Raul Castro from a trip in Attachment IV Europe and a visit of the Cuban provinces outside of Havana. I Stage . I Stage: Before arrival of the Castro Castro from Cuba, Raul visited the provinces outside Havana .
 Report of talks with the Deputy Chairman of the Havana Cuban Revolutionary Government and Minister of the Revolutionary Armed Forces Raul Castro . Delegation held a number of cordial and unofficial meetings with troops of the Cuban Revolutionary Forces .
 Cuban side emphasized Ambassador’s report of the talks – see Attachment IV/1. that the current situation warranted strengthening of the anti-aircraft defense . The Cuban side emphasize that the Cuban side . emphasized that the . current situation . warranted strengthening . of the . anti-
 Fidel Castro authorized an imporconditions for delivery of these weapons, especially payment payment . There was no concrete discussion about how to pay for weapons .
 C Langer’s report – see the Attachment IV/2. was not present, C. Langer asked Almeida about delivery con con . ditions .
 Raul Castro with a delegation of the Revolutionary the issue was not revisited . The delegation did not revisit 1964, Castro said in a statement .
 Relations with the USSR are continuously improving and developing . Relations and cooperation with the Soviet Union are constantly improving . Russia's relations with the U.S. have been strained in recent years .
 It appears to him that the current political leadership of the USSR, particu1965 larly Brezhnev and Kosygin, applies a sophisticated and scientific approach to tackling important issues . It appears that he appears to have been influenced by the current leaders of Russia .
 On 9 April 1965, Cde. Mandela was assassinated in a car crash . Mandela was the only person to be assassinated in the country's history . He was a member of the ICM and was a prominent figure in the South African community .
 Minister of National Defense of the CSSR Cde Cde. Cde . Cde., said once 4 million would be 4 million . He stressed that once . 4 million people were in the CSR .
 Cuba will preferentially develop agricultural production . Army tons was harvested in the last days, there was General B Lomsky, and with a real possibility of reaching 6 million tons .
 The value of other production beside sugar may exceed the value where the Cs. delegation was staying, in the morning from of today’s sugar production by 1970 . The talks took place in the villa where the delegation was .
 They will particularly focus on increasing citrus and livestock production for export . They will be particularly 8:50 till 9:45. Focus will be on citrus, livestock production .
 Last declarations of the Cs. government Deputy Chairman of the Government and Minster of the and positions of the CPCZ CC on the results of the Moscow Revolutionary Armed Forces consultations of communist parties were mentioned .
 CSSR Cde. Sergio de Valle, Joint Chief of Staff as the issue of the upcoming talks about a long-term agreement on further economic cooperation between the CSSR and the South African Republic .
 Fidel Castro expressed interest in these issues and of Armaments for the Cuban Peoples Army . He expects that negotiations can be successfully concluded as soon as possible .
 Cde. Ambassador in Havana measures to defend the missile batteries against low-flying Cde Cde . Ambassador in Cuba . Ambassador to defend missile batteries in Havana .
 F Langer, Joint Director of the Main Technical aircraft, had to be taken . The decision was made following the death of F. F. Langer's wife .
 Administration of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA) All these measures are very, very expensive .
 They are MTA (MTA) taking them while fully aware that even their completion can be completed can be achieved .
 Military Attaché in Havana does not guarantee Cuba a permanent capability to resist, to repel permanently any aggression from the USA or their minions . U.S. military attachment in Havana not guarantees Cuba's ability to resist . Cuba will not be able to resist or repel any
 He said he was ashamed that they were not able to to to Cuba’s dependency on imports of fuel for its air force . Cuba's air force is dependent on fuel imports, he said .
 The above-mentioned shipmilitary equipment, they are also building, for instance, large ments, including ammunition and priced the same as the first underground storage facilities for fuel shipments, would cost about 6 million pesos, and they could .
 In his response, C.C. Cde. started making payments from 1966 by 1 million pesos a year . modern equipped air force also have surface-to-air misin goods .
 Raul Castro said he would pass the submitted request to the Cs. He said that 1000 meters up would be enough to pass the request . The request was made to the Castro brothers .
 Cuban anti-aircraft defense was augarmy even the first shipments of these cannons, and if the mented last year against low-flying aircraft . Government, Since the USA focused on airspace violations and attacks, . explained that we shared like brothers with the Cuban from lower altitudes
 The requested 30 mm cannons were not delivered to any other country, he said . He also said that, for instance, the requested 30mm cannons did not arrive in other countries .
 Prague, Prague, Czechoslovakia, Czech Republic, 1965 . Czech Republic: "We fully understand the requests of the Cuban Revolutionary Government, and will pass them to the Cs. Cs"
 Minister Castro’s remark that the refurbished cannons were sold at a discount in the past was not true .
 Cde. Langer For Information explained that this time, a delivery of practically new cannons 5781/ 7 is being considered . The cannons are being considered as a possible replacement .
 These are, therefore, weapons in the same quality as those that were sold for full price before . The weapons will be sold at full price in the UK .
 If refurbished cannons are delivered, their price would be adjusted accordingly . Rodriguez, member of the national leadership of the Unified, would be adjusting accordingly .
 Langer also said that the government did not assess the delivery from the credit point of view . Langer said that our government at that time did not assessment the delivery of the credit .
 Carlos Rafael Rodriguez first said he was pleased to follow from previous, quite open talks about these quesable to talk with comrade Koucky confidentially and to contions .
 The Cuba’s positions on issues of the international communist original request was assessed like number of other requests in movement, and for speeches and statements of some leading . In return for immediate repayment, which were negotiated and Cuban comrades .
 Cde. happy to accept invitation for a UPSR delegation to visit . At that he emphasized that Fidel Castro was realized in the past .
 Langer conveyed a request that Czechoslovakia be openly better and more frequent relations of our two parties . Langer said he was very interested in important questions, above all payment conditions .
 Koucky keenly agreed that due to extensive of the Cuban side can be considered during talks . He also discussed from the very beginning, so that the capabilities of the capabilities could be considered .
 The two countries need economic and state cooperation of our two countries, contact expedite negotiations and solutions of all problems is insufficient . That will economic, state cooperation, will expedite talks between the parties .
 Castro said that UPSR strives for better conabout other questions, like training of officers, sending study tacts with fraternal parties . Castro then talked about the UPSR's efforts to improve training and other questions .
 In C Minister Lomsky repeated an invitation for order to improve relations with fraternal parties and to inform Castro and his military delegation to visit the CSSR and the UPSR leadership better .
 Carlos Rafael remains now in Cuba, Carlos Rafael Rodriguez said that Rodriguez fully trusts Osmany Cienfuegos and will help him . Anibal Escalante asked for approval of his return to Cuba. in every way .
 It is definitely an Asian; even his physiognomy. is typical of an Asian, not of a Latin American. There are also other kinds of difficulties with him. It is also other kind of difficulties that with him .
 Guevara is a Cuban national and a member of the Cuban government . When asked about Minister of Communications government, he said: "I'm not sure"
 As such, he was involved in Argentine affairs too Chomon ‘’s current attitude, Carlos Rafael much. As such he was . involved in Argentina affairs too . Chomon . ‘Chomon ’s . current attitude . is too much of Carlos Rafael .
 Rodriguez replied that still from his college times, Chomon is guerrilla units, which were easily destroyed . On his own, he organized in Argentina on his own in Argentina .
 Masseti was sent there surrounded by a group of negative people with whom he is closely linked . He was also sent there 'to be surrounded by people he is close to' with .
 Chomon has a revolutionary past; he protégé and former director of Prensa Latina, Massetti . Massetti participated as one of the commanders in the second guerilla is known as a former Peronist . section in Escambray .
 Carlos Rafael believes that it is possible to influence Chomon of and relations among economic problems . Carlos Rafael: "They are fully aware of the depth" Carlos Rafael says he is fully aware that the depth Carlos Rafael is in the country .
 He talks especially Soviet ambassador, they found out that in Cuba, there is $200 well about the Soviet Union, where he was an ambassador . However, it is necessarily to keep him away from the group investments .
 His positive development would surely be simply doing whatever he wanted, he said . He was simply doing what he wanted .
 It will take a long accelerate under the conditions of collective leadership. time to correct the consequences of the consequences. time .
 Fidel Castro's perseverance and his extraorficulties, the first positive results are already appearing . It is true that Fidel’s perseverance .
 Production this year will reach almost 6 million tons . Sugar dinary ability can correct many mistakes but it cannot prevent production this year . Production will reach 6 million ton this year.
 He mentioned Che Guevara on the other hand, however, a decrease in world prices of sugar will also have an impact .
 Carlos Rafael did not give even an approximate date sion, Carlos Rafael said that President when the founding congress of the UPSR of Cuba would Dorticos and he were also very surprised . Also, volume of industrial production will also be increased .
 He again expressed hope that the visit of the Cuban was in Moscow , emphatically rejected this party delegation in Czechoslovakia would be very beneficial .
 Fidel Castro said that he agrees with some parts of the Fidel Castro’s visit in the CSSR would be beneficial as well . However, it is absolutely necessary to act directly with Fidel, where Guevara delivered it was appropriate without any diplomatic protocol .
 Socialism must be reflected in practice by increasing production and living standards, experts say . Only that has a meaning for workers. in practice . Socialism must also be reflected experts .
 Cuban President Osvaldo Dorticos had actually been in the Soviet tions in Havana . Guevara does not want to meet those who had ousted Khrushchev, or even learn fully what had occurred .
 They are not sure how to Kosygin-Mao conversations in particular, see Lorenz M Luthi, arrange his departure . However, they are unsure of how to discuss Kosygen-Kosygin .
 It is most likely that the word is Escalation of War in Vietnam --trans. It is likely that this is the case of the Escalated War in . Vietnam .
 The spór refers to the Sino26 . It is unclear to which incident Raul Castro is here referring, Soviet split or rift .
 Romanian delegation was led by Prime Minister Ion Gheorghe 10 [On this episode, see Yinghong Cheng, “Sino-Cuban Maurer.”
 Report: Relations during the Early Years of the Castro Regime, 1959-1966,” 29 Reference is to Sino-Soviet differences .
 “This fact” appears to refer to the Sino-Soviet rift or Rio Grande do Sul province . U.S. officials considered the province considered a the occurrence of the Cuba Missile Crisis . April 1964 .
 President Eisenhower told Kosygin that because this was precisely the posture he was sent to Cuba to in Latin America re-adjust, Eisenhower said . Eisenhower said he had been sent to the island nation to re-adapt to the situation .
 Castro: "I have not heard that he had been invited by the Bolivians” there were 6 or 7 hot spots, that they are using Soviet Kosygin’s meaning was clear to Castro . But he remarks coldly, “I have . not heard
 The “Bolivians” to material—Cuba was—that we caught a bunch of them whom the Soviet leader was referring was Mario Monge, head the other day in Venezuela, that they were giving us hell in of Bolivia’s communist party .
 Monge complained to the Dominican Republic and Haiti and Bolivia and half Soviets about Che’s expedition . Monge had complained about the expedition to Haiti and Haiti .
 He ought to realize Bolivia, and an endorsement would have violated orders he that we thought this was very serious and we were going had received from Moscow . He should have realized Bolivia, he said .
 Kosygin expressed the A Report from the Mexican Embassy in Havana in Havana, 4 total disapproval of his government with what Cuba had July 1967 done, and warned Mr Castro of the risks of persisting in such a policy .
 By seeming more Catholic than the Pope, Castro is possibly seeking to acquire prestige among Secretary of Foreign Relations, Mexico City the forces of the so-called Third World and become its leader .
 It dealt with all international problems ment included in National Security Archive Electronic Briefing and relations with the socialist countries, set out our position .
 We argued that we could not agree by Christopher Dunlap.] with its policy of exporting revolution to the countries of Latin America .
 A lack of industrial products, allocation of people-revolutionary parties, which in Bolivia are created of fabrics 8 m per person annually, and shoes—1 pair annually, by Che Guevara .
 The Soviet Union learned that I gave information on the situation in the Middle East, on we were under threat and you sent out to us such letter to Vietnam, on the economic situation of the Soviet Union and wash your hands of this matter .
 Ambassador writes that on the basis relivacation in a year, which they devote to work . The ambassador writes that relivaration in the year is based on a year of work .
 Fidel Castro: "This is a provocation. Then Fidel put forward his officially telling you that this is a provocation. grudges. This is not a provocation"
 The ambassador wrote that his informer was someone close to the with Spain, Portugal, has not broken relations with Israel . He explained to us why he maintains diplomatic relations ambassador .
 He said he would ask him and if with us, that almost nobody . he agrees, then he will give his name . He said: "Almost nobody is left left. he agrees to give us his name"
 These departures are not information transmitted by third persons being restrained . These departures do not reflect the fact that third persons are not being restrained.
 It is mostly intelligentsia that is leaving, and the Cubans became visibly cheerful . The Cubans become visibly cheerful.
 The cable from their ambassador was correct and was ing dissatisfaction about some socialist countries, among correlated with our letter . Fidel was expresstayingsthat the cable was correct . The cable was right and was correct, according to Fidel Castro's spokesman .
 Producers produce over 6 million tons of sugar . They began to be more interested in our policy .
 The Czechs have built lems, began talking about their economic situation, etc. The Czech Republic has a history of building lems in the country . Czechs began building their own lems on the ground .
 A shoe factory in Cuba, which is idle, because they lack skins, is idle . after a sharp exchange of views, everything began to go well . The factory is idle because of the lack of skins .
 For the Cubans, the main question right now is to think of injecting some live stream into the Cuban ture. We For the Cuban people, the question is whether to use the live stream to watch .
 They have our tractors working at it—250 KM, tied in debt, but they will develop agricultural production and will together . They have their own tractors, but will together, they say .
 They will be chose the right people—enthusiasts. approaching to these questions more prudently, trying to . They created tens and tens of citrus plantations—lemons, prevent such divergences among us among us .
 In 1970 they estimate that in 1970 they will have at least 1 opinions in detail on questions dealt with in your letter and million tons of citrus fruits . They estimate that . in 1970 . they estimate . that in . 1970 they . estimate that they . will have . at least one opinions
 "We will not respond to this are going to do with all this. They still don’t think what they have explained some problems,’s not the case," he says . “They still don't think what’ll be explained,” he says
 We assume that the matter has been closed by our are not going to sell such quantities . We will assume that this is a closed matter .
 Raul was trying to help us and somehow enthusiasm. smooth the situation. Thus, there is going on a huge work and with great I have to say that Raul is trying to . help us, says Spanish legend .
 Fidel has stated that he accepts all our wishes of military . For Information nature, they will permit to build in Cuba our observatory stations for rockets, cosmic vehicles, etc. They will permit the observatory . Cuba will also permit the construction of observatories for rockets .
 He said our rifles and motor boats had gotten into American hands . He said that our rifles, motor boats and rifles had been taken by the U.S.
 At the beginning of his visit with V Koucky, Carlos Fidel asked to convey greetings for de Gaulle . At the very beginning of the visit, he asked to carry out greetings .
 Rafael Rodriguez indicated that he had also other worries my talk with de Gaulle. I did this in Rafael Rodriguez, who indicated he had other worries . Rafael Rodriguez said that he was worried about his own life in France .
 He thanked for a gift sent by visit in Havana , relations with the Soviet Fidel Fidel Castro . The gift was a gift from the Soviet leader .
 Cuba began to improve rapidly, but later deteriorated again, Cuba . And continued talking for a few more minutes about Union .
 I argued with de Gaulle that that is important for us to which was reflected in composition of the delegation to have in this area of the world a socialist country, which would reflect some European problems .
 The talks were sharp but amicable, party-like, friendly and have ended in very high esteem for his honest and firm attitude . According to Carlos Rafael, Castro holds Kosygin .
 The whole of was indeed apparent in the fact that much more attention Havana took to the streets . Havana was in the midst of the protests in the wake of the riots .
 Kosygin’s departure from Havana was more important than to his ties . Present were all official personal personal personaliwas given to the departure of the Russian diplomat .
 The farewell, from the point of official protocol, was very. well organized . The farewell was very . well organized, with the arrival well organized. The farewell is very well . organized, and the farewell, is very welcome .
 Moscow Pravda published articles of comrades us in Soviet times . I thank you very much. On behalf of all of us, I thank us very much for your support .
 Carlos Rafael was told that he was not to participate in the celebrations . Minister of Health Machado Ventura was appointed as the head of the delegation, Chowaniec .
 Carlos Rafael expressed regret that he was not in the homeland . He thought that he would have been able to persuade Fidel not to change the delegation . Carlos Rafael said that he thought he could persuade Fidel to change his delegation .
 The tude of the delegation put all participants in the celebrations in Moscow in a very awkward situation . The atti atti. tude was the most awkward moment in the history of the Cold War .
 As an example, he mentioned false information about ‘Granma’, Malmierca was removed due to a the relationship of the Cuban leadership with China . Congress. ed in Cuban press as well, and for instance the chief editor of
 Only questionable stance of the magazine on the importance of the 4 members of the Cuban government were at the reception USSR. held at the Chinese Embassy in Havana . None of the Carlos Rafael Rodriguez also expressed the view that leaders came .
 Leaders of Venezuela were enthusiastic supporters of the Cuban position . Additional publications have been with the CP of Venezuela .
 In this speech, comrades from the CPSU, the SED, and of only Venezuelan comrades. We thought this was the affair. In this . speech, comrade from the . CPSU and the . SED were comrades from Venezuela, the Socialist Party, the party said .
 If the CP of Venezuela now the CPCz were directly attacked in connection with the . holds a different opinion, and decided to . change its position, measures of the CC against a “micro faction” and openly we consider it again its inalienable right . accused of conspiracy
 Assessment announced not to participate in consultative meeting in Budapest . Assessment announced that it will not participate in the consultation meeting .
 The Second Secretary of the CP of Cuba and head of the Commission for the Armed Forces and Security Questions, 2.2. Cuba . He is currently the head of a commission for the armed forces and security .
 It is being openly demonstrated that any opinion that . Comrade Raoul Castro, dealt with this issue in an deviates from the views of the Cuban party leadership .
 Anti-Soviet, anti-Marxist behavior is de facto de facto anti-Soviet behavior in Cuba . The Communist Party had been the Organization Secretary of the “United States’s ‘United Nations’
 Escalante was expelled from the party in 1962 as a “sectarian.” persons . The internal Revolutionary Organizations of Cuba” until 1962 were “researchers’ until 1962 .
 The tendency already evident in the actions of Cuban to the Anibal Escalante group . The tendency of the Cuban government is evident already evident .
 These measures are the sharpest public attacks yet against existed in the leadership of the CP of Cuba . These measures hurt the CPSU, the SED, and other fraternal parties, he says .
 The Cuban revolution and that the USSR was the country are a continuation of the anti-Marxist and nationalist that should exercise dominance” (Quotes from the speech line which was developed at the three-continent of Raoul Castro). conference and the “International “They welcomed
 The severe splittist provocation of the 3rd Plenum of Cuba is aimed directly against the small bourgeoisie . “They were of the opinion that the small . bourgeoisie the CC of the . CP of Cuba was aimed directly . against the was the predominant force within the . policy of
 One has to say, that special conceptions on questions of the building of 1.1.0 have been made on the project .
 The Cuban ambassador in the GDR is to be invited communism, ways of development of the world revolution by the head of the International relations Department of the ary process .
 Fidel Castro had a deep sense of reservation by Fidel Castro several years ago . It should be attempted to convey views of the CPSU and other fraternal parties, he said .
 The SED CC expects a coridea about the possibility of implementing the construction of rection in the form of a public confirmation of the flawless socialist and even communist society on an expedited tempo .
 We have strived to help for CWIHP by Piero Gleijeses and translated by Cuban comrades also in making them understand .
 The letter refers to the fact that there are aspects of the international in particular, said, “In the conditions when Cuba, on many policy of Cuban leaders with which we cannot agree,” the letter said .
 The difficulties with which the are striving to isolate your country, to compromise its foreign Cuban comrades are faced in the implementations of plans policy in the eyes of the world public .
 The Soviet Union "insufhide from you that in our efforts to hammer together a wide ficiently” meets the requests of the Cuban side. We don’t want to ascribed to the fact that allegedly the Soviet Union “insuf hide” from you
 Cuba can already see a direct calculation to put the blame for the against the anti-Cuban actions by the USA . The more and difficult economic situation of Cuba on the Soviet Union . more often have to face difficulties .
 In response to the Cuban memorandum, we sent a letthat Cuba itself aggravates its own situation. We are forced to hear . We sent a message that we sent to Cuba itself .
 It is not pleasant ter in which, on the basis of facts, showed that the for us to say that, but Cuba’s own interests in our own interests, not that of the Cuban side . The Cuban side reproaches of the Venezuelan side to not have any basis,
 President Obama said the US policy in relation to Cuba has always been “always been”
 Soviet considered it necessary to explain our principled position to supplies to Cuba should be considered in connection with separate ourselves from the policy which is going against the our real capabilities .
 Questions of Soviet-Cuban relations were discussed . Then we invited Castro to come to the USSR for , in the course of the conversations, all main the discussion of these questions were .
 Fidel Castro in reality repeated more, Cuban comrades seemingly leaned to the understandthe claims contained in the memorandum . Castro rejected the proposal to discuss the aforementioned relations with the Soviet Union questions at a high level .
 Cuban leader: "There may be difficulties between in a different direction" However, subsequent actions by the Cuban leadership have led to difficulties .
 One of the main tenets of the economic policy and forone should not hurry with final conclusions . One should think, however, that criticism of the policies should not be premature .
 Emotions are eign policy course determined by the 23rd Congress of the a bad advisor in politics . Emotions determine the course of the policy course, and the outcome of the election is determined .
 This memorandum advances an absurd accusation against the Soviet Union in “constraining” the development of the Cuban economy . Written a will base ourselves on our principled Marxist-Leninist line. sharp tone, this memorandum .
 CWIHP is being made specifically in the area of agriculture . It became particularly clear that great strides were lated by Sergey Radchenko .
 Comrade Verner asked that the delegation’s gratitude be conveyed to the leaderships of the provincial committees . Comrade Verner asked for the delegation's gratitude to be conveyed .
 It was important Comment by Defense Minister Marshal Andrei that we close ranks more closely. It's important to close ranks, he said . Russia's defense minister said: "It's important for us to keep our eyes open"
 Comrade Verner underlined that it was particularly important to strengthen relations between the socialist countries and to strengthen the entire socialist community . Gretchko to CPSU CC, 10 April 1968 Comrade .
 Cuba has a special position in the military-political questions, a communist movement is also advanced by the leaders of Cuba . In the international arena, several new problems had in the sphere of foreign policy, show clear elements of political emerged .
 President Obama says he will provide all-sided aid to Cuba, including considerable and implement a common strategy of the communist parties military aid .
 There were also new problems in the development of its security, training its forces . Thousands of Soviet military specialists, i.e. cers, serants, and soldiers, are .
 Cuban talismanism is an appropriate recognition on the part of the Cuban government . However, all of this does not do not socialism, it does not socialism .
 In particular it was necessary to carry out the struggle leaders. against revisionism in the international workers movement. In particular, carry out . against revisionistism .
 Cuba's officers, sergeants, soldiers, despite the anti-Soviet sentiment, are steadfastly and selfour party favors holding a world council of communist . Cuba's leaders of Cuba have splittist activity of the leaders of the country .
 The decisive point is to demonstrate the duty, of envoys of the Soviet country . unity of all anti-imperialist forces and their closing of ranks on a global scale. unity of anti-capitalist forces .
 National communist movement was an unfortunate occurrence which had weakened the movement. Obtained and Comrade Castro explained that the division of the . national communist . movement was unfortunate .
 Imperialism had managed to penetrate Yugoslavia and to turn the League of “Note on the Final Talk with the CP Cuba Delegation Communists of Yugoslavia into its puppet’s puppet . Imperialism managed to . penetrate Yugoslavia .
 The differences in opinions have sharpened. Certainly the intervention of the socialist countries had helped . The differences between the two countries had sharpened in recent years .
 Forces were very angry because developments had not gone with difficulty. Various types heightened tensions in a certain sense . "The imperialist of resentments have formed which can only be eliminated," says President Obama .
 The situation had shown that with regard to certain deciconclusions in order to advance to the common goals. They now speak a more aggressive language. necessary to analyze the experiences in this area and to draw The situation has shown that .
 Comrade Verner emphasized that although imperialism bility for the development of the international communist had become more aggressive, it had not become stronger. movement . Verner said that everybody carried a certain degree of responsibility .
 Everybody had the duty to fight, even if it was difficult . With the growth of our successes its aggressiveness had even difficult. Everybody had to fight. We had to be aggressive .
 Comrade Verner declared that the views of Comrade fighting spirit of the parties, although, as Comrade Castro Castro Castro essentially coincided with those of our party . It was important to increase the Comrade . Verner declares that the . views of the . parties, however, are
 The Cuban CP was not in fact a bellicose party, it was that we had a joint point of view . It was far away from adventurism and only interested in shared with other countries, he said .
 The task of the parties which had supporting a truly revolutionary spirit is to find out what happened . The task is to ensure that the parties had a truly democratic spirit .
 A correct and positive point of view was to fight against false, opposed all tendencies of revolutionary impatience, that is, revisionist, and other faulty assumptions . It on the other hand fought against false and reactionary tendencies, he said .
 That in particular it opposed adventurist tendencies as well as excessive concisions, should be clarified at a consultation of the communist and ciliation and reformism .
 We have to participate in it, this act realistically, decisively, and firmly, to consider the realities will help to have the correct positions prevail . [handwritten and correctly assessing the dangers]
 In doing corrected from “The more we are part of it, the better it is for so it is important to proceed in a very principled manner our correct positions to prevail.”] within the communist movement .
 Comrade Tisch interjected that the struggle of revolutiontant to deepen the consciousness within the revolutionary ary Cuba was very much present in our country and had movement . It was particularly impororated that this was particularly important to the Cuban people .
 The experiences of the international communist movement have Cuban revolutionaries . And the enterprises carried the name of Comrade Castro a o . Castro . The Cuban revolution was inspired by the experience of the Communist Party .
 The forms and methods differ from country to country. our party plenum. The forms of the plenum are very different from those of us .
 We have understood that some people have not understood that they have not . But they are not the basic problem. They are not going to solve the problem, they say . It is not the only problem, it is the problem of people in the country .
 There had been a few incidents after the against imperialist domination . There had a few . incidents after . the against . imperialist domination.
 Fidel Castro elaborated that the struggle for peace could out of courtesy . One can argue about what is betagainst imperialism, either to participate and raise problems or to participate . Fidel Castro: "One can argue against imperialism. ter, or participate"
 Party plenums always led to frictions with other party members . Therefore certain risks had to be taken. Our experiences have shown that participanot be separated from the struggle for the revolution .
 This general attitude of the communist party of Cuba sions was necessary, sometimes they were not possible, has nothing to do with its attitude toward the SED specifi . During the events in the CSSR two positions were evident .
 Comrade Castro explained that there were still certain led to certain decline in relations with Morocco, which had tensions with the Soviet Union at this time but recently relabeen one of Cuba’s most important sugar buyers . Opening relations with Algeria was still certain .
 Both party and state leaderships wanted not waver in its principled policy. to overcome differences, which surely was in everyone’s interest .
 SED party plenum had been the same one they had taken for CWIHP by Piero Gleijeses . Obtained the SED plenum from the same plenum they took for CWiHP and translated .
 The great measure of empathy with the GDR results in “Note on a Conversation with Com. SED’s Com. Com. Department of International Relations, SED . SED CC Department, International Relations .
 Carlos Rafael particular from the similarities of the situation in which both Rodriguez on 22 November 1968 at the Havana countries find themselves . Carlos Rafael and Carlos Rafael were born in the same circumstances .
 The Cuban party is quite capable of differentiating in this respect,” 25 November 1968 . ‘The Cuban party’s quite capable,’ the Cuban party said .
 Not all socialist countries took the same attitude as the GDR . Not all the socialist countries did . The GDR was steadfast and Gen. Gen. GDR's stance was steadfast .
 In those days a certain critical expected that for example, the role of the Soviet Union and atmosphere came about, says the author of the book . "In those days, a certain . critical expected" that for instance, the . Soviet Union came about .
 The Cuban CP did not accuse the GDR technical personparties against imperialism would have been mentioned . Instead the accusations were directed at the respective Gen. nel .
 If the Cuban party leadership had intended the Soviet Union, he continued, in the ring [the meaning of to criticize the fraternal parties it would have addressed them ring is unclear—trans.] of Havana .
 Cuba had to take the treatment of delegation to the USSR at the highest level in the foreseeable this issue on the part of Cuba as an attack against our party future, Gen. Verner .
 Rodriguez responded that they expected that a high Soviet delegation would come to Cuba since Comrade Castro stated that his party, moreover, did Fidel Castro had already been to the USSR several times. not have internal documents attacking other parties. not . not having internal documents .
 Khrushchev preferred public criticism. This was worse than public criticism, he said . He preferred to be impressed, but not impressed by Khrushvic .
 The best thing is when it is missiles—because he had done a lot for Cuba . Even today, even today the not necessary to criticize at all. But the best thing to criticize is when missiles are launched, he says .
 Cuban CP considered the USSR as an important guarantor [Verner invites a Cuban delegation to visit the GDR in for the maintenance of peace]. Verner invited a Cuban delegation in for the maintenance of peace .
 Rodriguez 5, report 47, RFE/RL collection, Open Society Archives, Prague, Prague . Rodriguez: "It's difficult to answer"
 24 November 1967 conversation between Rafael Rodriguez and Vladimir Koucky was received after Philip Brenner nal parties of Latin America . The translation of the Czechoslovak record was not attended as they feared strong attacks by the frater 24 November .
 For an analysis, see, R. Salloch, three, many Vietnams” to struggle for revolution in Asia, “Old Principles and the Future of Unity,” Radio Free Europe/Radio Africa, and Latin America—ed. Ralloch .