 Cartoons of Khrushchev and Kennedy arm wrestling were published . Cartoons were published, such as the one on the right, featuring the two sitting on nuclear warheads with their fingers aimed at the fire buttons .
 Newspaper placards with lines like WAR INEVITABLE were hanging up all over the place . Newspaper placard with . lines like . War Inevitable were . hanging up . around the world .
 Everyone thought that the USA and the USSR would launch into a nuclear war at any second . The USSR and the USA were thought to be at risk of nuclear war . The U.S. and the Soviet Union were at risk from each other .
 In 1959, the leader of Cuba, Fulgencio Batista, was overthrown by Fidel Castro, a Communist revolutionary . Fidel Castro is the current Cuban president .
 Batista was unpopular and corrupt, but he was not Communist, so the USA had supported his reign . The U.S. supported Batista's reign, but the U.K. supported him .
 Khrushchev placed the missiles in Cuba . The USA was very angry and immediately made moves to bring Castro down . The missiles were placed in Cuba by the Soviet Union .
 They gave money and equipment to Cubans who wanted to take Castro down . They gave them equipment and gave them money to help Cubans take Castro .
 Nikita Khrushchev, the leader of the USSR, was happy that there was a Communist country in the USA's back yard .
 Khrushchev realised that if the USA invaded Cuba and took down Castro, all his work would go waste, so he installed nuclear missiles in Cuba to scare the Americans off . The U.S. would invade Cuba and take Castro down .
 Khrushchev sent 40 nuclear missiles to Cuba in September 1962, along with missile launchers, launchers, experts to construct them and troops, jet fighter planes and anti-aircraft missiles to protect the nuclear warheads .
 President Kennedy forms The U2 photograph that revealed the Soviet missiles EXCOMM to advise him . ExCOMM was used to advise the President of the Soviet Union to use the U2 photo .
 Some of his advisors wanted to order a strategic airstrike to take out the missiles . Some of the president's advisors wanted a strategic strike, he says .
 Others wanted to either put diplomatic pressure on the USSR or do a deal with them in secret . Still others wanted to do a secret deal with the USSR in secret, according to reports .
 The USA announces that they are going to blockade Cuba to prevent any more missiles from being delivered . The U.S. announced that they will blockade Cuba .
 The United States army starts preparing to invade Cuba to get rid of any missiles that remain . The U.S. army begins preparing to invasion Cuba to remove missiles .
 President John F Kennedy goes on EXCOMM national television to inform the nation about what is happening in Cuba . President Kennedy and EXCOMm national television talk about the Cuban situation .
 Soviet leader Khrushchev tells his advisors to expect an American invasion and fight back when it happens . Meanwhile, Soviet leader tells advisors that the U.S. will invade the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev condemns the U.S. for blocking his ships from reaching Cuba . He says it was a violation of his right to travel to Cuba .
 American People panic and race to the shops to stock up on goods in case of a nuclear war . American people panic and run for food and medicine .
 The Secretary General of the UN called on both the USA and the USSR to reach a compromise . The UN Secretary General called on the two countries to reach an agreement .
 Khrushchev orders his ships to stop heading for Cuba, but not to turn back . Khrrushchev: "We are going to Cuba. We are not going to go to Cuba, we are to Cuba"
 The U.S. armed forces went up to DEFCON 2, against the President’s orders . The President ordered the military to go up to the highest level in the military .
 An American warship stops a Soviet vessel, but because she was only carrying oil, they allowed her passed . The U.S. warship was stopped by the Soviet vessel .
 President Kennedy receives a letter from Khrushchev saying that if the USA promises not to invade Cuba, he will remove his missiles . President Kennedy received a letter of support for removing the missiles from Cuba . Kennedy received the letter in response to the letter .
 U2 spy plane was shot down by Cuban anti-aircraft missiles . U2 plane was a U.S. spy plane shot down in Cuba .
 Khrushchev offered to remove the missiles from Cuba if the USA does not invade Cuba and removes her missiles from Turkey . Kennedy offered another letter to Kennedy, offering to remove missiles if the U.S. does not invaded Cuba and Turkey does not remove them .
 President Kennedy agrees to this, but makes sure that the removal of the missiles from Turkey will be secret . The removal of missiles will be kept secret, Kennedy says .
 Khrushchev announces that he will remove his missiles from Cuba to protect world peace . The decision was made to remove them from Cuba in order to protect the world peace.
 The U.S. promised to leave Cuba alone and around six months later, her missiles were removed from Turkey . Six months after the crisis, the missiles were taken out of Turkey .
 President Kennedy could claim victory in that his policy of containment had worked and saved the world from nuclear war . President Kennedy was able to claim victory .
 As a precaution, a hot line was set up between President Kennedy and Khrushchev . Still, as a precautionary measure, the hot line had been set up .
 In 1963, both countries signed the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty, one small step towards ensuring that the threat of nuclear destruction would be reduced . The treaty was signed in 1963 .