 He was a polarizing figure to be sure, but you either loved or hated the guy . He was an iconic figure who was either either a fan or a fan .
 One year he shaved off his beard and walked around with his fly down the entire evening . Another year he walked around the entire night with a fly down .
 Raul didn't think it was very funny, but Fidel and Fidel and I sure got a kick out of it, says Fidel . Raul: "I'm not sure what I'm doing, but I'm sure sure we're going to have a laugh."
 Fidel always talked about opening an all-you-can-eat BBQ place called the Bay of Pigs . Fidel always wanted to open a BBQ place in the U.S.
 He loved bringing people together for food and fun at a price that wouldn't break the bank . He loved to bring people together at a restaurant that would be a great party .
 In fact, his dream was to one day walk away from the whole dictator thing and open a jet ski rental place, he says .
 Fidel Castro walked into a Banana Republic and spent two hours asking the staff if each of the items came in olive . Fidel asked the staff at Banana Republic if each item was in olive. Fidel Castro was the president of the United States .
 Another time he paid a wedding DJ $50 to play ""Semi-Charmed Life"" by Third Eye Blind over and over again until the entire bridal party completely lost it . Another time, he paid $50 for a DJ to play a song that ended up playing Third Eye
 Fidel showed up at his home in a salmon jumpsuit instead of his usual military garb one time, I asked him what gives . And when he showed up in a jumpsuit, he said, 'I asked him why gives'
 Fidel got us tickets to see Phranc, the Jewish lesbian folk singer, thinking we were seeing Sinatra . And I'll never forget the time Fidel got me tickets to show PhRanc, a Jewish lesbian singer .
 Fidel Castro's favorite restaurant, Le Pain Quotidien, was a chain restaurant with communal tables, he said . Fidel was conflicted when he told him about the chain restaurant .
 Every Friday night Fidel and Fidel would order two large pizzas with everything . Fidel and I would order pizza with everything, including everything, with everything.
 Fidel came out over for Taco Tuesday one night and I had completely forgotten to pick up the necessary ingredients . Fidel came over for a Taco Tuesday and I forgot to get the ingredients . I'm so proud to be able to say yes to Fidel Castro .
 Fidel's footprints in the sand in front of Senor Frog's in Cabo San Lucas . The footprints were found by Fidel Castro in a beachside restaurant .
 When his health began to fail, Fidel Castro asked Fidel what he'd like to be remembered for most . Fidel Castro said he wanted to remember him as a father .
 I keep thinking Fidel will roll up my driveway in his beat up Geo Tracker any minute, tell me it was all a joke . "I keep thinking . Fidel," he says, "will roll up his driveway in . his old Geo Tracker."
 Dave Hill's second collection of essays, Dave Hill Doesn't Live Here Anymore, is out now .
 A U.S. Navy destroyer dropping depth charges off the Cuban coast almost accidentally hit a Soviet submarine carrying a nuclear warhead . The most dangerous day of all was Oct. 1962 --when a United States Navy destroyer dropped depth charges .
 The historic papers underscored the danger of a nuclear attack --accidental or deliberate --that existed during those tense October days . The papers underscore the danger .
 Cuban President Fidel Castro participated in the conference's closed-door sessions Friday and Saturday . Former Defense Secretary Robert McNamara and other key advisers from the Kennedy administration attended .
 Scholars hoped for the release of the letters in time for a Moscow conference next weekend . The conference will feature missile crisis participants from the United States, Cuba and the Soviet Union . Scholars hoped the letters would be released before the conference .
 Among the 19 representatives will be Robert McNamara, McGeorge Bundy, Ted Sorensen and Ted Salinger . Among the U.S. representatives will include Robert N.C. McNamara and Pierre Salinger, Kennedy's press secretary .
 Georgi Bolshakov, courier of Khrushchev letters, will be among the 12 Soviet delegates . Bolshakakov will be one of the 12 delegates to the Soviet Union .
 The Cubans promise their three to six representatives will include people directly involved in the crisis . They would not disclose names of their delegates .
 Soviet leaders were enthusiastic about the idea of releasing the letters, he said . He said Soviet leaders are enthusiastic about releasing the documents .
 People close to Mikhail Gorbachev and the Central Committee also embraced the idea, he said . Other 'very close' to the current Soviet leader, he added .
 Blight says the Soviets would not release the correspondence without U.S. approval . Blight said the correspondence would not be released without United States approval . But Blight: The United States would not have to approve it .
 Byrd: George Shultz, Reagan's secretary of state, told Sen. Byrd that the State Department has not announced its decision . Byrd: Shultz told Byrd that Shultz was Reagan's Secretary of State .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev exchanged 22 letters from Oct. to Dec., 1962, concerning the missile crisis . The letters were exchanged between Oct. and Dec. 1962 .
 Ten of the letters were declassified in 1973 by the State Department, and the 11th was released in 1979 . Ten were released in 1973 .
 The remaining letters, written by Kennedy and Khrushchev from Oct. through Dec., have remained sealed at the Boston library despite periodic requests by the library on behalf of scholars to have them released .
 He acknowledged that world leaders may be reluctant to have frank correspondence if they fear the documents might be released later . World leaders may also be wary of having frank correspondence .
 Scali's journalistic career included many years with Associated Press and ABC News . Scali was ambassador to the United Nations, replacing George Bush, and as a White House media consultant .
 Nikita Khrushchev's visit to the U.S. and Richard Nixon's trips as vice president to Russia and Poland . He covered Nixon's visits to Russia, Poland and the United States .
 Scali was a reporter for ABC News in 1962 when President Kennedy disclosed the existence of offensive missile sites in Cuba . He warned that if any were fired at the United States, the U.S. would retaliate against Moscow, not Havana .
 Two days later, Scali was contacted by Alexandr Fomin, a KGB official in Washington . Fomin was a personal friend of Khrushchev's . Scali had been working for the KGB in the past for decades .
 Khrushchev added a stipulation to the proposal that the U.S. abandon its missile bases in Turkey . The following day, the United States agreed to abandon the bases . The proposal was rejected .
 The United States ignored the Turkey-base proposal and concluded the negotiations through Scali . Scali is the first time the U.S. has concluded a deal with the Turkish government .
 He went to work for the AP in Washington on April 12, 1945 the day Franklin D Roosevelt died . He covered the State Department until 1961 .
 Scali's journalistic career included many years with The Associated Press and ABC News . Scali also served as ambassador to the United Nations replacing George Bush .
 Two days later, Scali was contacted by Alexandr S Fomin, a KGB official in Washington . Fomin was a personal friend of Khrushchev, a friend of the former Soviet leader .
 He was diplomatic correspondent for ABC News for 10 years . He returned as a senior correspondent for the network after his White House and United Nations assignments .
 His first marriage to Helen Glock ended in divorce in 1973 and he married Denise St. St. in 1973 . He had two children with a daughter with a son with an adult daughter .
 He stood between Khrushchev and Nixon during the famous ""kitchen debate" in which the two leaders traded barbs on the relative merits of democracy and communism .
 Two days later, Mr Scali was contacted by Alexandr Fomin, a KGB official in Washington . Fomin was a personal friend of Mr Khrushchev and a friend of the former leader .
 Mr Fomin outlined a proposal under which the Soviets would dismantle the Cuban missile bases if the U.S. government would pledge not to invade Cuba .
 Khrushchev added a stipulation to the proposal that the U.S. abandon its missile bases in Turkey . The following day, the proposal was rejected .
 The United States ignored the Turkey-base proposal and concluded the negotiations through Mr Scali . The U.S. ignored the Turkish-based proposal and negotiated the negotiations .
 ABC planned to disclose the account after Mr Kennedy's assassination, but The Los Angeles Times and Newsday published the story first . ABC had planned to release the story after the assassination .
 Two days later, Mr Scali was contacted by Alexandr S Fomin, a KGB official in Washington . Fomin was a personal friend of Khrushchev and a personal acquaintance of the former Soviet leader .
 Khrushchev added a stipulation that the U.S. abandon its missile bases in Turkey . The following day, he added that the United States must also abandon its bases . The decision was made in response to a request from the Soviet Union .
 The United States ignored the Turkey proposal and concluded the negotiations through Mr Scali . The U.S. did not negotiate with Turkey and the United States did not .
 Mr Scali's career included many years with The Associated Press and ABC News . He served as ambassador to the United Nations replacing George Bush .
 In 1962, President Kennedy disclosed the existence of offensive missile sites in Cuba . President Kennedy warned that if any missiles were fired at the United States, it would retaliate .
 Two days later, Mr Scali was contacted by Alexandr S Fomin, a KGB official in Washington and a friend of Khrushchev . Two days after, Mr Fomin wrote to a friend in Washington .
 Khrushchev added a stipulation to the proposal that the U.S. abandon its missile bases in Turkey . The next day the next day he added that the United States would also abandon its bases there .
 ABC planned to disclose the account after Kennedy's assassination, but the Los Angeles Times and Newsday published the report first .
 Russia bitterly opposes including former Soviet allies in the Western alliance . But tacitly concedes it cannot stop the move . Russia bitterly opposed including former allies in NATO alliance but concedes it can't stop it .
 Yeltsin, under tough criticism from nationalist and communist opponents at home, has been trying to limit the expansion . He has been under pressure from nationalists and communists at home to limit expansion .
 NATO wants an agreement with Russia before its July 8-9 summit in Madrid . NATO plans to name its first new members from Central and Eastern Europe . NATO also wants to name new members of Central and East Europe .
 Negotiators have agreed to create a new Russia-NATO council that will allow Moscow to have a direct voice but not a vote in decisions made by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization . Moscow will not be allowed to vote in NATO's decisions .
 NATO says it has no plan, no need and no intention to move nuclear weapons or combat troops to the territories of new members . NATO doesn't rule out such a move in the future .
 NATO says it can't make firm promises and still preserve its security guarantees to member states . Moscow wants stronger assurances, but NATO can't guarantee guarantees to members of the U.S.
 The Western alliance declines to promise that it won't build military infrastructure on the territory of new member states . Airfields, communications centers and air defense installations will be built in new member member states, the alliance says .
 Russia and NATO sign a charter this month remained shaky . At the latest talks this week, both sides reported progress but acknowledged problems remained .
 Le Monde said Castro's account of the crisis was provided to the newspaper by Vincent Touze, a French academic and expert on the missile crisis . Touze is an expert on missile crisis in France .
 The missile crisis became public Oct., 1962, when President Kennedy revealed to the American people that the Soviet Union had secretly deployed nuclear missiles in Cuba . President Kennedy told the American public that the missiles were in Cuba in 1962 .
 The crisis brought the two superpowers closer to a nuclear confrontation than at any other time during the Cold War . Six days later, after the crisis, Nikita Khrushchev agreed to withdraw the weapons .
 Castro said he dearly wanted to keep the missiles, which he saw as a super weapon for any battle with the United States . Castro had little control over the situation, Le Monde said .
 Castro: "We were fighting for the first time almost on equal terms with an enemy that had threatened and provoked us unceasingly" Castro said in his report to the Central Committee . Castro said he was fighting for first time 'on equal terms'
 Castro suggested that the Kremlin deploy 1,000 missiles and was chagrined when told that only about 40 would be installed . Soviet advisers came to Cuba in summer 1962 to discuss the deployment of missiles .
 Castro argued that a nuclear strike should be launched if the U.S. attacked Cuba . Castro: A nuclear strike would be launched in Cuba if the United States attacked Cuba in Cuba .
 Castro said the country was calm and he admitted to laughing even as the possibility of nuclear war loomed . Castro said he laughed even as nuclear war looms, documents reveal .
 Castro: "We were in the antechamber of the holocaust and we were telling jokes. It was a very interesting fact because we were ... telling jokes,'' the documents quoted Castro as saying . Castro said: "It was very interesting that we were in antechambers of the
 The Marucla was a test to see how the Soviets would respond when confronted with the U.S. blockade . It was the first time the Soviets had been directly confronted by the United States with a blockade of Russia .
 30 years ago today the Kennedy signaled the Marucla that a U.S. search party would try to board at daybreak . 30 years later the search party successfully boarded the ship .
 The Marucla, which had loaded its cargo at the Soviet port of Riga, did not object to the cargo . It was the first ship to arrive in the Soviet Union .
 A whaleboat with five unarmed Navy men motored over to the freighter, where a rope ladder was dropped . A rope ladder ladder was also dropped from a freighter to reach the ship .
 In the hold, they found 12 trucks, rolls of toilet paper and a crate marked Precision Instruments . Police say they found Precision Instruments and trucks in the hold .
 The Americans opened the crate but found nothing that looked like it had a military use . The Americans found nothing in the crate that appeared to be military equipment .
 After three hours on board, the Navy party left, giving the freighter permission to sail on to Cuba . The freighter was allowed to sail to Cuba, Cuba .
 In South Florida, people were wondering how much longer the tension could last before the crisis erupted into war . People in South Florida wondered how long it would last before war erupted .
 Miami Beach police chief was afraid that Castro secret agents might be at work . Police chief feared secret agents were at work in Miami Beach . Miami police chief feared Castro agents might have been at work.
 He ordered a ban on nighttime fishing on the causeways, because main water pipes ran alongside the bridges . He didn't want saboteurs tampering with the drinking water, he said .
 FBI agents observed that the staff at the Soviet embassy were burning large quantities of documents . The last act of an embassy before its country goes to war is to burn documents .
 At the White House, top officials were worrying that the only way to get the missiles out of Cuba was either an air strike or a reciprocal deal, agreeing to remove U.S. nuclear missiles from Turkey .
 Military leaders in the high-level ExComm meetings were advocating an air assault . The military leaders in ExComm met in Washington to discuss the possibility of an air strike .
 1,190 bombing sorties would destroy the Cuban air force, as well as the missile sites . Three massive air strikes a day would destroy Cuba's air force and missile sites, the Cuban president says .
 Air attacks would be fairly quick and low-risk at least compared to an invasion . Air strikes would be more likely to take place in the air than an invasion of the U.S. Air attacks .
 At 6 p.m., the State Department began receiving a rambling, emotional letter from Nikita Khrushchev . The State Department received the letter at 6 a.m. The letter was signed by the then-Russian President Vladimir Putin .
 The final section of the letter didn't arrive until 9m. 12 hours after the text was delivered to the U.S. embassy in Moscow . It was delivered 12 hours later to the embassy in the Russian capital .
 Members of ExComm had a hard time figuring out what the Soviet leader was driving at . ExComm members of the Soviet Union had to figure out what was happening .
 Others thought it was another stall tactic, as the Soviets tried to buy time until all their Cuban missile sites were operational . Others thought the move was a ploy to get the missile sites operational .
 Kennedy increased the number of reconnaissance flights over Cuba from once every 12 hours to once every two hours . Kennedy, reluctant to order military action, decided to apply more pressure .
 In Havana, Fidel Castro thought the low-level flights were a prelude for a United States attack . Fidel Castro believed the flights were prelude to a U.S. attack on Cuba .
 President Obama ordered Cuban anti-aircraft batteries to open fire on any U.S. plane flying over the island . That's why he ordered Cuba to shoot down any United States aircraft flying over Cuba .
 The Cuban leader also sent an astonishingly bellicose message to Khrushchev in which he estimated that the U.S. military was planning to invade Cuban within the next three days .
 Lundahl received a Presidential medal for his CIA work and was knighted by Queen Elizabeth II . Lundahl died Monday at the age of 77 .
 He died of respiratory failure at Suburban Hospital in Bethesda, Md., where he lived, a hospital spokeswoman said .
 In his career at the CIA, Mr Lundahl briefed presidents Dwight D Eisenhower and Kennedy, as well as top military experts . He briefed presidents Eisenhower, Kennedy and Eisenhower .
 He was the founding director of the agency's National Photographic Interpretation Center . He was also a director at the National Geographic Agency .
 His discovery of the Cuban missile sites in 1962 took military and political analysts by surprise and was considered a major intelligence feat . The discovery of Cuban missiles was considered an intelligence feat.
 Castro will make his presentation Thursday in Havana before a gathering of prominent Soviet, American and Cuban officials . Castro's presentation will be held at a gathering in Havana, Cuba, Cuba .
 Cuban officials described Castro's plans to Americans involved in organizing the conference . Cuban officials describe Castro's plan to Cuba to Americans . Castro plans to meet with President Obama in Washington, D.C.
 Castro has generally muted his feelings about the bystander role that Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev forced on him at the time . In recognition of the intimate ties that developed between Moscow and Havana for more than two decades after the crisis, Castro has muddled his feelings .
 Castro was outraged when Khrushchev agreed without consulting him to dismantle Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba in return for President Kennedy's promise not to invade the Caribbean island . Castro was angered by the deal in October 1962 when he agreed to dismantle the Soviet missiles .
 A conference in Moscow in January 1989 explored the U.S.-Soviet dimension of the crisis . Cuba subsequently agreed to play host to a follow-up meeting to offer its own perspectives of that period .
 Castro is scheduled to give a lengthy presentation Thursday afternoon and to answer questions from the participants on Saturday . Castro will also give a presentation Saturday afternoon and Saturday afternoon .