 The Indus River Valley Civilization cities of the Indus Valley Civilization . Harappan Culture Disappearance of the . Indus . culture Disappeared of the the Ind . Valley .
 Baron de Montesquieu Voltaire Voltaire Jean-Jacques Rousseau Marquis de Condorcet Mary Wollstonecraft Attributions 4 20.4 .
 The French Protectorate in Indochina is the name of the French colony of Vietnam . The French protectorate in Vietnam is the birthplace of the first French colony in Vietnam .
 Historians always write in the context of their own time, current dominant ideas of how to interpret the past, and even subjective viewpoints . e All events that are remembered and preserved in some original form constitute the historical record .
 The Western division of the largest blocks of time agreed upon by Western historians represents the Western point of view . Prehistory (before written history), ancient history, Middle Ages, modern history, and contemporary history (history within the living memory) is a common general split .
 Some historians have also noted that the 1960s, as a descriptive historical period, actually began in the late 1950s and ended in the early 1970s . The cultural and economic conditions that define the meaning of the period dominate longer than the actual decade of the '60s .
 The first recorded calendars date to the Bronze Age, including the Egyptian and Sumerian calendars . Compare and contrast different calendars and how they affect our understanding of history .
 A great number of Hellenic calendars also developed in Classical Greece and influenced calendars outside of the immediate sphere of Greek influence . Hindu calendars also gave rise to the various Hindu calendars, as well as the ancient Roman calendar .
 Julius Caesar effected drastic changes in the existing timekeeping system . Julius Caesar made changes to the existing system of timekeeping . Caesar was Caesar's first king of the Roman Empire . Caesar died at the age of 50 in August .
 Gregorian calendar is internationally the most widely used civil calendar today . It is also known as the Western calendar and the Christian calendar .
 The Medieval Latin term means anno Domini, which means /n the year of the Lord . It shares many aspects with calendars employed by other Mesoamerican civilizations, such as Zapotec and Olmec .
 It is used by Muslims everywhere to determine the proper days on which to observe the annual fasting, to attend Haj/ and to celebrate other Islamic holidays and festivals . It is also used to date events in many Muslim countries .
 It is named after Pope Gregory XIIl, who introduced it in October 1582 . The Pope introduced it to the world in 1582, and it was named after him .
 Julian calendar introduced by Julius Caesar in 46 BCE (708 AUC) was a reform of the Roman calendar . Julian calendar was reform of Roman calendar, introduced in 46 BC . Julian calender introduced in the Roman era of the year .
 The natural units for timekeeping used by most historical societies are the day, the solar year, and the Iunation . The day is the most significant unit of timekeeping .
 It is named after Pope Gregory XIll, who introduced it in October, 1582 . The Pope introduced it to the world in 1582, and it was named after him .
 Solu, rian IR MEE ET ONa eS. At gue sitwad gueidens 1 6ek rabjolar sistas sarenit . Atgne edidis .
 The first page of the papal bull ""Inter Gravissimas' by which Pope Gregory XIll introduced his calendar . Pope Gregory's calendar .
 The names of the twelve months are the same (because the names are based in Sanskrit) although the spelling and pronunciation have come to vary slightly from region to region over thousands of years .
 CE/BCE designation uses the Same numeric values as the AD/BC system . CE-BCE uses the same numerical values as AD-BC system so the two notations are numerically equivalent . CE/BECE designation is the same as AD and AD system .
 In the study of history as an academic discipline, a primary source is an artifact, document, diary, manuscript, autobiography, recording, or other source of information that was created at the time under study .
 History as an academic discipline is based on primary sources, as evaluated by the community of scholars for whom primary sources are absolutely fundamental to reconstructing the past . History as a history academic discipline must be evaluated by a community .
 Historians point out that hardly any historical evidence can be seen as fully objective since it is always a product of particular individuals, times, and dominant ideas . While some sources are considered more reliable or trustworthy than others, historians say there are no objective sources .
 Historical method comprises the techniques and guidelines by which historians use primary sources and other evidence to research and write historical accounts of the past . Historical method is used by historians to research primary sources, other evidence and research .
 Primary sources may remain in private hands or be located in archives, libraries, museums, historical societies, and special collections . Primary sources are located in libraries, archives, museums and historical societies .
 Historians use various strategies to reconstruct the past when facing a lack of sources . Historians often collaborate with experts from other academic disciplines, such as archaeology . Archaeology and archaeology are some of the strategies used to reconstruct past .
 In some cases, historians are forced to speculate (this should be explicitly noted) or simply admit that we do not have sufficient information to reconstruct particular past events or processes . Historians must speculate .
 History textbooks in most countries have been tools to foster nationalism and patriotism . History textbooks are often used to promote the most favorable version of national history .
 Germany attempts to be an example of how to remove nationalistic narratives from history education . Germany is trying to be a model for students to be able to learn from their history .
 The history curriculum in Germany is characterized by a transnational perspective that emphasizes the allEuropean heritage . It minimizes the idea of national pride, and fosters the notion of civil society .
 Despite progress and increased focus on groups that have been traditionally excluded from mainstream narratives, bias remains a component of bias . People of color, women, the working class, the poor, the disabled, LGBTQI-identified people, etc. are still excluded from the mainstream narratives .
 Voltaire, a French author and thinker, is credited to have developed a fresh outlook on history . He broke from the tradition of narrating diplomatic and military events and emphasized customs, social history and achievements in the arts and sciences . Voltaire is credited with developing a fresh approach to history
 The history curriculum in Germany (controlled by the 16 German states) is characterized by a transnational perspective that emphasizes the all-European heritage . It minimizes the idea of national pride, and fosters the notion of civil society centered on democracy and human rights .
 In the United States after World War I, a strong movement emerged at the university level to teach courses in Western Civilization . The aim was to give students a common heritage with Europe .
 Humans began to evolve about seven million years ago, and progressed through four stages of evolution . Learning Objective To understand the process of human evolution .
 Research shows the first modern humans appeared 200,000 years ago . Research shows that modern humans first appeared in Europe 200,00 years ago.
 Although they had larger brain capacity and interbred with humans, they eventually died out . Although they interbred, they died out in the wild, interbred humans .
 A number of theories examine the relationship between environmental conditions and human evolution . Environmental conditions are linked to human evolution, say experts .
 The main human adaptations have included bipedalism, larger brain size, and reduced sexual dimorphism . The main adaptations to human life have included larger brain sizes, bipalism and larger brain .
 Aridity hypothesis is the theory that the savannah was expanding due to increasingly arid conditions, which then drove hominin adaptation . turnover pulse hypothesis says extinctions due to environmental conditions hurt specialist soecies more .
 Homini (including early humans and chimpanzees) separated from Gorillini about 8 millions years ago . Various divergences among apes, gibbons, orangutans occurred during this period . Homini, including early humans, and chimpanzees, separated about 8 million years ago from Gor
 Humans and chimps then separated about 7. million years ago . Human-Chimp chimps separated from each other 7.million years ago.
 The turnover pulse hypothesis states that extinctions due to environmental conditions hurt specialist soecies more than generalist ones . Extinctions are caused by environmental conditions, rather than by natural causes .
 While generalist species spread out when environmental conditions change, specialist soecies become more specialized and have a greater rate of evolution . Generalist species are spread out and spread out in response to environmental conditions .
 During the Paleolithic Era, humans subsisted by gathering plants, fishing, hunting or scavenging wild animals . Explain the significance of the Neolithic Revolution. Explain the importance of the revolution in Neolithic culture .
 There are several competing theories as to the factors that drove populations to take up agriculture . The Hilly Flanks hypothesis, the Feasting model, the Demographic theories, and the evolutionary/intentionality theory, are some of the theories .
 Humankind gradually evolved from early members of the genus Homo to fully behaviorally and anatomically modern humans during the Paleolithic era . Homo habilis, who used simple stone tools, was first known to be Homo Homo .
 This eventually resulted in humans spreading out from Africa and into Eurasia, Southeast Asia, and Australia . This eventually led to humans spreading from Africa to Eurasia and Southeast Asia .
 The Sumerians were a people living in Mesopotamia from the 27th-20th century BCE . The major periods in Sumerian history were the Ubaid period, the Uruk period (4100-2900 BCE), the Early Dynastic period , the Ak
 Epic of Gilgamesh is an epic poem from the Third Dynasty of Ur (circa 2100 BCE) It is seen as the earliest surviving work of literature .
 Trade goods began to flow down waterways in southern Mespotamia, and large, temple-centered cities (most likely theocratic and run by priests-kings) rose up to facilitate this trade .
 Sumerian culture began to spread from southern Mesopotamia into surrounding areas . Sumerians are believed to have lived in Mesopotamian culture .
 Sumerian necklaces and headgear discovered in the royal graves of the early Bronze Age era . The way they may have been worn shows how they were worn .
 The Sumerian Renaissance/Third Dynasty of Ur (2047-1940 BCE) saw the rulers Ur-Nammu and Shulgi, whose power extended into southern Assyria . The third dynasty of Ur was known as the Third Dynasty .
 The Assyrian Empire was centered on the Upper Tigris river in northern Mesopotamia . At its peak, the empire stretched from Cyprus in the Mediterranean Sea to Persia .
 These periods roughly correspond to the Middle Bronze Age, Late Bronze Age and Early Iron Age, respectively . The Bronze Age period roughly corresponded to the Bronze Age .
 Assyria is mainly remembered for its military victories, technological advancements (such as using iron for weapons and building roads), use of torture to inspire fear, and written history of conquests . Assyria was one of the world's most successful statesmen .
 Karl August Wittfogel, the German scholar who first developed the notion of the hydraulic empire, argued in his book, Oriental Despotism, that strong government control characterized these civilizations because a particular resource was both a central part of the economic process and environmentally limited .
 The Akkadian Empire was an ancient Semitic empire centered in the city of Akkad and its surrounding region in ancient Mesopotamia . It united all the indigenous Semites and the Sumerian speakers under one rule within a multilingual empire . Describe the key political characteristics
 Sargon claimed to be the son of La'ibum or Itti-Bel, a humble gardener, and possibly a h/erodule, or priestess to Ishtar or Inanna . Sargon and His Dynasty Sargon were the first two kings of Sargon
 The economy was dependent on irrigated farmlands of southern Irag, and rain-fed agriculture of Northern Iraq . The economy is dependent on irrigation and rainfall of northern Iraq .
 Some centralized authority may have been restored under Shu-Durul (21682154 BCE), but he was unable to prevent the empire collapsing outright from the invasion of barbarian peoples, known as the Gutians, from the Zagros Mountains .
 Ur was a major Sumerian city-state located in Mesopotamia, founded circa 3800 BCE . The Ziggurat of Ur was built in the 21st century BCE, during the reign of Ur-Nammu, and was reconstructed in the 6th century BCE by Nabon
 Map shows Mesopotamia in the third millennium BCE, with Ur in the south . Ur was located at the side of modern-day Tell el-Muqayyar in south Iraq's Dhi Qar Nasiriyah .
 The Ziggurat of Ur was built in the 21st century BCE, during the reign of U-Nammu . It was reconstructed in the 6th century BCE by Nabonidus, the last king of Babylon .
 The Ziggurats were massive structures built in the ancient Mesopotamian valley and western Iranian plateau . The Ziggurat of Ur measured 64 m in length, 45 m in width and over 30 m in height .
 Babylon remained a minor territory for a century after it was founded, until the reign of its sixth Amorite ruler, Hammurabi . Hammababi established a bureaucracy with taxation and centralized government . Hammurababi was an extremely efficient ruler .
 Hammurabi enjoyed various military successes over the whole of southern Mesopotamia, modern-day Iran and Syria, and the old Assyrian Empire in Asian Minor . Hammabi also enjoyed various . military successes . over the . whole of Mesopotamian, modern . day Iran
 Hammurabi was able to invade modern-day Iran to the east and conquer the pre-Iranic Elamites, Gutians and Kassites . The armies of Babylonia were well-disciplined, and Hammabi's armies were able to defeat the Elam
 At the end of Hamurrabi's reign, the Babylonian empire had extended south to the Persian Gulf and north along the Euphrates to Mari . Mari was located in modern-day Abu Kamal, Syria, near the Syria/Irag border .
 Babylonian temples were massive structures of crude brick, Supported by buttresses . Babylonian culture was a major part of the Babylonian empire .
 Such uses of brick led to the early development of the pilaster and column, and of frescoes and enameled tiles .
 Certain pieces of Babylonian art featured crude threedimensional statues, and gem-cutting was considered a high-perfection art .
 Babylonians produced extensive compendiums of astronomical records containing catalogues of stars and constellations, as well as schemes for calculating various astronomical coordinates and phenomena . Babylonians also produced schemes to calculate various astronomical calculations .
 Medicinally, the Babylonians introduced basic medical processes, such as diagnosis and prognosis . Babylonians also catalogued a variety of illnesses with their symptoms .
 Both Babylonian men and women learned to read and write . Much of Babylonian literature is translated from ancient Sumerian texts such as the Epic of Gilgamesh .
 The Babylonian GU text arranges stars in ""strings"" that lie along declination circles . It also employs the stars of the zenith, which are also separated by given right-ascensional differences .
 Nebuchadnezzar I was the most famous ruler of the Second Dynasty of Isin . He ruled Isin during the reigns of the First Dynasty of the Isin dynasty .
 After 1180 BCE, the empire came to an end during the Bronze Age collapse and splintered into several independent city-states . e The Hittite language was a member of the Anatolian branch of the Indo-European language family . The empire made successful use of char
 After 1180 BCE, amid general turmoil in the Levant, the kingdom disintegrated into several independent ""Neo-Hittite" city-states . The head of the Hittite state was the king, but other officials exercised independent authority .
 The Hittite Empire reached its height during the mid-14th century BCE under Suppiluliuma I . It encompassed an area that included most of Asia Minor as well as parts of the northern Levant and Upper Mesopotamia .
 At its peak, the Hittite Empire stretched from Arzawa in the west to Mitanni in the east, many of the Kaskian territories to the north including Hayasa-Azzi in the far north-east, and on south into Canaan approximately as far as the
 The Hittites are usually depicted as a people living among the Israelites . They are often depicted as high-ranking military officers in David's army . Hittite is often depicted in the Bible as living among Israelite .
 League of independent city-state ports was ideally suited for trade between the Levant area and the rest of the ancient world . The league of independent cities-states was ideal for trade .
 Minoan handicraft on the Greek mainland is a result of a connection between Mycene and Minoan trade networks . Evidence of the influence of Minoan civilization outside Crete can be seen in Minoan art on the mainland .
 The Minoans were also connected to Egypt and the Canaanite civilization . The Minoanans were connected to the Egyptian culture .
 Minoan civilization declined due to natural catastrophe . Dynasty of Knossos was able to spread its influence over Crete until it was overrun by the Mycenaean Greeks .
 Minoan culture is known best for its pottery and handiwork, and its religion was based primarily on the worship of female goddesses . Minoans are known for their pottery, and their religion is based on their worship of women . The Minoan religion is known for
 The Neopalatial period (the 17th and 16th centuries BCE) was when the population increased again . Palaces were rebuilt on a larger scale, and new settlements were set up .
 Ancient Carthage was the empire born of the Phoenician city-state Carthage . Explain Carthage's culture and the Punic Wars . Learn how Carthage evolved from the ancient city of Carthage to the modern world .
 Carthage was one of the largest military forces in the ancient world . Its navy was its strongest force . Carthage's navy was the largest force in the world .
 Carthage eventually extended across northern Africa and into the south of modern-day Spain . Carthage also extended into modern-modern Spain and beyond .
 Carthaginian religion was based on Phoenician religion . It was a form of polytheism . Carthaginians believed to have been polytheists . It is believed to be the oldest form of religion .
 According to Aristotle, the Carthaginians and others had treaties of commerce to regulate their exports and imports . The empire of Carthage depended heavily on its trade with cities of the Iberian peninsula, from which it obtained vast quantities of silver, lead, copper and tin .
 Carthaginian trade-relations with the Iberians made it the sole significant broker of tin and bronze in its day . Carthage's naval strength made it a monopoly on Iberian trade and that with Britain . Carthaginians were able to trade with Britain, but Carthagin
 A geoglyph of a human with long hair and open mouth was discovered in 2000 by Marco Machacuay and Rocio Aramburu . At its peak, approximately 3,000 people are believed to have lived in Caral. e Norte Chico .
 Chavin had a small, powerful elite that was legitimized through a claim to divine authority . Chavin was a leader of a small group that legitimized his authority .
 The chief example of Chavin architecture is the Chavin de Huantar temple, the design of which displays a complex and innovative adaptation to the highland environment of Peru . The design of the temple is an example of a complex adaptation to Peru's highland .
 The Chavin people showed advanced knowledge of acoustics, metallurgy, soldering, and temperature control . Chavin is a Russian-speaking group of people .
 The Chavin produced ch'arki, or llama jerky, which was commonly traded by camelid herders . It was the main economic resource for the Chavin people .
 The Old Temple featured the Lanz6n, housed in a central cruciform chamber in a labyrinth of underground passages . The Lanz 6n was housed in an underground chamber .
 The Lanz6n functions as axiS Mundi, or a pivot point linking the heavens, earth, and underworld . It is located in the center of the world's most powerful cities .
 The Lanzon at Chavin is the most important stela statue of the central deity of the Chavin, called the Lanz6n .
 Valdivian pottery are the oldest in the Americas, dating to 2700 BCE . e Valdivians created rafts with sails, and built a maritime trade network with tribes in the Andes and Amazon . e A main trading item was the red shell of the thorny oy
 Map of Valdivian culture shows the location of the Valdivia culture . Shown here is the location where the Valdivians lived .
 The prehistory of Egypt spans from early human settlements to the beginning of the Early Dynastic Period of Egypt (c.c. 2011) Egypt . Egypt's prehistory spans from human settlement to the early Dynastic period .
 They appeared to be settled people, descended from the Khormusan people, and spawned the Ibero-Marusian industry . They appear to have been settled people and appeared to have lived in Spain .
 Naqada Il Pottery has a ship theme . This pottery has been done in the style of Naqadas Il .
 Protodynastic Period (3200 3000 BCE) During this period, the process of state formation, begun in Naqada II, became clearer . State formation of state became clearer during this period .
 The Old Kingdom is the name commonly given to the period from the Third Dynasty through the Sixth Dynasty (26862181 BCE), when Egypt gained in complexity and achievement .
 First notable king of the Old Kingdom was Djoser of the Third Dynasty . Djoser ordered the construction of the step pyramid in Memphis' necropolis, Saqqara .
 Funerary prayers on royal tombs (called Pyramid Texts) appeared, and the cult of the deity Osiris ascended in importance . The cult of Osiris rose in importance in Egypt .
 The power of the king and central government declined during this period, while that of nomarchs (regional governors) increased . The Sixth Dynasty (2345-2181 BCE)
 The First Intermediate Period, the Seventh to Eleventh dynasties, spanned approximately one hundred years (21812055 BCE) The period was characterized by political instability and conflict between the Heracleopolitan and Theban Kings .
 Pepi Il's reign was extremely long, and the resulting succession issues were complicated . Pepi I was one of the last monarchs to hold on to the throne . He ruled the country for more than 20 years .
 The founder of the Ninth Dynasty, Wahkare Khety lI, is often described as an evil and violent ruler who caused much harm to the inhabitants of Egypt .
 The power and influence of these Ninth Dynasty kings were still insignificant compared to that of the Old Kingdom kings . His successor, Kheti lll, brought some degree of order to the Delta .
 Intef II began the Theban assault on northern Egypt, and his successor, Intef III, completed the attack and moved into Middle Egypt against the Heracleopolitan kings . Intef I began the attack in northern Egypt .
 The Middle Kingdom was a period of Egyptian history Spanning the Eleventh through Twelfth Dynasty (2000-1700 BCE), when centralized power consolidated a unified Egypt . Centrally power consolidated Egypt .
 The height of the Middle Kingdom came under the rules of Sensuret III and Amenemhat Ill . The Middle Kingdom declined into the Second Intermediate Period during the Thirteenth Dynasty, after a gradual loss of dynastic power and the disintegration of Egypt . e
 The End of the Eleventh Dynasty and the Rise of the Twelfth Dynasty . Mentuhotep Il and his successors unified Egypt under a single rule .
 The reign of Amenemhat II, Successor to Senusret I, has been characterized as largely peaceful . The reign was largely peaceful and reigns were largely peaceful until the death of Senuret I .
 He reigned only fifteen years, and was succeeded by his son, Senusret Ill. Ill. He died in 17th century .
 Senusret Ill was a warrior-king and launched a series of brutal campaigns in Nubia . He launched a brutal campaign in the Middle Kingdom .
 Statue head of Sensuret Ill is one of the kings in the Twelfth Dynasty . The head of the head is a statue of the king .
 The reign of Amenemhat Ill was the height of Middle Kingdom economic prosperity . Egypt is remarkable for the degree to which Egypt exploited its resources .
 Records of the Nile flood levels indicate that the end of the reign of Amenemhet lll was dry . Crop failures may have helped to destabilize the dynasty .
 The brilliant Twelfth Dynasty was succeeded by a weaker Thirteenth Dynasty, which experienced a splintering of power . The Hyksos made their first appearance during the reign of Sobekhotep IV, and overran Egypt at the end of the Fourteenth Dynasty .
 The Seventeeth Dynasty established itself in Thebes around the time that the Hyksos took power in Egypt . They ruled through the Fifteenth and Sixteenth Dynasties . The Abydos Dynasty ruled over part of Upper Egypt .
 The Thirteenth Dynasty proved unable to hold onto the long land of Egypt . The provincial ruling family in Xois, located in the marshes of the western Delta, broke away from the central authority to form the Fourteenth Dynasty .
 Famine was an issue during this period, most notably during the reign of Neferhotep Ill. Ill. The famine was a major issue during the period .
 Around the time Memphis and Itj-tawy fell to the Hyksos, the native Egyptian ruling house in Thebes declared its independence . Thebes became the Seventeenth Dynasty .
 The New Kingdom period of Egyptian history began with Ahmose |, its first pharaoh, who completed the expulsion of the Hyksos from Egypt and placed the country, once again, under centralized administrative control . The Eighteenth Dynasty was created around 1550 BCE .
 The Eighteenth Dynasty contained some of Egypt's most famous pharaohs, including Hatshepsut, Akhenaten, Thutmose Ill, and Tutankhamun . This was possibly a result of foreign rule of the Hyksos during the Second Intermediate Period .
 Hatshepsut concentrated on expanding Egyptian trade, while Thutmose III consolidated power . Hatshephpsut was the Egyptian ruler of Egypt .
 Akhenaten's devotion to Aten defined his reign with religious fervor . Art flourished under his rule and attained an unprecedented level of realism .
 The Hittites gradually extended their influence into Phoenicia and Canaan . Due to Akenaten's lack of interest in international affairs, the Hittite extended its influence into the region of Canaan .
 Ramesses II attempted war against the Hittites, but eventually agreed to a peace treaty after an indecisive result . The heavy cost of military efforts in addition to climatic changes resulted in a loss of centralized power at the end of the Twentieth Dynasty .
 Ramesses II was the third pharaoh of the Nineteenth Dynasty of Egypt . He made peace with the Hittites and made peace peace with them .
 The Nineteenth Dynasty New Kingdom Egypt would reach the height of its power under Seti | and Ramesses II, who fought against the Libyans .
 The first known labor strike in recorded history occurred during the 29th year of Ramesses Ill's reign, over food rations . The severity of the difficulties is indicated by the fact that the first known strike occurred during Ramesses ill's reign .
 Ramesses Ill may have been killed by a palace conspiracy . Three of his sons ascended the throne successively as Ramesses IV, Ramesses VI and Ramesses Vill. Vill. Ramesses V. and Vill. V. were later kings .
 The power of the last pharaoh of the dynasty, Ramesses XI, grew so weak that, in the south, the High Priests of Amun at Thebes became the de facto rulers of Upper Egypt . The power was so weak, the Priests at Amun became the
 Hatshepsut ruled Egypt in the Eighteenth Dynasty (14781458 BCE) He brought wealth and a focus on large building projects . Hatsheapsut ruled the Egyptian state of Egypt in Egypt .
 Hatshepsut established trade networks that helped build the wealth of the Eighteenth Dynasty . She ruled longer than any other woman of an indigenous Egyptian dynasty . e
 Hatshepsut died in 1458 BCE in middle age, possibly of diabetes and bone cancer . While not the first female ruler of Egypt, her reign was longer and more prosperous .
 Hatshepsut's husband was also a child of Thutmose II, but was conceived with a different wife . The Egyptian king was also conceived with his wife's daughter .
 Hatshepsut used frankincense as kohl eyeliner in her eyeliner . Her reign included a successful mission to the Land of Punt in her ninth year of her reign .
 She installed twin obelisks at the entrance to this temple, one of which still stands . One obelisk still stands in the temple .
 Hieroglyphs of Thutmose III and Hatshepsut are shown having the trappings of a greater role . The hieroglyphiches were created by the Egyptian king in the early 1400s .
 After her death, attempts were made to remove Hatshepsut from certain historical and pharaonic records . Attempts were made during the reign of Thutmose Ill's reign .
 The Third Intermediate Period of Ancient Egypt began with the death of the last pharaoh of the New Kingdom, Ramesses Xl in 1070 BCE . It ended with the start of the Postdynastic Period, which began in 1070 BC .
 The Third Intermediate Period was one of decline and political instability . It was marked by division of the state for much of the period, as well as conquest and rule by foreigners .
 The Twenty-First Dynasty was characterized by the country's fracturing kingship . The period of the Twenty-first Dynasty was defined by the nation's fracturing Kingmanship .
 Ramesses XI ruled from Tanis, but was mainly active only in Lower Egypt . Smendes I ruled from the city of Tanis but was mostly active in Lower Egyptian .
 Shoshenq is descended from Meshwesh immigrants originally from Ancient Libya . Shoshesq is a descendent of Meshweesh immigrants from ancient Libya . They are descendants of the Meshwees originally from Meshweeks .
 In Thebes, a civil war engulfed the city between the forces of Pedubast |, a self-proclaimed pharaoh, and the forces that supported him . The battle began in Thebes in ancient Egypt in the early 2000s .
 Osorkon B defeated his enemies, and proceeded to found the Upper Egyptian Libyan Dynasty of Osorkan III, Takelot II], and Rudamun . Eventually Osorken B defeated the enemies and founded the Egyptian Libyan dynasty .
 The Nubian kingdom to the south took full advantage of the division of the country . The Twenty-Fourth Dynasty was the most successful kingdom in Egypt .
 Piye established the Twenty-Fifth Dynasty after his military conquests . He appointed defeated rulers as his provincial governors .
 Pharaoh Psamtik Ill succeeded his father, Anmose II, six months before he had to face the Persian Empire at Pelusium .
 The religion of Ancient Egypt lasted for more than 3,000 years, and was polytheistic, meaning there were a multitude of deities, who were believed to reside within and control the forces of nature . Describe the religious beliefs and practices of ancient Egypt .
 His role was to sustain the gods so that they could maintain order in the universe . His role is to sustain them so they could keep order in order .
 Ma'at has several meanings in English, including truth, justice and order . The Egyptian universe is centered around the Egyptian universe centered on Ma'At . The meaning means truth, order and truth .
 Egyptians were concerned about the fate of their souls after death . Egyptians were very concerned about their fate after death.
 Artistic depictions of gods were not literal representations, as their true nature was considered mysterious . The true nature of gods was not considered a literal representation .
 Temples were the state's method of sustaining the gods, since their physical images were housed and cared for . Temple was not a place for the average person to worship, since it was a state's way to sustain the gods .
 Certain animals were worshipped and mummified as representatives of gods . Animals were worshipped as representatives for gods .
 Symbolism meant order, shown through the pharaoh's regalia, or through the use of certain colors . Symbolism was meant to show order in the Egyptian pharoahs .
 In Egyptian art, the size of a figure indicates its relative importance . The size of an Egyptian art figure is considered a sign of importance .
 Paintings were often done on stone, and portrayed pleasant scenes of the afterlife in tombs . Paintings often done in stone, often depicted pleasant scenes in tombodies . The paintings were often painted on stone .
 Ancient Egyptians created both monumental and smaller sculptures, using the technique of sunk relief . Ancient Egyptians used the technique to create monumental sculptures .
 Ka statues, which were meant to provide a resting place for the ka part of the soul, were often made of wood and placed in tombs . Ka statues were often found in the homes of the people .
 Faience was sintered-quartz ceramic with surface vitrification . It was used to create relatively cheap small objects in many colors .
 Papyrus was used for writing and painting, and and was used to record every aspect of Egyptian life . Papyrus has been used in the past for writing, painting and recording .
 Architects carefully planned buildings, aligning them with astronomically significant events, such as solstices and equinoxes, to coincide with astronomical events .
 The Amarna period represents an interruption in ancient Egyptian art style . Subject subjects were represented more realistically, and scenes included portrayals of affection among the royal family .
 Ancient Egyptian architects carefully planned buildings, aligning them with astronomically significant events, such as solstices and equinoxes . They used mainly sunbaked mud brick, limestone, sandstone, and granite .
 The Luxor Temple was constructed in the 14th century BCE by Amenhotep Ill in the ancient city of Thebes, now Luxor . The temple was built in the 15th century BC in the city of Luxor in ancient Thebes .
 Ancient Egyptian concept of truth, balance, order, harmony, law, morality and justice . Equinoxes are the two times in the year when the sun crosses the celestial equator .
 The Great Sphinx of Giza is located on the Giza Plateau to the west of the Nile . It is a limestone statue of a reclining sphinx with a lion's body and a human head .
 Decoration included reliefs (bas relief and sunken relief) of images and hieroglyphic text and sculpture, including obelisks, figures of gods (sometimes in sphinx form), and votive figures . Decoration also included obelisk, statues of gods,
 The Middle Kingdom was a time of prosperity and stability, as well as a resurgence of art, literature, and architecture . Literature had new uses during the Middle Kingdom, and many classics were written during the period . Block statues were a new type of sculpture invented in the Middle .
 e Nubia consisted of two major regions along the Nile River, from Aswan to Khartoum . The Nubian history can be traced from 2000 BCE onward to 1504 AD . The region was divided between Egypt and the Sennar sultanate and became Arab
 The Yellow River and the Huai and Yangtze Rivers, created fertile land, ripe for experimentation with agriculture .
 These phenomena took place in China about 1000 years later than in Mesopotamia, Egypt, and the Indus River valley . These phenomena are believed to have occurred 1000 years ago .
 Fuxi and his wife, NUuwa, were credited with introducing domesticated animals and creating the basic social structure of family life . They were credited .
 A TS Map of Shang Dynasty shows the location of the Shang Dynasty in the Yellow River valley . This map was created by the Shang Shang Dynasty .
 Jie, the last king of the Xia Dynasty (the first Chinese dynasty), was overthrown 1760 BCE by Cheng Tang . Cheng Tang overthrown Jie in 1760 BC . Jie was the last Chinese king of Xia Dynasty .
 Shang kings considered themselves divine rulers, consulted the great god Shangdi for advice and wisdom . In particular, the Shang king considered himself divine rulers . Shangdi was the god of Shangdi, Shangdi and Shangdi .
 Shang Dynasty oracle bone dates back to the reign of King Wu Ding . The oracle is believed to date from the Shang Dynasty .
 Shang Dynasty Bronze ding vessel dates to the Shang Dynasty .
 The Shang Dynasty used this Mandate to justify their overthrow of the Shang, and subsequent rule . They used it as a justification for their overthrow, and their subsequent rule.
 Some scholars think the Xia Dynasty never existed—that it was invented by the Zhou to support their claim under the Mandate that there had always been only one ruler of China . Others think the earlier Xia dynasty never existed . Some scholars believe that the Zhou dynasty was invented .
 Di Xin (the final king of the Shang Dynasty) had become cruel, spent state money on drinking and gambling, and ignored the state . Di Xin was the last king to become cruel and ignored state money .
 The Chinese character for ""Tian,"" meaning ""heaven,"" in Bronze script, Seal script, Oracle script, and modern simplified simplified . RREK The Chinese Character for "Tian"
 The first period of Zhou rule, during which the Zhou held undisputed power over China, is known as the Western Zhou period . The focus of religion changed from the supreme god, Shangdi, to ""Tian,"" or heaven . The feudal system was established .
 Under the feudal system, the monarchy would reward loyal nobles with large pieces of land . Loyal nobles would be rewarded with large chunks of land by the monarchy .
 Work in bronze, including inscriptions, continued and expanded in the Zhou Dynasty . Few paintings have survived from this period, but we know they were representations of the real world . The production of lacquerware expanded during this period .
 The text records the appointment of a man named Song as supervisor of the storehouses in Chengzhou . The text is repeated on at least 3 tripod pots ( ding), 5 tureens and their lids, and 2 vases and lids .
 The Spring and Autumn period is named after the Soring and Autumn Annals, a text that narrated events on a year-by-year basis, and marked the beginning of China's deliberately recorded history . The first part of the Eastern Zhou period is known as the Spring & Autumn period
 A map of the Warring States of China was created in the early years of the period . Gulf of Jili J Yellow Sea was one of the most important areas of China .
 Large-scale works, including the Dujiangyan Irrigation System and the Zhengguo Canal, were completed and increased agricultural production in China .
 Iron Sword from the Warring States Period is an example of the metal work done during this period . This iron sword is one of the most impressive examples of the work done in the Iron Age .
 The crossbow was invented, and its low cost and easy use (as Compared to the expensive chariot) resulted in the increased conscription of peasants . peasants as expandable infantry .
 Lao-tzu founded Daoism during the same period as Confucianism . Another important philosopher in this period was Lao,tzu .
 The first was concerned with shi, or the investment of the position of ruler with power and the necessity of obtaining facts to rule well . The other was concerned about shi or investment of power .
 Mohism emerged around the same time as the other philosophies discussed here, under the philosopher Mozi (c.m. Mozi)
 Shi Huangdi also built the Great Wall of China, roughly 1,500 miles long and guarded by a massive army, to protect the nation against northern invaders . e The Qin Dynasty collapsed after only 15 years . The Qin dynasty collapsed after 15 years. e
 Emperor Gaozu, formerly known as Liu Bang, founded the Han Dynasty . He founded the dynasty . He was known as the Emperor of Han .
 Other innovations included the recording of stars and comets, the armillary sohere, which represented star movements in three dimensions, the waterwheel, and other engineering feats . The first use of negative numbers in mathematics in mathematics was the first use .
 Through Emperor Wu's southern and western conquests, the Han Dynasty made contact with the Indian cultural sphere . Emperor Wu made contact between the Han and Indian culture .
 The Silk Road was established by China's Han Dynasty through territorial expansion . Describe the importance of the Silk Road as an important link to history .
 The Han Dynasty of China made contact with the Indian cultural sohere . The Silk Road was established by the Han Dynasty in the early 1400s .
 Red shows the land route and blue shows the maritime route . As China pushed its borders further, trade contacts were established with lands to the west .
 Bone, bamboo, and sometimes silk were used as writing tablets during the Shang and Zhou (1050-250 BCE) dynasties . Bone and bamboo were used in writing tablets from 1050 to 250 BCE .
 Portrait of Cai Lun depicts the invention of paper . The portrait depicts the creation of paper in China .
 The ruins of Harappa were first described in 1842 by Charles Masson in his book, Narrative of Various Journeys in Balochistan, Afghanistan, the Panjab, & Kalat .
 There is no conclusive evidence of palaces or temples, or even of kings, armies, or priests . The largest structures may be granaries .
 During the Early Harappan period (about 3200-2600 BCE), cultural similarities in pottery, seals, figurines, and figurines document caravan trade with Central Asia and the Iranian plateau .
 Indo-Aryan Migration theory suggests Harappan culture of Indus River Valley was assimilated during migration of the Aryan people into northwest India .
 Monsoon Seasonal changes in atmospheric circulation and precipitation . Usually winds that bring heavy rain once a year . Monsoon seasonal changes are usually accompanied by heavy rain .
 The Indus Valley Civilization may have met its demise due to invasion . The Aryan Invasion Theory is based on the Aryan invasion theory .
 Archaeological evidence shows that the site, which had been a major city before the downfall of the Indus Valley Civilization, continued to be inhabited by a much smaller population after the collapse . The site is believed to have been inhabited by much smaller people .
 Indo-Aryans were a branch of the Indo-Iranians, who originated in present-day northern Afghanistan . They were the descendants of the ancient Indo-Afghans . They originated in Afghanistan .
 Indo-Aryans developed an agricultural society during the Later Vedic Period . They further developed crafts, such as pottery . Ceramic goblet from Malwa, 1300 BCE .
 The institution of the caste system was influenced by stories of the gods in the Rig-Veda epic . It assumed and reinforced the idea that lifestyles, occupations, ritual statuses, and social statuses were inherited . Explain the history of the system .
 Aryan society was patriarchal in the Vedic Period, with men in positions of authority and power handed down only through the male line .
 Hand-painted images of men and women of the various castes and religious and ethnic groups found in Madura, India at that time .
 The aloum was compiled by the Indian writing master at an English school established by American missionaries in Madura, and given to the Reverend William Twining . As indicated on the presentation page, the aloums were compiled by an English writing master .
 Sanskrit traces its linguistic ancestry to Proto-Indo-lIranian, also called the Aryan languages . It can be traced historically back to the people who spoke Indo-Iranian . Indo-European languages are a family of several hundred related languages .
 Kalidasa’s play, Abhi/nanasakuntalam, is generally regarded as a masterpiece . It was among the first Sanskrit works to be translated into English, as well as numerous other languages .
 In the medieval era, Sanskrit continued to be spoken and written, particularly by Brahmins for scholarly communication . In the 14th century, Sanskrit was used to write for scholarly purposes .
 According to the Rig Veda, the most important deities were Agni, Indra, the god of Heavens and War, Surya, the Sun god; Vayu, the gods of Wind; and Prthivi, the goddess of Earth .
 Agni, the Indian God of Fire from the ancient Vedic religion, is shown riding a ram . Agni is believed to be the most powerful deity in the world .
 The Vedic religion was influenced by local cultures and traditions adopted by Indo-Aryans as they spread throughout India . Explain the evolution of hinduism in this article .
 Hinduism evolved as a combination of various cultures and traditions, including Vedic religion and the Upanishads . Over time, Buddhism declined but some of its practices were integrated into Hinduism . Large Hindu temples were built in South and Southeast Asia .
 In the 19th century, the Indian subcontinent became a western colony during the period of the British Raj . The British Raj (the name of the government) began in 1858 .
 The Sramana movement gave rise to Jainism and Buddhism . They are commonly known as monks . e The movement gave birth to Jains and Buddhists .
 Sramanas were those who practiced an ascetic, or strict and self-denying, lifestyle in pursuit of spiritual liberation . Understanding the development of Buddhism as a major world religion .
 Jainism is considered an independent, pre-Buddhist religion with possible roots in the Indus Valley Civilization . e The predominance of karma is one of the key features of Jainistism . e
 Sramana traditions later gave rise to varying schools of Hinduism, as well as Yoga, Buddhism, and Jainism . Sraman traditions later became schools of yoga, yoga and Buddhism .
 Wikipedia CC BY-SA 3.0. {e) ""Akbar.""
 The empire covered lands that included portions of Azerbaijan, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Iran, Iraq, Israel, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Libya, Macedonia, Moldova, Oman, Nagorno-Karabakh, Northern Cyprus, Pakistan, Palestien,
 Emperors Cyrus Il and Darius created a centralized government and extensive trade network in the Achaemenid Empire . Cyrus I, Darius I and Darius I were the two kings of the empire . Darius I, I, II, II and III were the first two monarchs of the A
 Cyrus the Great maintained control over a vast empire by installing regional governors, called satraps, to rule individual provinces . Discuss how the central government provided cultural and economic reform . Discuss the role of regional governors in modern times .
 Researchers were able to compare the scripts and use it to help decipher ancient languages . The Behistun Inscription is as valuable to cuneiform as the Rosetta Stone is .
 The contesting force to Ahura Mazda was called Angra Mainyu, or angry spirit . The contestant force was known as the "angra mainyu" or "angry spirit"
 Darius |, and later Achaemenid emperors, acknowledged their devotion to Ahura Mazda in inscriptions . Darius . appear to have continued the model of coexistence with other religions . Darius | and later . emperors . seem to have . continued to . continue to be the
 Persian colonists who were cut off from their co-religionists in Iran proper continued to practice Zoroastrianism . In the Cappadocian kingdom (whose territory was formerly an Achaemenid possession), Persian colonists .
 Chandragupta defeated the invasion led by Seleucus I, a Macedonian general from Alexander's army, and gained additional territory west of the Indus River . Chandragpta then defeated the invaders and gained control of the region .
 According to several legends, Chanakya traveled to Magadha, a kingdom that was large and militarily powerful and feared by its neighbors, but was insulted by its king Dhana Nanda, of the Nanda Dynasty . The Maurya Empire was founded by the Maury
 Kalinga was the only kingdom in India independent from Bindusara's empire . Apart from these southern states, Kalingas were the only states independent from the empire .
 As a young prince, Ashoka was a brilliant commander who crushed revolts in Ujjain and Taxila . Ashoka is known for his role in crushing revolts against the ruler of India .
 The Edicts of Ashoka are known as an early document that promoted religious tolerance . For this, the Edicts were known as a document that promotes religious tolerance in India .
 The map shows the empire covering all of modern-day India, as well as portions of modern day Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Iran, Nepal, Pakistan, and China . The map also includes portions of Afghanistan, Afghanistan, and Bangladesh .
 Ashoka the Great became a follower of the Buddha's teachings after his conquest of Kalinga . Discuss the effects of his conversion to Buddhism .
 In one source, his conversion is presented as a gradual process coming from intense personal anguish, rather than spurred by a specific event . In another source, the conversion is said to have been gradual .
 As a Buddhist emperor, Ashoka believed that Buddhism is beneficial for all human beings, as well as animals and plants, so he built a number of stupas . Ashoka was a Buddhist leader who believed Buddhism was beneficial for humans and animals .
 He sent his only daughter, Sanghamitra, and son, Mahindra, to spread Buddhism in Sri Lanka (then known as Tamraparni) His only daughter and son were sent to spread Buddhist Buddhism in the country .
 Ashoka the Great's rule was followed by 50 years of weak kings who did not retain strong central authority . Describe the factors that contributed to the decline of the Maurya Empire . Use this information to help students understand the historical context of the decline .
 The commander-in-chief of his guard, Brahmin General Pusyamitra Sunga, killed Brihadratha during a military parade and ascended the throne . The commander in-chief was killed by the commander in a military march .
 Buddhism was favored in the Indo-Greek Kingdom . FE Seated Buddha statue showing Greek influences .
 The Kushans were one of five branches of the Yuezhi confederation, an Indo-European nomadic people . Kushan Origins (30-375 CE) The Kushan people were a nomadic nomadic group of five .
 Wikipedia CC BY-SA 3.0. o ""Kanishka."" http://en.org/wiki/kanishka .
 Kalidasa is considered the greatest poet and dramatist of the Sanskrit language . Aryabhata was the first of the Indian mathematician-astronomers who worked on the approximation for Pr Vishnu Sharma, thought to be the author of the Panchatantra .
 The period of Gupta rule, especially the reign of Chandragupta II, is still remembered as the Golden Age of India . The period is still known as the 'Golden Age' of India.
 The Gupta Empire flourished, in military and territorial conquests as well as cultural and scholastic advancements, during the reign of Emperor Chandragupta Il. The Gupta empire flourished in the Gupta Empire .
 The Late Bronze Age collapse, also known as the Age of Calamities, was a transition in the Aegean Region, Eastern Mediterranean, and Southwestern Asia . Learning Objective Understand the characteristics of the Greek Dark Ages .
 Historians believe this period was violent, sudden, and culturally disruptive . Many historians attribute the fall of the Mycenaeans, and overall Bronze Age collapse, to climatic or environmental catastrophe combined with an invasion by the Dorians .
 The Homeric Question concerns the doubts and debate over the identity of Homer, the author of the //iad and the Odyssey . It also questions the historicity of the two books, and questions the legitimacy of their existence .
 The //iad, however, has been placed immediately following the Greek Dark Age period . The //Iad was placed immediately after the ancient Greek Dark Ages .
 Poleis were different from ancient city-states in that they were ruled by bodies of the citizens who lived there . Poleis ruled by the bodies of people who lived in Poleis .
 The city's administrative geography was reworked . The goal was to have mixed political groups, not federated by local interests linked to the sea, the city, or farming . Decision decisions would depend on their geographical situations .
 e Sparta was an oligarchic city-state ruled by two hereditary kings equal in authority . e Spartan society was largely structured around the military, and around military training .
 At the age of 20, Spartiates were initiated into full citizenship and joined a syssitia . e Helots were granted many privileges, in comparison to enslaved populations in other Greek city-states .
 The Helot population outnumbered the Spartiate population, and grew over time, causing societal tensions . e Female Spartans enjoyed status, power, and respect that was unequaled in the rest of the classical world .
 Spartan society was highly regimented society with a clearly delineated class system . Spartan society had a clearly defined class system, with a clear delineation of class .
rophimoi, or ""foster sons,"" from other Greek city-states, were allowed to attend training as foreign students .
 Xenophon sent his two sons to Sparta as trophimol . For example, the Athenian general Xenophon used his sons to be sent as Trophimols .
 Persians installed tyrants in every city, as a means of control . Found the lonians difficult to rule, the Persians found it difficult to control . The Persians were found to be hard to rule .
 At its greatest extent, the Achaemenid Empire included all of the territory of modern-day Iran, Turkey, Iraq, Kuwait, Syria, Jordan, Israel, Palestine, Lebanon, Afghanistan, and much of Central Asia . The empire was one of the largest empires in history .
 Persian Wars was fought between Sparta and the Peloponnesian League . Sparta withdrew from the Delian League after the second Persian invasion of Greece was halted .
 Many Greek city-states had been alienated from Sparta following the violent actions of the Spartan leader Pausanias during the siege of Byzantium . Many of the city-state's cities were alienated by the violent action of Pausanas .
 Athens was able to use the resources of the Delian League to its own ends, which led it into conflict with less powerful members of the League . Sparta’s departure from the League led Athens to conflict with the less powerful . Athens used Sparta's resources to use to
 Persian Empire adopted a divide-and-rule strategy in relation to the Greek city-states in the wake of the Persian Wars, stoking already simmering conflicts, including the rivalry between Athens and Sparta . To protect the Persian Empire against further Greek attacks, the Persian empire adopted a
 Athens attained its Golden Age under Pericles in the 5t century BCE, and flourished culturally culturally as the hegemonic power of the Hellenic world . Athens was founded in the 4th century BC .
 Cleisthenes overthrew the dictator Hippias in 511/510 BCE in order to establish democracy at Athens . Understanding the factors contributing to the rise and fall of Athens .
 This money funded the building of the Acropolis, put half the Athenian population on the public payroll, and allowed Athens to build and maintain the dominant naval power in the Greek world .
 Athens produced some of the most influential and enduring cultural artifacts of the Western tradition . With the empire's funds, military dominance, and political . fortunes as guided by statesman and orator Pericles, Athens produced . Pericles .
 Tensions within the Delian League brought about the Peloponnesian War . Athens defeated by its rival, Sparta, in the war .
 These victories enabled Athens to bring most of the Aegean, and many other parts of Greece, together in the Delian League, creating an Atheniandominated alliance . Sparta and its allies withdrew from the alliance from which Sparta withdrew .
 The artwork shows a Greek hoplite and Persian warrior fighting each other . The artwork was commissioned by the Persian Empire .
 As Athens' ruler, he helped the city to prosper with a resplendent culture and democratic institutions . The administration of the Athenian state was managed by a group of people referred to as magistrates .
 The resulting tensions brought about the Peloponnesian War , in which Athens was defeated by its rival, Sparta .
 By the mid4th century BCE, the northern Greek kingdom of Macedon was becoming dominant in Athenian affairs . Macedon became dominant in the kingdom of Athens .
 The Athenian elite lived modestly and without great luxuries compared to the elites of other ancient societies . Athenians tn the Age of Pericles .
 Socrates argues that the invisible world is the most intelligible, and the visible world the least intelligible . A paradoxical analogy is Socrates' argument that the world is less intelligible and more obscure .
 When he was on trial, he used his method of e/enchos, a dialectic method of inquiry that resembles the scientific method, to demonstrate to jurors that their moral values are wrong-headed .
 The formative influence of the Homeric epics in shaping Greek culture was widely recognized . Homer was described as the teacher of Greece . Homeric poetry influenced the development of classical Greek historical texts .
 The /liad is set during the Trojan War and recounts the battles and events surrounding a quarrel between King Agamemnon and the warrior Achilles . The Song of Ilion is sometimes referred to as the Song of . Ilion or Song of Iium .
 Herodotus is the first historian known to have broken from Homeric tradition in order to treat historical subjects as a method of investigation arranged into a historiographic narrative . He is known as the "Father of History" for his work .
 Thucydides, who had been trained in rhetoric, provided a model of historical prose-writing based more firmly in factual progression of a narrative . Herodotus, due to frequent digressions and asides, appeared to minimize authorial control .
 Homer was a Greek poet of the 7"" or 8 century BCE; author of the lliad and the Odyssey . dactylic hexameter is a form of meter in poetry or a rhythmic scheme . Homer is the most famous poet in the world .
 Homer is the author of the Iliad and the Odyssey . He is revered as the greatest of ancient Greek epic poets . Homer is also considered the most famous poet of all time .
 Idealized portrayal of Homer dating to the Hellenistic period; located at the British Museum . Idealized portrayals of Homer are located at British Museum in London . Homer is depicted in a depiction of Homer by Homeric artworks .
 The Iliad is an ancient Greek epic poem in dactylic hexameter . The /liad (sometimes referred to as the Song of Ilion or Song of Iliium) is an epic poem . It is also known as The Song of the Iliar
 Set during the Trojan War (the ten-year siege of the city of Troy by a coalition of Greek states) tells of the battles and events surrounding a quarrel between King Agamemnon and the warrior Achilles .
 The likely historicity of the //iadasa piece of literature, however, must be balanced against creative license that would have been taken over years of transmission, as well as the alteration of historical fact to conform with tribal preferences .
 According to Aristotle, Aeschylus expanded the number of actors in theater to allow for the dramatization of conflict on stage . The author also expanded the role of actors to allow conflict to be dramatized .
 The Corinthian Order grew directly from the lonic in the mid5th century BCE . It was initially of a very similar style and proportion .
 Great seats of learning rose during the Hellenistic Period, including those at Alexandria and Antioch . Scientific inquiries were often sponsored by royal patrons . Discoveries of Pythagoras and Euclid are still used in mathematical teaching today .
 The Peloponnesian War provided a dramatic end to the 5t century BCE . It shattered religious and cultural taboos, devastating vast swathes of countryside, and destroying whole cities . It also destroyed vast swaths of countryside .
 The Peloponnesian War was fought between Athens and its empire, known as the Delian League, and the Pelopsian League led by Sparta . During this conflict, Greek warfare evolved from a limited and formalized form of conflict, to allout struggles between city-
 The Peloponnesian War provided a dramatic end to the 5th century BCE, shattering religious and cultural taboos, devastating vast swathes of countryside, and destroying whole cities .
 Spartan strategy during the Archidamian War was to invade the land surrounding Athens, depriving Athenians of the productive land around their city . The two powers were relatively unable to fight decisive battles .
 Agesilaus II was one of two Spartan kings during the period of Spartan hegemony . His loss at the Battle of Leuctra effectively ended Spartan hegemony in the eastern Aegean and Persian territories .
 Macedonian Conquest 7.7.1: The Rise of the Macedon Il’s conquests during the Third Sacred War cemented his power, as well as the influence of Macedon, throughout the Hellenic world . Philip I. I. Philip II. Philip Il�
 Macedon 's rise is largely attributable to the policies during Philip Il’s rule . Macedon ‘s rise’ in Macedon is largely due to policies during the rule of the country .
 A Macedonian Phalanx Depiction of a Macedonian phalanx armed with sarissas . Depiction . of the Macedonian phalanx depictation .
 The phalanx is a rectangular mass military formation, usually composed entirely of heavy infantry armed with spears, pikes, Sarissas or similar weapons . It is considered one of history's most successful commanders, Alexander the Great .
 He overthrew the Persian King Darius Ill, and conquered the entirety of the Persian Empire . The king overthrew Darius Ill and ruled the Persian kingdom .
 Chandragupta Maurya (referred to in Greek sources as Sandrokottos), of relatively humble origin, took control of the Punjab, and with that power base proceeded to conquer the Nanda Empire . Taking advantage of this, he took over the Punjab and took
 After the birth of Alexander IV, Perdiccas and Philip III were appointed joint kings, albeit in name only . Eventually the two sides reconciled, and after Alexander IV was born, they were named joint kings . Philip III died in the death of Alexander III .
 They allied with Rome again under Eumenes II against Perseus of Macedon, during the Third Macedonian War . They allied again with Rome in the Second Macedonia War .
 Macedon or Macedonia was the dominant state of Hellenistic Greece . The Kingdom of Macedon at the death of Philip II ina eCity Macedonian garrison .
 Macedon clashed with the rising Roman republic during the reigns of Philip V and his son Perseus . Macedon and Roman republic clashed during Philip V's reigns . Philip V was the first king of Macedon .
 Macedon fought a series of wars against Rome during the 2"" and 15t centuries BCE . During the 2."" and 15th centuries BCE, Macedon was victorious in a war against Rome . Macedon defeated Rome in a battle known as the Trojan War .
 The Etruscans were a Mediterranean civilization during the 6th to 3 century BCE, from whom the Romans derived a great deal of cultural influence . The Romans were a major influence in the culture of Etruria .
 The twelve Etruscan league citiies were Felathri, Arretium, Curtun, Perusia, Fufluna, Clevsin, Vetluna, Velzna, Velch, Tarchna, Caisra and Veil .
 It is believed that the Etruscan government style changed from total monarchy to an oligarchic republic in the 6 century BCE . It is important to note that this did not happen to all city-states, as it did in the Roman Republic .
 Etruscan name for family was /autn, and at the center was the married couple . At the center of the family was the couple who were married .
 The hypothesized etymology for Tusci, a root for ""Tuscan"" or ""Etruscan,"" suggests a connection to the Latin and Greek words for ""tower,"" illustrating the 7Jusc/ people as those who built towers . Tusci may be a root
 The criterion for deciding whether or not an object originated in Rome or descended to the Romans from the Etruscans is the date of the object and the opinion of ancient sources regarding the provenance of an object’s style .
 Diodorus of Sicily wrote, in the 15t century, of the great achievements of the Etruscans . Little survives or is known of it, but little survives .
 Etruscan beliefs concerning the afterlife were influenced by a number of sources, particularly those of the early Mediterranean region . Etruscans believed that the afterlife was an afterlife .
 The Etruscan scriptures were a corpus of texts, termed the Etrusca Disciplina . They were the Etruscuscans .
 Tin or Tinia, the sky; Uni, his wife Juno; and Cel, the earth goddess . Cel is the goddess of Cel, goddess of the earth, goddesses of the underworld .
 Souls of ancestors found depicted around Etruscan tombs . After the 5th century BCE, the deceased are depicted in iconography as traveling to the underworld .
 Some deceased individuals were laid out on stone benches . Cremated ashes and bones might be put into an urn in the shape of a house, or a representation of the deceased .
 The national epic poem of mythical Rome, the Aene/d by Virgil, tells the story of how the Trojan prince, Aeneas, came to Italy . Explain how the founding of Rome is rooted in mythology .
 Recent studies suggest that the wolf may be a medieval sculpture dating from the 13th century CE . Romulus and Remus were purported to be sons of Rhea Silvia and Mars, the god of war .
 The hero, Aeneas, was already well Known within Greco-Roman legend and myth, having been a character in the //iad . The hero of the //Iad is already well known within the mythic world .
 Tullus Hostilius had little regard for the Roman gods, and focused entirely on military expansion . Hostiliu was a Roman general who had little respect for the gods and focused on military .
 Marcius ruled peacefully and only fought wars when Roman territories needed defending . He constructed the home of the Roman Senate, the Curia Hostilia . e Ancus Marcius only fought a single war in his reign .
 Lucius Tarquinius Priscus increased the size of the Senate and began major construction works, including the Temple to Jupiter Optimus Maximus, and the Circus Maximus . He also began construction works on the Temple of Jupiter, the Circus of the Maximus.
 Servius Tullius built the first pomerium, walls that fully encircled the Seven Hills of Rome . The walls were built in the Roman capital of Rome in the early Roman times .
 He also implemented a new constitution for the Romans, further developing the citizen classes . He also made organizational changes to the Roman army and the Roman constitution .
 Lucius Tarquinius Superbus's reign is remembered for his use of violence and intimidation . Superbus was known for his disrespect of Roman custom and the Roman Senate .
 After the death of Romulus, there was an interregnum for one year, during which ten men chosen from the senate governed Rome as successive /nterreges . Numa Pompilius ruled Rome for a year after Romulus died .
 Many slaves descended from debtors or prisoners of war, especially women and children captured during foreign military campaigns and sieges . Many slaves originated from Rome’s conquest of Greece, and yet Greek culture was considered, in some respects, to be superior to their own .
 Many slaves worked under harsh conditions, and/or suffered inhumanely under their owners during their enslavement . Nonetheless, many worked under . harsh conditions . Many worked under conditions .
 Togato, | sec dc. con testa di_restauro da . da_un_ritrat to_di_nerva, inv. "Togato" is a form of form . Wikipedia CC BY-SA 3.0 .
 The comitia tributa, or assembly of the tribes (the citizens of Rome), was presided over by a consul and composed of 35 tribes . It was composed of the 35 tribes and presided over over by the consul .
 Dictators were sometimes elected during times of military emergency, during which the constitutional government would be disbanded . The constitutional government was disbanded during those times .
 Senators were usually appointed by Roman censors, but during times of military emergency, such as the civil wars of the 15* century BCE, this practice became less prevalent . The Roman dictator, triumvir, or the Senate itself would select its members .
 Citizens on these assemblies were organized further on the basis of curiae , centuries (for military purposes) and tribes . Each would each gather into their own assemblies, and each would gather in their own assembly .
 A number of developments affected the relationship between Rome’s republican government and society, particularly in regard to how that relationship differed among patricians and plebeians . Describe the relationships between the government and the people in the time of the Roman Republic .
 The passage of Lex Trebonia forbade the co-opting of colleagues to fill vacant positions on tribunes in order to Sway voting in favor of patrician blocs over plebeians . e Throughout the 4th century BCE, a series of reforms were passed that
 e Romans typically produced historical sculptures in relief, as opposed to Greek free-standing sculpture . Cicero is one of the most famous Republican authors, and his letters provide detailed information about an important period in Roman history .
 The portraits of Pompey the Great were neither fully idealized, nor were created in the same veristic style of Republican senators . The busts were not created in an idealized manner, nor in the style of the Republican senators.
 By the middle of the 3rd century and the end of the Pyrrhic War, Rome had effectively dominated the Italian peninsula and won an international military reputation .
 Rome completely defeated Hannibal and razed Carthage to the ground in the three Punic Wars . Rome acquired all of Carthage's North African and Spanish territories .
 In 264, at the start of the lst Punic war, the territory expanded to include large portions of present-day northern Italy . The territory expanded as far north as Pisae and Ariminium .
 Pyrrhus's complete withdrawal from Italy was due to the decimation of his army following years of foreign Campaigns, and the diminishing likelihood of further material gains . Beneventum's outcome was indecisive, but it led to Pyrrhu's complete retreat from Italy .
 An underlying theme of conflict between aristocracy and ordinary citizens drove the majority of actions . Explain how crises in the 1st century BCE further destabilized the Roman Republic .
 Gracchi brothers, Tiberius and Gaius, introduced a number of populist agrarian and land reforms in the 130s and 120s BCE that were heavily opposed by the patrician Senate .
 The triumvirate crumbled in the wake of growing political violence and Crassus's daughter’s death . e A resolution was passed by the Senate that declared that if Caesar did not lay down his arms by July 49 BCE, he would be considered an enemy of the
 Caesar crossed the Rubicon and marched towards Rome on January 10, 49 BCE . Pompey was granted dictatorial powers over the Republic . Meanwhile, Pompey became a dictator .
 When Tiberius sought re-election to his one-year term (an unprecedented action), the oligarchic nobles responded by murdering him . Mass riots broke out in the city in reaction to the assassination, and mass riots erupted .
 Caesar was assassinated in 44 BCE by his remaining enemies in the Senate . As dictator, he instituted a series of reforms and, most notably, created the Julian calendar . Caesar's assassination threw Rome into another period of chaos and civil war .
 In 60 BCE, Caesar, Marcus Licinius Crassus, and Gnaeus Pompeius Magnus (Pompey the Great) formed a political alliance, known as the First Triumvirate . The alliance dominated Roman politics for several years .
 Octavian was adopted by Julius Caesar as his adopted son and heir when he was 19 years old . By ingratiating himself with his father's legions, he was able to fulfill the military demands of the Roman Senate .
 The Pax Romana, which began under Augustus, was a 200year period of peace in which Rome experienced minimal expansion by military forces . It was a period of period of minimal military expansion by Rome .
 The Ara Pacis is a prime example of the propaganda Augustus employed to promote the Pax Romana . Augustus had to persuade Romans that the prosperity they could achieve in the absence of warfare was better for the Empire than potential wealth and honor acquired when fighting a risky war .
 Augustus retained /mperium over the provinces where the majority of Rome's soldiers were stationed . As a result of this, Augustus retained control of the provinces .
 Augustus was given honorifics that made his full name /mperator Caesar divi filius Augustus . His full name stressed military power and victory and emphasized his role as commander-in-chief .
 Augustus renounced his ten-year consulship, but in return, secured concessions for himself . Augustus was also granted the role of tribunicia potestas, which enabled him to act as the guardian of the citizens of Rome .
 Claudius’s appointment as emperor by the Praetorian Guard damaged his reputation . Claudius was appointed emperor by Praetorians Guard . He died in August 31, 2013 .
 Vespasian founded the Flavian Dynasty, which ruled the Empire for 27 years . Analyze how he consolidated control over the empire . Find out how the Roman army defeated the Jewish rebellion .
 After Galba and Otho perished in quick succession, Vitellius became the third emperor in April 69 CE . The Roman legions of Roman Egypt and Judaea declared Vespasian emperor on July 1, 69 CE. e
 Almost simultaneously the Senate declared Galba, then governor of Hispania Tarraconensis, as Emperor of Rome . Galba was declared Emperor of Roman Empire by Senate .
 Historians who lived through the period soeak suspiciously well of Vespasian, while condemning emperors who came before him . Tacitus, Suetonius, Josephus, and Pliny the Elder all condemn the emperors' actions .
 The most significant military campaign undertaken during the Flavian period was the siege and destruction of Jerusalem in 70 CE by Titus . Titus was a response to a failed Jewish rebellion in 66 . Describe some of the military achievements and challenges of the Flavians .
 Contemporary estimates claimed that 1,100,000 people were killed during the siege, of which a majority were Jewish . Substantial conquests were made in Great Britain under command of Gnaeus Julius Agricola, between 77 and 83 .
 Mount Vesuvius eruption in 79 CE was one of the most catastrophic volcanic eruptions in European history . Several Roman settlements were obliterated and buried, and thereby preserved, under ash . The eruption of Mount Vesuviius was a catastrophic eruption of volcanic activity .
 The eruption of Mount Vesuvius in 79 CE, during the reign of Emperor Titus, was one of the most catastrophic volcanic eruptions in European history . Learning Objective Describe the events surrounding the eruption of the volcano in this article .
 Mount Vesuvius spewed a cloud of volcanic gas, stones, and ash to a height of 21 miles . The eruption released a hundred thousand times the thermal energy of the Hiroshima bombing . Several Roman settlements were obliterated and buried underneath massive pyroclastic surges and ashfall deposits
 The preserved remains of about 1,500 people have been found at Pompeii and Herculaneum . The overall death toll is still unknown, but the remains are preserved .
 In Pompeli, the eruption destroyed the city, killing its inhabitants and burying it under tons of ash . The eruption was the largest eruption in the country's history .
 Plaster casts of victims still in situ; many casts are in the Archaeological Museum of Naples . Pompeii's ""Garden of the Fugitives’’s’
 Nerva's brief reign was marred by financial difficulties and his inability to assert his authority over the Roman army . His greatest success was his ability to ensure a peaceful transition of power after his death, thus founding the Nerva-Antonine Dynasty .
 The first five of the six successions within the NervaAntonine Dynasty were notable in that the reigning emperor adopted the candidate of his choice to be his successor, rather than choosing a biological heir . Describe the characteristics of the Golden Age and the achievements of the Five Good Em
 Hadrian was known to be a humanist and a philhellene, renowned for his building projects and commitment to his military lifestyle . Marcus Aurelius enjoyed not only military successes during his reign, but also authored a defining Stoic tome .
 Trajan is remembered as a successful soldier-emperor who presided over the greatest military expansion in Roman history . He led the empire to attain its maximum territorial extent by the time of his death .
 Trajan was officially declared by the Senate as optimus princeps (""the best ruler"") He presided over the greatest military expansion in Roman history, leading the empire to its maximum territorial extent by the time of his death .
 Hadrian's policy was peace through strength, even threat, with an emphasis on discipline . His coins showed military images almost as often as peaceful ones . Hadrian was the subject of two monetary series .
 Sections of Hadrian's Wall remain along the route, though much of it has been dismantled over the years, in order to use the stones for nearby construction projects .
 Trajan was known for his philanthropic rule . He oversaw extensive public building programs and implementing social welfare policies . Emperor Hadrian had a major influence on Roman culture through his love of Greek culture .
 Hadrian was familiar with the work of the philosophers Epictetus, Heliodorus, and Favorinus . He also introduced Greek styles into public use, such as wearing a beard instead of being clean-shaven .
 Hadrian behaved as a Roman civic traditionalist, wno demanded the use of the toga by senators and knights in public, and strict separation between the sexes in public baths and theaters .
 Diocletian secured the empire's borders and purged it of all threats to his power . Describe the change in attitudes towards Christians and their statuses within the Roman Empire. Describe a change in attitude towards Christians .
 Diocletian also restructured the Roman government by establishing the Tetrarchy, a system of rule in which four men shared rule over the massive Roman Empire . The four-man rule system was established in the Roman empire .
 The empire was effectively divided in two, with an Augustus and a subordinate Caesar in each half . Caesar Caesar was Augustus Augustus and Caesar Caesar . Caesar was Caesar Augustus Augustus Augustus Caesar .
 Diocletian established administrative capitals for each of the Tetrarchs . The capitals were located closer to the empire's borders . The administrative capitals were established in the region of the empire .
 Rome retained its unique Prefect of the City, but it was no longer the administrative capital of Rome . Rome was the first city to have a prefect of city .
 The first phase of Diocletian's government restructuring, sometimes referred to as the diarchy, involved the designation of the general Maximian as co-emperor . Maximian was first known as Caesar in 285, then Augustus in 286 .
 Map shows the four zones of influence under Diocletian's tetrarchy . Dioceses and boundary a * vim , Zones of Influence in the Roman Tetrarchy.
 Caesar had tried to placate both Constantine and Maximinus with the meaningless title fi/ius August (""son of the Augustus,"" essentially an alternative title for Caesar), they both had to be recognized as Augusti in 309 . After an abortive attempt to place Constantine with a meaningless
 While the Roman Emperor Constantine the Great reigned, Christianity began to transition to the dominant religion of the Roman Empire . Christianity began the transition to Christianity in the early years of Christianity .
 Explain why Constantine moved the capital of the empire to Constantinople, and the consequences that had for the empire as a whole . After defeating Maxentius, Constantine gradually consolidated his military superiority .
 Licinius' defeat came to represent the defeat of a rival center of Pagan and Greek-speaking political activity in the east . The city was thus founded in 324, dedicated on May 11, 330, and renamed Constantinople . The Byzantine Empire considered Constantine its founder, and the Holy Roman
 Constantine and his Franks marched under the standard of the /abarum Chi-Rho, and both sides saw the battle in religious terms . Constantine's son Constantine died in the fall of the year .
 Throughout the 5th century, the empire's territories in western Europe and northwestern Africa, including Italy, fell to various invading or indigenous peoples . The Migration Period is sometimes called the Migration Period .
 In 476, Odacer and his Germanic mercenaries took Ravenna, the Western Roman capital at the time, and deposed Western Emperor Romulus Augustus . Odacer was refused lands in Italy, and was deposed by Romulus Augustinian .
 The Empire as a whole initiated major cultural and political transformations since the Crisis of the Third Century, with the shift towards a more openly autocratic and ritualized form of government . The adoption of Christianity as the state religion, and a general rejection of the traditions and values of Classical Antiquity
 According to this school, Roman world underwent a gradual (though often violent) series of transformations, morphing into the medieval world . This school, drawing its basic premise from the Pirenne thesis, is based on this thesis .
 After the Eastern Roman Empire's fall in 1453 CE, western scholars began calling it the ""Byzantine Empire"" to emphasize its distinction from the earlier, Latin-speaking Roman Empire centered on Rome . e The ""Zionist Empire"" is now the standard term used among historians
 The first use of the term ""Byzantine"" to label the later years of the Roman Empire was in 1557, when the German historian Hieronymus Wolf published his work, Corpus Historiee Byzantine .
 It was not until the mid-19th century that the term came into general use in the western world . The term emphasized differences from the earlier Latin-speaking Roman Empire, centered on Rome .
 His more immediate political legacy was that, in leaving the empire to his sons, was that he replaced Diocletian's tetrarchy with the principle of dynastic succession .
 Leo | managed to free himself from the influence of the non-Orthodox chief by supporting the rise of the lsaurians, a semi-barbarian tribe living in southern Anatolia . Leo managed to . free himself . from the . influence by supporting . the rise by supporting
 Justinian also undertook many important projects at home . Byzantine Emperor Justinian was known for his work in the Byzantine Empire .
 The Hagia Sophia is a massive basilica with four minarets and a large central dome . The basilica is located in central Istanbul, Turkey .
 Justinian | achieved lasting fame through his judicial reforms, particularly through the complete revision of all Roman law . The Corpus juris Civilis is known today as the Corpus juri Civilis .
 Justinian decided the empire's legal system needed repair after becoming emperor in 527 . Explain the historical significance of Justinian's legal reforms .
 Early in his reign, Justinian appointed an official, Tribonian, to oversee this task . The Tribonian was a Tribonian official .
 It consists of the Codex /ustinianus, the Digesta, the Institutiones, and the Novellae . It is one of the oldest surviving manuscripts of the Roman Empire . The Codex is the most important Codex of all time .
 Many of the laws contained in the Codex were aimed at regulating religious practice . e The Corpus formed the basis not only of Roman jurisprudence but also influenced civil law throughout the Middle Ages and into modern nation states .
 Phocas was already alienating his supporters with his repressive rule . The Persians were able to capture Syria and Mesopotamia by 607 .
 The arrival of another large Byzantine army outside Antioch (some 80,000 troops) forced the Arabs to retreat . The Arabs were forced to retreat from the city .
 In the Byzantine-Arab wars of the Heraclian Dynasty, the Arabs nearly destroyed the Byzantine Empire . In order to fight back, the Byzantines created a new military system, known as the theme system, in which land was granted to farmers who, in return, would provide
 Constantinople dropped substantially in size, due to relocation, from 500,000 to 40,000-70,000 . Under constant threat of attack, Constantinople had dropped dramatically in size . Constantinople had relocated from 500-000 to 70,000 people .
 The Isaurian Dynasty is characterized by relative political stability . Iconoclasm resulted in considerable internal turmoil during the dynasty's reign .
 By the end of the Isaurian Dynasty in 802, the Byzantines were continuing to fight the Arabs and the Bulgars for their very existence . Pope Leo Ill crowned Charlemagne /mperator Romanorum, which was seen as making the Carolingian Empire the successor
 Leo II], who would become the founder of the so-called Isaurian Dynasty, was actually born in Germanikeia in northern Syria 685 . His alleged origin from Isauria derives from a reference in Theophanes the Confessor, which may be a later addition .
 Leo IilI's rule preserved the empire from extinction by the Arabs . Leo proceeded to consolidate its administration, which had become completely disorganized .
 The Arab failure was chiefly logistical, as they were operating too far from their Syrian bases . The superiority of the Byzantine navy through the use of Greek fire and the strength of Constantinople's fortifications also played important roles . The use of the Greek fire, the strength in fortifications and the
 The Byzantine capital's survival preserved the empire as a bulwark against Islamic expansion into Europe until the L5th century, when it fell to the Ottoman Turks . The Ottoman Turks took over the capital from the Byzantine Empire in the early 1900s .
 Emperor Leo III interpreted his many military failures as a judgment on the empire by God . He decided that it was being judged for the worship of religious images . The emperor interpreted the failures of his military as a judgement by God by the empire .
 The seventh century had been a period of major crisis for the Byzantine Empire . believers had begun to lean more heavily on divine support . The 7th century was a time of crisis for believers .
 Leo Ill interpreted his many military failures as a judgment on the empire by God, and decided that they were being judged for their worship of religious images . Ill interpreted the failure of the empire as a judgement by God .
 Irene of Athens was an orphan from a noble family, and was married to the son of the current emperor, Leo IV, in 768 . When Leo died in 780, Irene became regent for their nine-year-old son, Constantine, who was too young .
 As imperial regent, Irene subdued rebellions and fought the Arabs with mixed success . Irene subdues rebellions, fought Arab revolts and fought them against her Majesty .
 Constantine rebelled against Irene when he was old enough to become emperor proper . He let her keep the title of empress, but she was allowed to remain empress .
 Irene organized her own rebellion and eventually killed her son, thereby claiming sole rulership over the empire as empress . Irene was the first woman to have that title in the empire .
 Although it is often asserted that, as monarch, Irene called herself ""emperor"" rather than ""empress" in most of her documents, coins, and seals, she used "empress"" in her documents and seals . Irene used the word "emperor" in
 The pope would not recognize a woman as ruler, and in 800, crowned Charlemagne as imperial ruler over the entire Roman territory, including Byzantium . The pope refused to recognize a female ruler .
 Charlemagne did not attempt to rule Byzantium, but relations between the two empires remained difficult . He was eventually deposed by the finance minister of the Byzantine Empire .
 Irene next had to subdue a rebellion led by Elpidius, the strategos of Sicily . Irene had to also subdue an uprising by Elidius, who led a revolt against Irene .
 She used the title ""basi/issa"" in all other documents, coins, and seals . The title was used in all documents and coins .
 In 800, Charlemagne was crowned emperor by Pope Leo III, on Christmas Day .
 Part of the population of Croatia and the Byzantine Empire were Bogomiils . It shows that part of Croatia's population was part of the Bogomiil .
 In 971, John | Tzimiskes, the Byzantine emperor, subjugated much of the weakening Bulgarian Empire . In 1185, Theodore Peter and Ivan Asen started a revolt, and the weakening Byzantine Empire was unable to prevent the revolt from being successful . In 1396
 Byzantine Emperor Basil Il completely conquered Bulgaria in 1018, as a result of the 1014 Battle of Kleidion . Emperor Basil I completely conquered the country in 1014 .
 Isaac II Angelos failed to exploit his victory and returned to Constantinople in 1186 . In 1186, the rebels suffered a defeat, but failed to take advantage of his victory .
 A number of wars between the Normans and the Byzantine Empire were fought from 1040 until 1185 . Learning Objective Identify the Double Disasters and their consequences . Identify and explain the double disasters in this article .
 In 1071, the Byzantines were defeated by the Normans during their conquest of Italy . The Normans drove the Byzantine Empire out of southern Italy .
 The Battle of Manzikert was fought between the Byzantine Empire and the Seljug Turks on August 26, 1071, and proved a decisive defeat of the Byzantine army . The battle was fought by the Selug Turks, who defeated the Byzantine empire .
 The premature death of the former, and the overthrow of the latter, led to further collapse as the Normans consolidated their conquest of Sicily and Italy .
 Pope Urban II called together the Council of Clermont, and urged all those present to take up arms under the sign of the cross, and launch an armed pilgrimage to recover Jerusalem and the east from Muslims . On November 27, 1095, the Pope called together a group of those
 In 1182 CE, Latins (the people from western Europe) were massacred by an angry mob . The massacre was a massacre of the Latins by a mob in western Europe .
 They found the city a Shell of its former self, soarsely populated and largely ruined . The city was soars-populated and soars populated, it was found to be largely ruined.
 The eastern Orthodox populace hated the western Catholics for the sack of Constantinople . Meanwhile, the Ottomans defeated most of the empire except for Constantinople . The east ultimately capitulated and accepted Catholicism, but it was too late .
 In the century after the death of Osman |, Ottoman rule began to extend over the eastern Mediterranean and the Balkans . In the 100 years after Osman, the Ottomans ruled over the east Mediterranean .
 Sultan Mehmed II took the title ""Kaysar-i Ram" following the conquest of Constantinople by the Ottoman Turks in 1453 . He was determined to make the Ottoman Empire the heir of the Eastern Roman Empire .
 Orthodoxy now occupies a central position in the history and societies of Greece, Bulgaria, Russia, Serbia, and other countries . Orthodoxy is a major part of the history of Greece and Bulgaria .
 They brought to western Europe the far greater preserved and accumulated knowledge of their own civilization . Western Europe brought to Europe the greatest preserved knowledge of its own civilization.
 Wea Se, wpay & Copa merve To A mara xeuaie 4 pear ie ru x ha pase he Fp wide Queene. iadade wer where) & ta. doje towyse. oe 7 ikot de
 ACE, d oreevag.ct Ay wm Amins, indday wera wera dy day Of cides Agrenar.dt Medeis bay + Yyricee . a naprvela FegasaAwe A 5 eCayre.
 Pre-Islamic Arabia refers to the Arabian Peninsula prior to the rise of Islam in the 630s . The Arabian Peninsula was pre-Islamic before Islam was established in Islam .
 Bedouin people dominated the Arabian Peninsula just before the rise of Islam . Nomadic tribes were one of the major cultures in pre-Islamic Arabia .
 The difficult living conditions in the Arabian Peninsula created a heavy emphasis on family cooperation, further strengthening the clan system . While most modern Bedouins have abandoned their nomadic and tribal traditions for modern urban lifestyles .
 Mecca was an important center of trade in the area, as well as the location of the Kaaba (or Ka'ba), one of the most revered shrines in polytheistic Arabia . The most important of these cities was Mecca .
 The nature of this document as recorded by Ibn Ishag and transmitted by lbn Hisham is the subject of dispute among modern Western historians . The nature is disputed among modern historians and some historians .
 Religion in pre-Islamic Arabia was a mix of polytheism, Christianity, Judaism, and Iranian religions . Polytheism was a mixture of religion and religion .
 Before the rise of Islam, most Bedouin tribes practiced polytheism, most often in the form of animism . The Bedouins practiced animism in pre-Islamic Arabia .
 Animists believe that non-human entities (animals, plants, and inanimate objects or phenomena) possess a Spiritual essence . Animists say non-humans possess an essence that can only be found in the spirit .
 The most well-known monotheists were the Hebrews, although the Persians and Medes had also developed monotheism .
 Women had almost no legal status under tribal law in pre-Islamic Arabia . Women in Pre-Islamic Saudi Arabia were almost completely non-existent .
 In nomadic Bedouin tribes, tribal law determined women's rights . In the Christian and Jewish southern Arabian Peninsula, Christian and Hebrew edicts determined women’s rights .
 These areas of the body are known as ""awrah" and are referred to in both the Quran and the Hadith . These areas are known to be known as 'awrah' and referred to by the Quran .
 In many modern Islamic countries, Sharia combines politics and religion . In Afghanistan, the Taliban has been fighting for the country's first time since 2001 .
 Marriage by capture, or ""Ba‘al,"" was also a common pre-Islamic practice . Marriage by capturing, or "Ba’al," was a common practice .
 Under Islam, polygyny (the marriage of multiple women to one man) is allowed, but not widespread . Polygyny is not widespread in Islam, but is allowed to be married to multiple women .
 In Iran, a woman's husband may enter into temporary marriages in addition to permanent marriage . In some Islamic countries, such as Iran, the husband may have entered temporary marriages . In the U.S. it is illegal to marry a woman in the Islamic world .
 Muhammad stayed with his foster mother, Halimah bint Abi Dhuayb, and her husband until he was two years old . Muhammad stayed at the home of the couple until he had to be adopted by his mother .
 Khawla bint Hakim suggested that Muhammad should marry Sawda bint Zama or Aisha, daughter of Um Ruman and Abu Bakr of Mecca . After Khadija's death, Khawl bint Hijijim suggested Muhammad that should marry sawda b
 He was concerned with social unrest, injustice, widespread discrimination, fighting among tribes, and abuse of tribal authorities prevalent in preIslamic Arabia . He was also concerned with the ""ignorance of divine guidance"
 Muhammad's initial revelation was followed by a pause of three years during which he felt depressed . Muhammad felt depressed and further gave himself to prayers and spiritual practices . The initial revelation is followed by three years .
 She was followed by Muhammad's ten-year-old cousin Ali ion Abi Talib, close friend Abu Bakr, and adopted son Zaid . Muhammad's cousin, 10, followed by close friends Abu Bakr and Zaid, 10 .
 Zakat consists of soending a portion of one's wealth for the benefit of the poor or needy, like debtors or travelers . Zakat is a form of Zakat that involves giving money to the poor and needy .
 The fast is meant to allow Muslims to seek nearness to and look for forgiveness from God, to express their gratitude to and dependence on him . Muslims are also meant to express gratitude to God and to atone for their past sins .
 The main rituals of the Haj/ include walking seven times around the Kaaba, touching the Black Stone, and traveling seven times between Mount Safa and Mount Marwah, termed Sa'yee .
 Sumayyah bint Knhabbab, a slave of the prominent Meccan leader Abu Jahl, is famous as the first martyr of Islam . Her master killed her with a spear when she refused to give up her faith .
 Muhammad spent fourteen-days at Quba and traveled to Medina . He participated in his first Friday prayer on the way to the city . Medina was greeted cordially by its people .
 The pagan cities are—from north to south along the Red Sea —Qudayd, Jeddah, Mecca, Mecca and Nakhla, Taif, Dnul-Khalash, and San'a .
 Muhammad created the first Islamic state when he wrote the Constitution of Medina . Muhammad wrote a formal agreement between Muhammad and all of the significant tribes and families of Medina, including Muslims, Jews, Christians, and pagans . Discuss the rise of Islam under Muhammad .
 The Battle of Badr was a key battle in the early days of Islam . It was a turning point in Muhammad's struggle with his opponents among the Quraysh in Mecca . Muhammad was killed in the battle .
 Muhammad gathered an army of 10,000 followers and conquered the city of Mecca . After eight years of fighting with the Meccan tribes, Muhammad destroyed the pagan idols in the Kaaba .
 Banu Thagif adopted an anti-Meccan policy due to the decline of the prestige of Meccans . They were joined by the Banu thagif, who adopted anti-meccan policies due to decline of prestige .
 Muhammad defeated the Hawazin and Thagif tribes in the Battle of Hunayn . Muhammad defeated them in the battle . The battle took place in Hunayn, which was fought by Muhammad .
 The Rashidun Caliphate was led by Abu Bakr, then by Umar ion Khattab as the second caliph . Uthman lbn Affan as the third caliph, and Ali as the fourth caliph. Abu Bakr was the first caliph of the Rash
 Abu Bakr's general Khalid ion Walid defeated a competing prophet . After a series of successful campaigns, the Arabian peninsula united under the caliphate in Medina .
 The followers of all four Rashidun caliphs (Abu Bakr, Umar, Uthman, and Ali) became the majority Sunni sect . Followers of all the four of the Rashiduns became the most Sunni sect of Islam .
 Abbasid victors desecrated the tombs of the Umayyads in Syria, sparing only that of Umar II . Most of the remaining members of the family were tracked down and killed . The Abbasid family were killed in the massacre .
 Abd al-Rahman I established a kingdom in AlAndalus proclaiming his family to be the Umayyad Caliphate revived . One grandson of Hisham survived and established his own kingdom .
 The revival of the Umayyad Caliphate in Al-Andalus (what would become modern Spain) was called the Caliphate of Cérdoba, which lasted until 1031 . The Caliphate was known as the Cédoba and lasted until the end of the
 Abd-ar-Rahman Ill united al-Andalus and brought Christian kingdoms of the north under control through force and diplomacy .
 The library of AlHakam II was one of the largest libraries in the world, housing at least 400,000 volumes . Cérdoba possessed translations of ancient Greek texts into Arabic, Latin and Hebrew .
 Mosque Interior of the Mezquita is one of the finest examples of Umayyad architecture in Spain . Mosque interior of the mosque interior is a stunning example of the architecture of the city .
 According to one view, the Umayyads transformed the caliphate from a religious institution (during the Rashidun) to a dynastic one . A common view is that the caliphate was transformed into a dynasty .
 The expansion of the Arab Empire in the years following the Prophet Muhammad's death led to the creation of caliphates . The people of the Islamic world created numerous centers of culture and science with farreaching mercantile networks .
 Historians distinguish between two separate strands of converts of the time . Historian distinguish between the two strands of convertism .
 In Africa it soread along three routes—across the Sahara via Timbuktu, up the Nile Valley through the Sudan up to Uganda, and down East Africa through settlements such as Mombasa and Zanzibar .
 The Islamic Golden Age started with the rise of Islam and establishment of the first Islamic state in 622 . Identify the causes of, and developments during, the Islamic . Age was the beginning of Islam .
 The introduction of paper in the 10th century enabled Islamic scholars to easily write manuscripts . Arab scholars also saved classic works of antiquity by translating them into various languages .
 The Arabs assimilated the knowledge of the civilizations they had overrun, including the ancient Greek, Roman, Persian, Chinese, Indian, Egyptian, and Phoenician civilizations . The Arabs were the first to assimilate scientific knowledge of their conquests .
 Scientists advanced the fields of algebra, calculus, geometry, geometry and chemistry, biology, medicine, and astronomy . They advanced the field in algebra and calculus .
 Many forms of art flourished during the Islamic Golden Age, including ceramics, metalwork, textiles, illuminated manuscripts, woodwork, and calligraphy . Ceramics and metalwork were among the most popular works of art in Islamic art .
 During the Golden Age, the major Islamic capital cities of Baghdad, Cairo, and Cérdoba became the main intellectual centers for science, philosophy, medicine, and education . Baghdad was one of the main centers of science and philosophy .
 Islamic scholars also absorbed ideas from China and India, and in turn Arabic philosophic literature contributed to the development of modern European philosophy .
 Ibn Rushd lbn Rushd, also known by his Latinized name Averroés (April 14, 1126-December 10, 1198), was an Al-Andalus Muslim polymath . He was a master of Aristotelian philosophy, Islamic philosophy and Islamic
 Averroes was born in Cérdoba, Al-Andalus, present-day Spain, and died in Marrakesh, Morocco . He was also known as a writer and poet of Spain .
 Ibn Rushd and the scholar Ibn Sina played a major role in saving the works of Aristotle . Aristotle's ideas came to dominate the non-religious thought of the Christian and Muslim worlds .
 Persian scientist Muhammad ibn Musa al-Khwarizmi significantly developed algebra in in in his landmark text, Kitab al-Jabr wa-l-Muqabala . The term ""algebra"" is derived from the term "algebra" from which the term
 Arabesque in Islamic art is often used to symbolize the transcendent, indivisible, and infinite nature of God .
 By the 10th century, the Persians, who had converted to Islam, began weaving inscriptions on elaborately patterned silks . Hamdanid gold dinar 1Oth-century Syria .
 The Abbasid dynasty descended from Muhammad's youngest uncle, Abbas ibn Abd al-Muttalib . The dynasty takes its name from the youngest uncle of Muhammad Muhammad . Muhammad died at the age of 12 .
 Within 50 years, the Idrisids in the Maghreb, the Aghlabids of Ifriqiya, and the Tulunids and Ikshidids of Misr became independent in Africa . The Idrisidids were one of the last monarchs to become
 By the 860s governors in Egypt set up their own Tulunid Emirate, so named for its founder Ahmad ibn Tulun, starting a dynastic rule separate from the caliphate .
 Several factions challenged the Abbasids’ claims to the caliphate . The Fatimid Caliphate was ruled by the Abbasid dynasty until the 9th and 11th century .
 The Buyid Emirs possessed all of lraq and western Iran, and were quietly Shi'a in their sympathies . The caliph himself was under ""protection"" of the Buyid emirs . The Buyids Emirs were quiet Shi'A .
 The Germanic people were a diverse group of migratory tribes with common linguistic and cultural roots . They dominated much of Europe during the Iron Age .
 When the Roman Empire lost strength during the 5th century, Germanic peoples migrated into Great Britain and Western Europe . Their settlements became fixed territories .
 Various Germanic tribes migrated into Italy, Gaul, Spain, Spain and North Africa . Various German tribes migrated to Italy and Gaul .
 Germanic peoples periodically cleared forests to extend the range of their pasturage . The third (and the most frequent occurrence) often emigrated to other areas as they exhausted the immediately available resources .
 Bronze statue of Theoderic the Great, king of the Ostrogoths, by Peter Vischer the Elder at the tomb of Emperor Maximilian, in Innsbruck .
 The western provinces of the Roman Empire at any one time were administered by a separate independent imperial court . They were coequal with (or only nominally subordinate to) that administering the eastern provinces . Western Roman Empire was one of the most successful periods of the Empire .
 At around this time, the foederati, wno had been quartered on the Italians all of these years, had grown weary of this arrangement . At around . this . time, they had grown tired of this . arrangement .
 Theoderic had plotted to kill Odoacer while the two kings were feasting together in the imperial palace of Honorius ""Ad Laurentum"" when this plan went astray, he struck him on the collarbone . When this plot went awry, he killed the king .
 Emperor Zeno gave Theoderic the title of Patrician and the office of Magister militum (master of the soldiers) and even appointed him Roman Consul . Zeno also gave him the title and office of the Magisterium . He was also given the title Pat
 Bronze statue of Theoderic the Great (by Peter Vischer, 1512-13), from the monument of Emperor Maximilian | in the Court Church at Innsbruck . Bronze statue was from 1512 to 13 .
 Longship allowed the Norse to ""go Viking"" (on an expedition), which might explain why this type of ship has become almost synonymous with the concept of Vikings . Longship was the longship that allowed the Vikings to go Viking .
 Christianity spread throughout the early Roman Empire despite persecutions due to conflicts with the pagan state religion . Monastic communities were centers for learning and preservation of classical culture . When the Western Roman Empire fell in 476, the Catholic Church competed with Arian Christians .
 Catholicism spread throughout Europe to the Irish, English, Franks, and Goths . Once the cultural and political boundaries of Rome were weakened, Catholicism spread across Europe .
 In 313, the struggles of the early church were lessened by the legalization of Christianity by the Emperor Constantine I In 380, under Emperor Theodosius I, Christianity became the state religion of the Roman Empire by the decree of the emperor . Christianity would persist until the fall of the
 After the fall of the Western Roman Empire in 476, the Catholic faith competed with Arianism for the conversion of the barbarian tribes . The Catholic Church tn the Middle Ages competed with the Arianic faith .
 A unique culture developed around the Irish Sea, consisting of what today would be called Wales and Ireland . Beginning in the 5th century, the culture developed in Wales, Ireland and Wales .
 Irish missionaries such as Saints Columba and Columbanus spread this Christianity to Scotland and the Continent .
 During the lst century of the church , the Roman capital became recognized as a Christian center of exceptional importance . The Roman capital of Rome was recognized as an important Christian center .
 After the fall of the Western Roman Empire, barbarian tribes converted to Arian Christianity or Catholicism . Clovis, king of the Franks, was first important barbarian ruler to convert to Catholicism rather than Arianism .
 This attack soawned the protracted civil and ecclesiastical strife in Germany and Italy Known as the Investiture Controversy . This attack was the result of a protracted civil war in Italy and Germany .
 The conflict ended in 1122, when Emperor Henry V and Pope Calixtus Il agreed on the Concordat of Worms . The Concordat gave the emperors a limited role in selecting bishops . It was the first time the conflict between the royal and spiritual powers ended .
 Such powerful popes as Alexander Ill, Innocent Il, Gregory IX and Innocent IV wielded a primacy over the church that attempted to vindicate a jurisdictional Supremacy over emperors and kings in temporal and spiritual affairs .
 Benedict's Rule is a book of precepts written by Benedict of Nursia (c.0550) for monks living communally under the authority of an abbot . Certain Christian religious orders have adopted a lifestyle of poverty, traveling, and living in urban areas .
 Francis' first rule was a collection of Scriptural passages emphasizing the duty of poverty . Their life was extremely ascetic, though such practices were not prescribed by the first rule .
 From 1309 to 1377, the seat of the papacy resided in Avignon, France, rather than Rome . Learning Objective Explain the events that led to the Western Schism, as well .
 Urban VI was born Bartolomeo Prignano, the Archbishop of Bari, in 1378 . Urban VI proved suspicious, reformist, and prone to violent outbursts of temper . Many cardinals who had elected him soon regretted their decision and moved to Anagni
 Robert took the name Clement VII and reestablished a papal court in Avignon . He re-established the papal palace in the French city . Robert became Clement VII .
 Owain Glyndwr's rebellion in Wales recognized the Avignon claimant . France, Aragon, Castile and Leén, Cyprus, Burgundy, Savoy and Savoy recognized the claimant .
 A council was convened at Constance by Pisan pope John XXIill in 1414 to resolve the issue . The council was held in Constance at the end of 1414 .
 Gregory XIl, Innocent VII's successor in Rome, ensured the legitimacy of any election . This was endorsed by Gregory XI l, Innocent VIII, the successor of Innocent VII in Rome . Innocent XIl was Innocent VIII's successor to Innocent VII .
 Archbishops loyal to Benedict XIII subsequently elected Antipope Benedict XIV . But the Western Schism was by then practically over . Three followers of Benedict XIII simultaneously elected Clement VIII .
 Clement Vill resigned in 1429 and apparently recognized Martin V Habemus Papam at the Council of Constance, 1415 .
 The Pope's motivation for crowning Charlemagne was to give the papacy and the church implicit authority over the empire . With this act Leo set a precedent, subsequent popes would do throughout the reign of the Holy Roman Empire . The two empires remained independent and continued to fight for
 Charlemagne's coronation as emperor had the effect of setting up two separate empires and two separate claims to imperial authority . The coronation was intended to represent the continuation of the unbroken line of emperors .
 Charlemagne was determined to improve education and religion and bring Europe out of turmoil . To do this he launched a thirty-year military campaign of conquests that united Europe and spread Christianity . Discuss the political and territorial achievements of the French king .
 First he conquered the Lombards in Italy, Supporting Pope Adrian I . In Saxon Wars, spanning thirty years and eighteen battles, he conquered Saxony and proceeded to convert the conquered to Christianity .
 A group of Germanic tribes first mentioned as living near the North Sea coast of what is now Germany (Old Saxony) in late Roman times . Saxons were first mentioned in Roman times as living in the area .
 Engria was between these two kingdoms, and to the north, at the base of the Jutland peninsula, was Nordalbingjia . Engria became Engria in the middle of the kingdom .
 e Charlemagne is known for his many reforms, including the economy, education, and government administration . His rule spurred the Carolingian Renaissance, a period of energetic cultural and intellectual activity within the Western church .
 Charlemagne established a new monetary standard, the livre carolinienne, based upon a pound of silver, as well as a universal accounting system . It was based on a pound, and was based upon an accounting system and a monetary standard .
 Charlemagne expanded the church's power structure, advancing the skill and moral quality of the clergy, standardizing liturgical practices, improving on the basic tenets of the faith and moral .
 Charlemagne's improvements on governance have been lauded by historians for instigating increased central control, efficient bureaucracy, accountability, and cultural renaissance . Historians have praised the French king's reforms in his reign .
 During this period, the /ivre and the sou were counting units; only the denier was a coin of the realm . The denier coin was the first coin to be found in the world .
 The gatehouse is an example of the Carolingian architectural style, a first, albeit isolated classical movement in architecture . Kloster Lorsch Lorch Abbey gatehouse, 800, is a first of the first of its kind in architecture.
 Charles Martel was the de facto ruler of Francia who defeated the Umayyad Caliphate in the Battle of Tours . Explain the significance of Martel's victory at the battle of Tours in this article .
 The Battle of Tours was historically significant because it stopped the advance of the Muslim empire, which had successfully conquered much of Europe . Many historians believe that had Charles failed, no power in Europe would have been able to halt Islamic expansion .
 After Carloman retired to religious life, Pepin became the sole ruler of the Franks . He continued to consolidate and expand his power to become one of the most powerful and successful rulers of his time .
 Battle of Tours pitted Frankish and Burgundian forces against an army of the Umayyad Caliphate led by 'Abdul Rahman AI Ghafigi, GovernorGeneral of al-Andalus .
 Pope Gregory III offered Charles the Roman consulship in exchange for becoming the defender of the Holy See . Charles declined the offer, but was offered the Roman Consulship .
 Charles subsequently extended his authority in the south . Abdul Rahman Al Ghafigi was killed, and Charles extended his power in the region . Charles also extended his control of the area .
 Charles took the offensive after Tours, destroying fortresses at Agde, Béziers, and Maguelonne, and engaging Islamic forces at Nimes, though ultimately failing to recover Narbonne or to fully reclaim Narbonensis .
 Childeric II]. was to be the last Merovingian monarch, as figurehead king of the Franks . In 743, they ended the Frankish interregnum by choosing Childeric . II], who was to . be the . figurehead monarch of the . Franks .
 Charlemagne was crowned Emperor by Pope Leo III at Rome in 800 in 800 . He was the greatest Carolingian monarch .
 The traditional Frankish practice of dividing inheritances among heirs was not given up by the Carolingian emperors . The concept of the indivisibility of the Empire was also accepted . The Carolingic emperors did not give up the practice .
 By this treaty, Lothair received northern Italy and a long stretch of territory from the North Sea to the Mediterranean, essentially along the valleys of the Rhine and the Rh6ne . This territory includes the regions of Lorraine, Alsace, Burgundy, and Proven
 He soon ceded Italy to his eldest son, Louis, and remained in his new kingdom, engaging in alternate quarrels and reconciliations with his brothers .
 In 800, Pope Leo III crowned Charlemagne Emperor of the Romans, reviving the title in Western Europe after more than three centuries . The Carolingian Empire came to be the Holy Roman Empire .
 After Charlemagne died in 814, the imperial crown was disputed among the Carolingian rulers of Western Francia and Eastern Francia . First the western king (Charles the Bald) and then the eastern attaining the prize .
 Otto I, Holy Roman Emperor Henry the Fowler died in 936, but his descendants, the Liudolfing dynasty, would continue to rule the eastern kingdom for roughly a century . Otto I was the Holy Roman emperor of 936 .
 Upon Henry's death, Otto |, his son and designated successor, was elected King in Aachen in 936 . Otto was elected king in 935 after his father's death .
 Byzantine princess Theophanu married Otto's son, Otto Il, in April 972 . To resolve this conflict, the princess was married to Otto Il's son .
 The Holy Roman Empire was made up of many small principalities governed by local rulers . Local rulers had authority over their land that mostly superseded the power of the emperor . Explain the relationship between the Holy Roman Emperor and the other German nobles .
 The emperor could not simply issue decrees and govern autonomously over the empire . His power was severely restricted by the various local leaders . The emperor was severely limited by the local leaders.
 The power of the emperor declined over time until the individual territories operated almost like de facto sovereign states . The emperor's power declined over the years until the territories operated as de facto states .
 Imperial Diet was the legislative body of the Holy Roman Empire and theoretically superior to the emperor himself . It included positions called prince-electors who elected the prospective emperor . The Imperial Diet also included positions known as prince electors .
 After the reign of Otto I, the centralized power of the emperor began to fade . Local rulers, as well as the Catholic Church, gained more and more power in relation to the emperor .
 The 1232 document marked the first time that the German dukes were called domini terree, owners of their lands, a remarkable change in terminology as well . The document was written in 1232 .
 The Hohenstaufen-ruled Holy Roman Empire and Kingdom of Sicily were ruled by the 12th century . They ruled the kingdom of Sicily and the Kingdom of Italy .
 Earlier, the empire's strength relied on its own lands, the so-called Re/chsgut, which always belonged to the king of the day and included many imperial cities . Now, the Empire's strength relies heavily on the land and its cities, rather than the land .
 The direct governance of the Re/chsgut no longer matched the needs of either the king or the dukes . The Re/Chsgut was ruled out of control by the king and the duke .
 Sigismund of Luxemburg (king 1410, emperor 14331437) and Frederick III of Habsburg neglected the old core lands of the empire and mostly resided in their own lands . It therefore proved somewhat damaging that Sigismond of Luxembourg and Frederick . III neglected the
 Territories in which secular authority was held by a clerical dignitary, such as an archbishop, bishop, or abbot . Territories held by secular dignitary such as archbishop or bishop .
 e Free imperial cities were subject only to the jurisdiction of the emperor . Examples are the princearchbishoprics of Cologne, Trier, and Mainz . Examples include Trier and Cologne .
 A brief but significant struggle over investiture also occurred between Henry | of England and Pope Paschal Il in 1103-1107 . The issue also played a minor role in the struggles between church and state in France .
 It was essential for a ruler or nobleman to appoint (or sell the office to) someone who would remain loyal to him .
 The sale of church offices was an important source of income for leaders among the nobility, who themselves owned the land and by charity allowed the building of churches . A substantial amount of wealth and land was usually associated with the office of a bishop .
 Anglo-Saxons were comprised of people from Germanic tribes who migrated to Great Britain from continental Europe . They inhabited the island from 4501066 to 1066 .
 The 9th century saw the rise of the Wessex kingdom, especially with King Alfred the Great . During the course of the 10th century, the West Saxon kings extended their power first over Mercia, then over the southern Danelaw, and finally over Northumbria .
 Hadrian's Wall ran from the banks of the River Tyne near the North Sea to the Solway Firth on the lrish Sea . The wall was the northern limit of the Roman Empire .
 Harold faced invasions by his brother Tostig, the Norwegian King Harald III of Norway, and Duke William II of Normandy . e Harold's army marched to confront William at the Battle of Hastings on October 14, 1066 .
 The Norman conquest of England was the 11th-century invasion and occupation of England by an army of Norman, Breton, and French soldiers led by Duke William II of Normandy, later styled William the Conqueror . The invasion of England took place in 11th century during the invasion of
 The Bayeux Tapestry depicts the loss of the Anglo-Saxon troops to the Norman forces . The controversial panel depicts Harold II's death in the controversial panel .
 After stating the assessment of a manor, the record sets forth the amount of arable land, and the number of plough teams available for working it, with the additional number that might be employed . Then the river-meadows, woodland, pasture and pasture, fisheries , water
 Henry II succeeded as the first Angevin king of England after Stephen's death in 1154 . Henry II was also the Count of Anjou in northern France .
 When Richard died, his brother John—Henry’s fifth and only surviving son—took the throne . Over the course of King John's reign, a combination of higher taxes, unsuccessful wars, and conflict with the pope had made him unpopular .
 John had lost most of his ancestral lands in France to King Philip Il in 1204 . He struggled to regain them for many years raising extensive taxes on the barons to fight a war that ended in expensive failure in 1214 .
 He died of dysentery contracted whilst on campaign in eastern England in 1216 . Supporters of his son Henry Ill went on to achieve victory over Louis and the rebel barons the following year .
 The root causes of the conflict can be found in the demographic, economic, and social crises of 14thcentury Europe . Discuss the three phases of conflict in the Hundred Years' War . Joan of Arc's role in the conflict is discussed in detail .
 Treaty of Brétigny was signed on May 25, 1360 . King Edward Ill of England and King John II of France signed the treaty .
 After the Magna Carta failed to prevent the Baron Wars, King John and his son King Henry Ill's reigns were characterized by numerous rebellions and civil wars, often provoked by incompetence and mismanagement in government . The 13th century was characterized by rebellions, civil wars and
 The reign of Henry III's son Edward was rather more successful than his own . Edward's reign was one of the most successful of the reigns .
 The Edwardian War was driven by Edward Ill's ambition to maintain sovereignty in Aquitaine and assert his claim as the rightful king of France by unseating his rival, Philip VI of France . Edward Ill wanted to maintain his claim to the throne of France and claim to have unseated
 English, and later British, monarchs would continue to claim the French throne until 1800 . English monarchs claimed the throne of France until after 1800 .
 Joan said she received visions of the Archangel Michael, Saint Margaret, and Saint Catherine of Alexandria instructing her to support Charles Vil and recover France from English domination late in the Hundred Years' War . Joan said the visions were of Saint Catherine and Saint Michael .
 Joan was captured at Compiegne by the English-allied Burgundian faction on May 23, 1430 . Joan died in 1430 after being captured by the French army .
 A court authorized by Pope Callixtus Ill examined the trial, pronounced her innocent, and declared her a martyr . Twenty-five years after her execution, she was declared a martyr by an inquisitorial court .
 Christian pilgrimages were stopped by Seljugq Turks in 1071 . Christians were permitted to visit parts of the Holy Land until 1071, when they were forced to stop .
 Seljugq Empire was a medieval Turko-Persian Sunni Muslim empire . It controlled a vast area stretching from the Hindu Kush to eastern Anatolia . It was also from Central Asia to the Persian Gulf . The Selugq Empire is one of the world's largest medieval empires .
 Reconquista (recapture of the Iberian Peninsula from the Muslims) was well underway by the 11th century . Alfonso VI of Leén and Castile retook Toledo from Muslim rule in 1085 .
 It became acceptable for the pope to utilize knights in the name of Christendom, not only against political enemies of the papacy, but also against Al-Andalus, or, theoretically, against the Seljug dynasty in the east .
 Historians have argued that the desire to impose Roman church authority in the east may have been one of the goals of the Crusades . Urban Il, who launched the First Crusade, never refers to such a goal in his letters on crusading .
 Pope Gregory VII had called for the milites Christi to go to Byzantium'’s aid . In response to the defeat at Manzikert and subsequent Byzantine losses in Anatolia in 1074, Pope Gregory VIII called for them to help .
 Seljuk Empire covered portions of modern-day Afghanistan, Armenia, Azerbaijan, China, Egypt, Georgia, Iran, lrag, Israel, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Lebanon and Nagorno-Karabakh, Oman, Palestine .
 The First Crusade, called for by Pope Urban Il, was the first of a number of crusades that attempted to recapture the Holy Lands . The Crusades were first of the crusades to attempt to reclaim the Holy Land .
 Pope Urban II was Pope from March 12, 1088, to his death in 1099 . He is best known for initiating the First Crusade . Urban II is the Pope of the Roman Catholic Church .
 The First Crusade, called for by Pope Urban Il, was the first of a number of crusades intended to recapture the Holy Lands . The Crusades were intended to reclaim the Holy Land .
 On June 7, the Crusaders reached Jerusalem, which had been recaptured from the Seljugs by the Fatimids only the year before . The Crusaders captured Jerusalem, capturing the city on June 7 .
 In the ensuing panic, the defenders abandoned the walls of the city at both ends, allowing the Crusaders to finally enter . The Crusaders finally entered the city in a panic .
 A depiction of the capture of Jerusalem in 1099 from a medieval manuscript . Capture of Jerusalem was captured in the early 1099 .
 The Second Crusade was started in 1147 in response to the fall of Edessa the previous year to the forces of Zengi . Edessa was founded during the First Crusade . Explain the successes and failures of the Second Crusades .
 The Second Crusade was led by two European kings— Louis VII of France and Conrad III of Germany . Louis VII led the Second Crusade . Conrad III led the crusade in Germany .
 The German and French armies took separate routes to Anatolia, fighting skirmishes along the way . Both were defeated separately by the Seljug Turks .
 Louis and Conrad and the remnants of their armies eventually reached Jerusalem and participated in an illadvised attack on Damascus in 1148 . e The Second Crusade was a failure for the Crusaders and a great victory for the Muslims . e
 Conrad was the First German king of the Hohenstaufen dynasty . He led troops in the Second Crusade . Conrad was one of the first German kings of the 12th century .
 The Second Crusade was announced by Pope Eugene Ill, and was the first of the crusades to be led by European kings . Louis VII of France and Conrad III of Germany had help from a number of other European nobles .
 Both armies were defeated by the Seljug Turks . After crossing Byzantine territory into Anatolia, both armies were separately defeated . Both armies crossed the border to Anatolia .
 Joscelin Il had tried to take back Edessa, but Nur ad-Din defeated him in November 1146 . Nurad-Adin defeated Josclin Il in the Battle of Edessa .
 Conrad Conrad wanted to travel overland through Hungary, as the sea route was politically impractical because Roger Il, king of Sicily, was an enemy of Conrad . The Germans had already decided to go overland, and the sea was too dangerous .
 Ottokar III of Styria joined Conrad at Vienna, and Géza II of Hungary allowed them to pass through unharmed . Conrad's enemy allowed them through without injury .
 Conrad decided not to wait for the French, and marched towards Iconium, capital of the Seljug Sultanate of Ram . Conrad marched to Iconium in Asia Minor .
 King Henry Il of England and King Philip Il of France ended their conflict with each other to lead a new crusade . Spurred by religious zeal, King Henry led a crusade in England and France . King Henry I of England led the crusade .
 Philip and Frederick's successor, Leopold V, Duke of Austria, left the Holy Land in August 1191 . After the Crusaders had driven the Muslims from Acre, Philip left Acre in 1191. The Crusaders were driven out of Acre .
 As in the Second Crusade, these disagreements and divisions within the European armies led to a weakening of the Christian forces . The Second Crusade was the result of divisions within European armies .
 King Louis VII and Conrad III led armies from France and Germany to Jerusalem and Damascus without winning any major victories . Conrad III and Louis VII led armies to Damascus and Jerusalem without major victories.
 According to Benedict of Peterborough, Pope Urban III died of deep sadness on October 19, 1187, upon hearing news of the defeat . Pope Urban died of a deep sadness upon hearing the news of his defeat .
 Innocent IIl began preaching what became the Fourth Crusade in 1200 in France, England, and Germany, but primarily in France . Innocent Il began the crusade in 1200 .
 In August 1203, Alexios Angelos was crowned co-emperor (as Alexios IV Angelos) with Crusader support . Following clashes outside Constantinople, he was crowned king of the Ottoman Empire .
 Feudalism was a Set of legal and military customs in medieval Europe that was determined by the ownership of land . Medieval Life 11.7.1: Medieval Life . Medieval life is written in Medieval Europe and written in medieval times .
 Below the king in the feudal pyramid was a tenant-in-chief, who was a vassal of the king . The tenant in-chief was the tenant-to-chief .
 Explorers opened up new trade routes to the south of Africa, India, and America due to the dominant position of the Ottoman Empire impeding trade routes . List the factors that led to a change in commerce and trade in the Late Middle Ages .
 Ottoman Empire Empire founded by Oghuz Turks under Osman Bey in northwestern Anatolia in 1299 . dissolved in 1923 in the aftermath of World War |, forming the new state of Turkey .
 At the same time, wealthy magnate consumers in England began to use the new fairs as a way to buy goods like spices, wax, preserved fish, and foreign cloth in bulk .
 Market place at Bridgnorth, one of many medieval English towns to be granted the right to hold fairs, in this case annually on the feast of the Translation of St. St. Stephen .
 During the High Middle Ages, the population of Europe grew from 35 to 80 million between 1000 and 1347 . 90% of the European population remained rural peasants gathered into small communities of manors or villages .
 Towns grew up around castles and were often fortified by walls in response to disorder and raids . Towns were fortified around castles, fortified with walls, walls and walls . Towns grew around castles around castles .
 Women were subordinate to men, in both the peasant and noble classes . Women were expected to ensure the smooth running of the household .
 In Europe, young men proceeded to university when they had completed their study of the trivium . The trivium is the preparatory arts of grammar, rhetoric, and dialectic or logic . The guadrivium was the study of arithmetic, geometry, music, and astronomy .
 Other works were more clearly pure history, such as Otto von Freising's Gesta Friderici Imperatoris, detailing the deeds of Emperor Frederick Barbarossa, or William of Malmesbury's work on the kings of England .
 Astronomy advanced following translation of Ptolemy's A/magest from Greek into Latin in the late 12th century . Astronomy was advanced following the translation of the A/Magest into Latin from Greek .
 After the fall of the Roman Empire, the Middle Ages was a time of little scientific and artistic advancement until the renaissance of the 12th century . Increased contact with the Islamic world and Byzantium revived the arts . Write about how these advancements were influenced by certain technological advancements and changes in
 William of Ockham insisted that the world of reason and faith had to be kept apart . This new approach paved the way for new approaches to scientific speculation, and this new approach is now being used in science .
 After the renaissance of the 12th century, medieval Europe saw a radical change in the rate of new inventions, innovations in the ways of managing traditional means of production, and economic growth . The renaissance of medieval Europe was a major period of innovation and innovation in medieval Europe .
 The period saw major technological advances, including the adoption of gunpowder, the invention of vertical windmills and mechanical clocks . In northern European countries, Gothic architecture remained the norm, and Gothic cathedral was further embellished .
 His E/ements is one of the most influential works in the history of mathematics . His work was one of many influential works of mathematics.
 During the 13th century, scholastics expanded the natural philosophy of these texts by commentaries (associated with teaching in the universities) and independent treatises .
 It came from central Asia on rat fleas living on black rats that were regular passengers on merchant ships . The fleas traveled towards Europe as people fled from one area to another . Fleas were living on the black rats and traveled to Europe .
 The Great Famine of 1315-1317 and subsequent malnutrition in the population likely caused weakened immunity and susceptibility to disease . It is thought to have led to weakened immunity, vulnerability to disease and weakened immunity .
 Medieval doctors thought the plague was created by air corrupted by humid weather, decaying unburied bodies, and fumes produced by poor sanitation . e As people struggled to understand the causes of the Black Death, renewed religious fervor and fanaticism bloomed in its wake .
 The practice of self-inflicted pain, especially with a whip, became popular during the time of the Black Death . The great population loss wrought by the plague brought favorable results to the surviving peasants in England and Western Europe .
 The plague initially soread to humans near the Black Sea and then outwards to the rest of Europe as a result of people fleeing from one area to another . The plague first soread in the area of Black Sea .
 The followers would fall to their knees and scourge themselves, gesturing with their free hands to indicate their sin . They would strike themselves rhythmically to songs, known as Geiss/erlieder, until blood flowed . Followers would fall down to the knees to scourge themselves .
 These regulated what people (particularly of the peasant class) could wear so that peasants did not begin to dress and act as higher class members with their increased wealth . nobles were able to ensure that peasants didn't begin to act and dress as higher-class members with increased wealth.
 Rurik and his followers likely originated in Scandinavia and were related to Norse Vikings . The Primary Chronicle is one of the few written documents available that tells us how Rurk came to power .
 Local leaders most likely invited Rurik to establish order in the Ladoga region around 862, beginning a powerful legacy of Varangian leaders .
 The capital of Kievan Rus' moved from Novgorod to Kiev after Rurik's successor, Oleg, captured this southern city . The capital was moved to Kiev in order to protect the city .
 The Invitation of the Varangians is commonly regarded as the starting point of official Russian history . This moment in history is known as the Invitation . It is commonly seen as the start of official Russia history .
 The expansion and shifting borders of Kievan Rus' become apparent when looking at this map, which includes the two centers of power in Novgorod and Kiev . The expansion becomes apparent in this map of the area .
 Vladimir became the ruler of Kievan Rus' after overthrowing his brother Yaropolk in 978 . Outline the shift from pagan culture to Orthodox Christianity under his rule .
 Vladimir | formed an alliance with Basil Il of the Byzantine Empire and married his sister Anna in 988 . Vladimir | officially changed the state religion to Orthodox Christianity and destroyed pagan temples and icons .
 He built the first stone church in Kiev in 989, called the Church of the Tithes . The church was built in Kiev, Kiev, by the same name as the first in Kiev .
 In this version of the story, Viadimir demanded a royal marriage in return for his military help . The story goes back to the original version of this version . In the new version, the story is said to have taken place in a different state of state .
 In either version of events, Vladimir vied for the hand of Anna, the sister of the ruling Byzantine emperor, Basil Il. In either case, Vladimir and Anna were married to Basil Il .
 Monument of Saint Viadimir in Kiev sits close to the site of the original Baptism of Kiev . Monument sits near the site where the Baptism took place .
 Viadimir became a symbol of the Russian Orthodox religion . When he died in 1015 his body parts were distributed throughout the country to serve as holy relics . His body parts became a holy relic of Russia .
 Yaroslav the Wise came to power after a bloody civil war between brothers . Outline the key elements of Yaroslav's reign and cultural influence . Yaroslav came to the throne in 12th century .
 He captured the Kievan throne because of the devotion of the Novgorodian and Varangian troops to his cause . He captured his throne because the devotion to the troops to him was strong enough .
 Grand Prince Yaroslav Yaroslav was the first Kievan ruler to codify legal customs into the Pravda Yaroslava . He codified legal customs . Yaroslav became the first ruler of Yaroslavoslavoslavia in the early 16th century . He was also the
 He bolstered borders and encouraged political alliances with other major European powers during his reign . He also bolstered borders with other European powers .
 Yaroslav I was set as vice-regent of Novgorod in 1010, as befitted a senior heir to the throne . Yaroslav was the son of Yaroslav II, who died in 11th century . He was set to be the heir of the throne in 101
 Building the Saint Sophia Cathedral and the first monasteries in Russia, named Saint George and Saint lrene . Building the St Sophia Cathedral . Also building the first monasteries in Russia named Saint George and Saint Lrene .
 Founding a library and a school at the Saint Sophia Cathedral . Encouraging the translation of Greek texts into Church Slavonic .
 Developing a more established hierarchy within the Russian Orthodox Church . Establishing a statute outlining the rights of the clergy and establishing bishops .
 First Mongol attempt to capture Kievan territories occurred in 1223 at the Battle of the Kalka River . Kiev was sacked and taken in 1240, starting a long era of Mongol rule in the region .
 He was born around 1288 and died in either 1340 or 1341, still holding the title of Grand Prince of Vladimir . He was still holding a title as Grand Prince still held the title .
 Kievan Rus’ 1220-1240 map illustrates power dynamics at play during the 13th century shortly before lvan | was born .
 Sarai, the capital of the Golden Horde, sat to the southeast of Sarai . Moscow was tucked up in the northern forests of Viadimir-Suzdal . Sarai was tucked away in the southern part of Russia .
 Ivan IIl became Grand Prince of Moscow in 1462 and proceeded to refuse the Tatar yoke, collect surrounding lands, and consolidate political power around Moscow . The Grand Duchy of Moscow 12.2.1: The Formation of Russia .
 e Ivan Ill overtook Novgorod, along with his four brothers’ landholdings, which began a process consolidating power under the Grand Prince of Moscow . i Ivan Ill was the first prince of Rus’ to style himself as the Tsar in the grand tradition of
 Vasili Ill followed in his father's footsteps and continued a regime of consolidating land and practicing domestic intolerance . He continued to practice domestic intolerance that suppressed any attempts to disobey the seat of Moscow .
 Ivan III Vasilyevich, also known as Ivan the Great, was born in Moscow in 1440 . Became Grand Prince of Moscow in 1462 . Ivan Ill and the End of the Golden Horde were the result of the Mongol invasion of 1466 .
 Ivan lll held the title of Grand Prince of Moscow between 1462 and 1505 . He was known as the Russian Grand Prince . He died in 1515 .
 Ivan the Great refused the Tatar yoke as the Mongol Empire’s stranglehold on Rus’ lands has been called . Ivan refused the Mongol yoke in 1476 . Ivan's most substantial accomplishment was refusing the Tatra yoke .
 Moscow refused to pay its normal Golden Horde taxes starting in 1480 . Knan Ahmed waged war against the city after refusing to pay the taxes . The city was defeated by the city's forces .
 Moscow’s primary rival, Novgorod, became its first order of business . Ivan the Great became the first Russian ruler to conquer the city . The city became a major rival to Moscow's main rival in the Russian Empire .
 Ivan III captured his greatest rival city of Moscow . Ivan III also collected his four brothers’ local lands over the course of his rule .
 Ivan III also levied his political, economic, and military might over the course of his reign to gain control of Yaroslavl, Rostov, Tver, and Vyatka . Ivan III formed one of the most unified political formations in the region since Vladimir the Great .
 Ivan IIl’s power was partly due to his alliance with Russian Orthodoxy . The alliance created an atmosphere of anti-Catholicism and stifled the chance to build more powerful western alliances .
 This piece was created by a contemporary artist and depicts Vasili Ill as a scholar and leader . Vasili Il was a leader and scholar of the Crimean War .
 Vasili Ill also followed in his father’s oppressive footsteps . Portrait of Vasili ill is published by the Portrait Gallery of Artworks .
 Ivan IV is often known as Ivan the Terrible, even though the more correct translation is lvan the Fearsome . Learning Objective Outline the key points of Ivan IV's policies and examine the positive and negative aspects of his rule . Examine the positives and negatives aspects of Ivan
 Ivan IV was the first Rus’ prince to title himself ""Tsar of All the Russias" beginning the long tradition of rule under the tsars . Ivan IV became the first Russian prince to call himself the Tsar of the Rus' prince .
 The persecution of the boyars during Ivan IV's reign began under the harsh regulations of the oprichnina . The boyars were persecuted by Ivan IV during the reign of Ivan IV .
 Ivan IV was born in 1530 to Vasili Ill and Elena Glinskaya . Ivan IV is one of the most powerful men in Russian history .
 e Developed the Zemsky Sobor, a Russian parliament, along with the council of the nobles, known as the Chosen Council . This army would help him in future military conquests . Developed an army that would be used in future conquests of Russia .
 Regulated the Church more effectively with the Council of the Hundred Chapters, which regulated Church traditions and the hierarchy . Regulated Church tradition and hierarchy. Regulated church traditions and hierarchy .
 Established the Moscow Print Yard in 1553 and brought the first printing press to Russia . Established in the 15th century and brought Russia's first printing presses to Russia. Established a printing yard in Moscow .
 This new proclamation also started a wave of persecution and against the boyars . The boyars were also persecuted for their beliefs . This proclamation was the first proclamation of a new proclamation .
 Ivan IV executed, exiled, or forcibly removed hundreds of boyars from power . Ivan IV's legacy solidifies his legacy as a paranoid and unstable ruler .
 The troubles did not cease after the famine subsided . The troubles didn't cease after it subsided.
 Feodor Ivanovich's younger brother was reportedly stabbed to death before the Tsar’s death . Some people still believed he had fled and was alive, but some people believed he was alive .
 Shuisky was still on the throne, both the second False Dmitri and the son of the Polish king, Wtadystaw, were attempting to take control of the kingdom . Shuisky's son Shuisky died in the early years of his reign .
 The new Romanov Tsar, Michael I, quickly had the second False Dmitri's son and wife killed, to stifle further uprisings . The new Tsar Michael I had the son and his wife killed .
 Romanov name stayed in power until the abdication of Tsar Nicholas Il in 1917 . The Romanov family ruled Russia until the death of Nicholas Romanov in 1918 .
 The Romanovs were exiled during the Time of Troubles but brought back when Patriarch Philaret and his son Michael were politically advantageous . Explain the rise of power of the House of Romanov and the first major Russian Tsars .
 e Alexis | successfully navigated Russia through multiple uprisings and wars and created long-lasting political bureaus . Michael | was the first Romanov Tsar and began a long line of powerful rulers . e Alexis was born in Russia .
 Patriarch Philaret's son, Michael |, was voted into power by the zemsky sober in July 1613, ending a long dynastic dispute . Michael was the son of Philaret, who died in 1613 .
 Alexis Alexis | of Russian tn the 1670s . His policies toward the Church and peasant uprisings created new legal codes and traditions that lasted well into the 19th century . Alexis was one of Russia's most influential statesmen .
 Ivan V and Peter shared the throne until Ilvan’s death in 1696 . Peter and Ivan V shared the kingdom until Ivan V died of his death . Ivan V was the last monarch to die of his illness .
 High Middle Ages was a time between the 1Oth and 12th centuries when the core cultural and social characteristics of the Middle Ages were firmly set .
 At its greatest extent it included all of modern-day Mongolia, China, parts of Burma, Romania, Pakistan, Siberia, Ukraine, Belarus, Cilicia, Anatolia, Georgia, Armenia, Persia, Persia and much of Russia .
 It also ensured that it was easy to create an army in short time and gave the khans access to the daughters of local leaders . The khans were able to create a small army in a short time .
 At its height these trade routes stretched between Europe, Persia, and China . Rersia eS ee we india . The Silk Road at its height .
 Marco Polo's Tatar costume would have been popular in regions in and around Russian, Eurasia, and Turkey . This style of dress, with the fur hat, long coat, and saber, was popular in Russia and Eurasia . This route allowed commodities such as silk, pepper
 After long rivalries and civil war, Kublai Khan took power in 1271 when he established the Yuan Dynasty . Civil war ensued again as he sought unsuccessfully to regain control of Genghis Khan's other descendants .
 By the time of Kublai's death in 1294, the Mongol Empire had fractured into four separate empires, or khanates . The Mongol Empire was one of the largest empires in the world .
 Genghis Khan led merciless conquests of the Western Xia Dynasty, the Jin Dynasty in 1234, the Kara-Khitan Khanate, and the Knwarazmian Empire . He led the Kara Khanate and the . Knwarzmian . Empire .
 The Yassa outlawed the theft of property, fighting amongst the population, and hunting animals during the breeding season, among many other things . e Forbidding the selling of women was also outlawed in the empire .
 Ghengis allowed his wives to sit at the table with him and encouraged them to voice their opinions . Appointed his adopted brother as supreme judge, ordering him to keep detailed records of the empire .
 Muslims, Buddhists, and Christians from Manchuria, North China, India, and Persia were more likely to acquiesce to Mongol intrusions and takeovers . e Encouraging literacy and adopting the Uyghur script, which would form the Empire's Uyghan-
 Genghis Khan began the conquest of the neighboring Jin Dynasty in 1211 . The Jin Dynasty would finally be successfully conquered by his son, Ogedei Khan, in 1234 .
 The Mongol Empire's conquest of the Knwarazmian Empire saw huge numbers of civilians massacred and enslaved . Huge numbers of people were massacred or enslaved .
 Used by Genghis Khan during the Mongol invasion of the Knwarazmian Empire . Used by the Mongol Empire .
 Samarkand was the capital of the Knwarazm region, which was captured by Mongol forces around 1221 . Gunpowder An explosive substance; can be used to form bombs .
 He was also attempting to gain more land to the west in the Kara-Khitan Khanate and the Khwarazmian Empire, regions that comprise modern-day Iran, Irag, and Uzbekistan . While he was fighting the Western Xia and Jin Dynasties in
 The Kara-Khitai attracted Genghis Khan's attention when they besieged Almalig, a city belonging to vassals of the Mongol Empire . Genghi Khan's son was killed by the Kara-hitai in the 14th century .
 Mongols now had a firm outpost in Central Asia directly bordering the Khwarazmian Empire, in Greater Iran . The Mongols had now established a firm foothold in the region .
 Relations with the Khwarazms would quickly break down, leading to the Mongol invasion of that territory in 1219 . The Mongol invasion was the result of a war between the two sides of the border .
 In the early 13th century, the Khwarazmian Empire was governed by Shah Ala ad-Din Muhammad . Conquest of the Khwaraan Empire was the first of its kind .
 Genghis Khan saw the potential advantage in Knwarazmia as a commercial trading partner using the Silk Road . He sent a caravan to establish official trade ties with the empire . Khan sent caravan to set up trade ties .
 Legend tells that Genghis Khan executed the Knwarazm governor by pouring molten silver into his ears and eyes . Legend says he was executed by pouring the molten silver in his eyes and ears .
 Ogedei Khan ordered his nephew (and grandson of Genghis Khan) Batu Khan to conquer Russia in 1235 . Batu was the grandson of the Khan Genghi Khan and the son of Ogedi Khan .
 Matthaus Merian the Elder painted the Battle of Legnica in 1630 . The Battle took place in the summer of 1630, when the Battle was still raging in the city .
 Mongke was generally a popular ruler of the Mongol Empire . He met debts, controlled soending, conducted a census, and protected civilians . Mongke also met debts and controlled the soending .
 Genghis Khan's descendants fought about who would rule until Batu Khan's death . Mongke's grandson Mongke took control of the world after the death of Ogedei Khan .
 He generously met all GUyuk's outstanding debts, an unprecedented move . The move was unprecedented for the businessman to meet his debts .
 Mongke also forbade extravagant spending, imposed taxes, and punished the unauthorized plundering of civilians . Mongke was also banned from extravagant spending and imposed taxes .
 He established the Department of Monetary Affairs and standardized a system of measurement . He set up the Monetary Affairs Department .
 From Ogedei's death in 1241 CE until 1246 CE the Mongol Empire was ruled under the regency of his widow, Toregene Khatun . The Mongol Empire ruled from 1246 to 1248 CE under the reign of Ogedea .
 Guyuk died in 1248 on the way to confront Genghis Khan's nephew Batu Khan . Guyuk was the grandson of Ogedei Khan and the nephew of Genghi Khan .
 Mongke might have been present at this battle . Battle of Mohi took place in the kingdom of Hungary, during one of the many Mongol invasions and attacks that expanded the Mongol Empire .
 e IIkhanate was the major southwestern khanate of the Mongol Empire and encompassed parts of modern-day Iran, Azerbaijan, Armenia, and Turkey . This region was clearly Islamic and functioned as an outlying region of the central Mongol government .
 MoOngke's brother, Hulagu, ruled over this region and his descendants continued to oversee this khanate into the 14th century . MoOengke's descendants continued their reigns until the end of the 13th Century .
 Mongke's death led to civil war between his two brothers . Kublai Khan emerged victorious and renamed the empire as the Yuan Dynasty in 1271 .
 Mongke's death in 1259 led to civil war (often referred to as the Toluid Civil War) between his two younger brothers, Kublai Khan and Arig Boke . Mongke died at the end of 1259, leading to the death of his brother Kubl
 Kublai took over control of the Chinese territories with the blessings of MOngke Khan around 1251 . He sought to establish a firmer hold on these vast regions . The Yuan Dynasty was established in 1251 by the Mongolian Khan .
 Kublai oversaw uprisings and wars between the western khanates . This new powerful position allowed him to assist rulers to oversee these regions . He was able to supervise the west .
 The sheer scale of this khanate required extensive military support and often strained the Mongol treasury in order to keep populations under its influence . Yuan Dynasty circa 1292 was the largest Mongol empire in history .
 Mongol invasions of Japan (1274 and 1280) and Java under Kublai Khan ultimately failed and illustrated the costly effects of constant invasive military tactics . Conversely, the Mongol invasion of Java and Japan in the 12th century also failed . The cost of constant invasions was the result
 Yuan Dynasty Administration Kublai Khan made significant reforms to existing institutions under the Yuan Dynasty . Yuan Dynasty administration was under the control of the Yuan dynasty .
 Marco Polo, Marco Polo's father (an Italian merchant) and his father's trade partner traveled to China during this time . Marco Polo was Marco Polo (Marco Polo's) father (An Italian merchant), and his . father (Marco . Polo's . father) and . his father
 Some historians speculate that trade was so accessible between the empire and Europe, that it may have contributed to the flow of disease, especially the plague in the mid-1300s .
 During the reign of Emperor Xuanzong, who came to power in 712, the Tang dynasty reached its height, a golden age with low economic inflation and a relaxed lifestyle . For the next hundred years, several Tang leaders ruled, including a woman, Empress Wu .
 The Tang dynasty was the most populous city in the world . Its territory rivaled that of the Han dynasty . The Tang capital at Chang'an (present-day Xi'an) was present-day .
 There was great contact with and interest in India as a hub for Buddhist knowledge . Famous travelers such as Xuanzang visited the South Asian subcontinent .
 Persians, Arabs, Hindu Indians, Malays, Bengalis, Sinhalese, Knmers, Chams, Jews and Nestorian Christians of the Near East . Thousands of foreigners came and lived in numerous Chinese cities for trade and commercial ties with China .
 Chinese alchemy, Chinese astrology, Chan Buddhism, several martial arts, and traditional Chinese medicine, feng shui, and many styles of qigong have been intertwined with Taoism throughout history .
 There were also many famous Chan monks from the Tang era, such as Mazu Daoyi, Baizhang, and Huangbo Xiyun . Mazu Doyi is one of the most famous Chan Buddhist monks .
 A Christian monastery was established in Shaanxi province where the Dagin Pagoda still stands . Inside the pagoda there is Christian-themed artwork .
 Emperor Xuanzong invited monks and clerics of both religions to his court . Before the persecution of Buddhism in the 9th century, Buddhism and Taoism were accepted side by side .
 In 655, Wu Zetian graduated forty-four candidates with the Jinshi degree . During one seven-year period, the annual average of exam takers graduated with /inshi degrees was greater than fifty-eight persons per year . In 655 in 655, the average of
 Wu lavished favors on the newly graduated //nshi degree-holders, increasing the prestige associated with this path of attaining a government career . Wu also increased the prestige of the graduates, according to Wu .
 /iedushi ushered in the political division of the Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms period, a period marked by continuous infighting among the rival kingdoms, dynasties, and regional regimes established by rival -iedushi . Eventually the political divisions of the 5th and 10th Kingdoms
 The power of the /iedushi, or provincial military governors, increased greatly after imperial troops crushed the rebels . Imperial troops took administrative power away from scholar-officials .
 Huang Chao Rebellion resulted in the sacking of both Chang'an and Luoyang, and took an entire decade to suppress . Collapse of Tang Dynasty caused by natural calamities and /iedushi amassing autonomous control .
 Zhao Kuangyin, later known as Emperor Taizu (r.0976), usurped the throne from the Zhou dynasty with the support of military commanders in 960, initiating the Song dynasty . His first goal was the reunification of China after half a century of political division .
 Ly commander Thuodng Kiét made peace overtures allowing both sides to withdraw from the war . Both sides captured territories held by both Song and Ly were mutually exchanged in 1082 .
 The extent of the land holdings of the Northern Song dynasty in 1111 is shown . Western Xia p organg Tibetans Dali .
 After the Jins captured the Northern Song capital of Kaifeng, they went on to conquer the rest of northern China . The Song Chinese court fled south and founded the Southern Song dynasty .
 To protect and support the multitude of ships sailing for maritime interests into the waters of the East China Sea and Yellow Sea, Southeast Asia, the Indian Ocean, and the Red Sea, it was necessary to establish an official standing navy .
 Wealthy families used social connections to obtain tax-exempt status . Financial matters were made worse by the fact that many wealthy, land-owning families had members working as officials .
 Mongol forces conquered both the Jin dynasty and Western Xia dynasty . Under the leadership of Ogedei Khan (r.291241), Mongol forces captured both Jin and Xia dynasties .
 Kublai made preparations to take Ezhou, but a civil war with his brother Ariq Boke forced him to retreat . Ariq was a rival claimant to the Mongol Khaganate, and Kublaai was forced to move north .
 The Song dynasty was an era of administrative sophistication and complex social organization that brought rise to a rich and diverse social life and culture . Explain cultural aspects of the Song dynasty .
 The visual arts during the Song dynasty were heightened by new developments in areas such as landscape and portrait painting . Chinese literature during the period contained a range of different genres . e
 Although women were on a lower social tier than men, they enjoyed many social and legal privileges . They wielded considerable power at home and in their own small businesses . Women were on lower social tiers than men .
 The Wusing Zongyao manuscript of 1044 was the first book in history to provide formulas for gunpowder and their specified use in different types of bombs . It was written in 1044 .
 Yang's contemporary Qin Jiushao was the first to introduce the zero symbol into Chinese mathematics . Before this blank spaces were used instead of zeroes in the system of counting rods in the counting rods .
 The enhancement of widespread printing and print culture in the Song period was a direct catalyst in the rise of social mobility and expansion of the educated class of scholar elites . The latter of which expanded dramatically in size from the 11th to 13th centuries .
 Bt 43 t # hy onaie #0 . > ket be a of tr ey oe g x ; ‘es SO on Oar B iD 2S aie een sh lk ae me 5.48 eRe it oe Fo Biche
 Kublai Khan founded the Yuan dynasty in 1272 in the style of a traditional Chinese dynasty . In 1272, he founded the new dynasty, the Yuan .
 Yuan dynasty is traditionally given credit for reuniting China after several hundred years of fragmentation following the fall of Tang dynasty . Eventually, Kublai won over the Song, both militarily and through adopting Chinese customs and practices .
 Méngke Khan succeeded Ogedei's son GuyUk as Great Khan in 1251 . He granted his brother Kublai control over Mongol-held territories in China .
 Kublai convened a kurultai in Kaiping that elected him Great Khan . But a rival in Mongolia proclaimed Arig Boke Great Khan, beginning a civil war . The war began in Mongolia in 18th century .
 Only the IIkhans truly recognized Kublai as Great Khan . All of the three western khanates became functionally autonomous . Only the Ikhans were truly recognized as Great Great Khan.
 Kublai readied the move of the Mongol capital from Karakorum in Mongolia to Khanbaligq in 1264, constructing a new city near the former Jurchen capital Zhongdu, now modern Beijing, in 1266 .
 Marco Polo traveled to the East on the Silk Road during the Pax Mongolica . The Mallorquin Atlas depicts Marco Polo traveling to the east on the silk road .
 Indian muslins, cotton, pearls, and precious stones were sold in Europe, aS were weapons, carpets, and leather goods from lran .
 The IIkhanate government issued paper money in 1294, but public distrust of the exotic new currency doomed the experiment .
 Rashid-al-Din's view was not shared by other chroniclers in the Middle East . Other chroniclers were critical of the experiment's disruptive impact .
 Mongke established a Department of Monetary affairs to control the issuance of paper money in order to eliminate the overissue of the currency by Mongol and nonMongol nobles since the reign of Great Khan Ogedei in 1253 . Mongke set up the department of Monetary Affairs to control
 During the reigns of Ogedei, GuyUk, and Mongke, Mongol coinage increased with gold and silver coinage in Central Asia and copper and silver coins in Caucasus, Iran, and southern Russia .
 Ghazan's fiscal reforms enabled the inauguration of a unified bimetallic currency in the IIkhanate . The reforms were part of the reforms to create a unified currency system .
 Emperor Toghun Temur defeated the Red Turban Rebellion, but was weakened and needed to rely more heavily on local warlords, and therefore central government control dissipated . He fled north to Shangdu from Khanbaligq (presentday Beijing) in 1368 after the approach
 He died in Yingchang (located in presentday Inner Mongolia) in 1370 . After trying to regain Khanbaliq, he tried to recapture the city .
 Ming army pursued ex-Yuan Mongol forces into Mongolia in 1372 . They were defeated by Mongol forces under Biligtu Khan Ayushiridara and his general .
 Explanations include institutionalized ethnic discrimination against Han Chinese that stirred resentment and rebellion, overtaxation of areas hard-hit by inflation, and massive flooding of the Yellow River caused by abandonment of irrigation projects .
 The Red Turban Rebellion was led in part by a peasant named Zhu Yuanzhang . The revolt led to the death of a Chinese peasant . The uprising was led by Zhu, a peasant who wore a turban .
 With the Yuan dynasty crumbling, competing rebel groups began fighting for control of the country and thus the right to establish a new dynasty . Zhu did in 1368 after defeating his rivals in the largest naval battle in history and marching toward Beijing .
 Zhu Yuanzhang drew on both past institutions and new approaches in order to create jiaohua as an organic Chinese governing process . The new governing process was created by Zhu Yuanzang .
 The government even resumed use of paper currency amid Li Zicheng's rebellion . The government resumed using paper currency in the wake of the rebellion .
 Excessive luxury and decadence marked the late Ming period, spurred by the enormous state bullion of incoming silver and by private transactions involving silver . Spring Morning in a Han Palace by Qiu Ying .
 In the early Ming dynasty, the Hongwu Emperor imposed severe restrictions on trade, called the haijin . The trade ban was completely counterproductive; by the 16th century, piracy and smuggling were widespread .
 Ming government built canals, roads, and bridges to ease trade and commerce . Chinese also purchased New World crops from the Spanish Empire .
 China has seen a rise in the population of China in recent years . This included sweet potatoes, maize, and peanuts, which could be cultivated in lands where traditional Chinese staple croos—wheat, millet, and rice couldn't grow .
 He taught the Chinese how to construct and play the spinet . He translated Chinese texts into Latin and vice versa, and worked closely with Xu Guanggi on mathematical work .
 Short fiction had been popular in China as far back as the Tang dynasty . The most striking literary development during the Ming period was the vernacular novel .
 Small leaf aloum paintings first became popular in Song dynasty . Chen Hongshou painting from the Ming period .
 In the early half of the 17th century, famines became common in northern China because of unusual dry and cold weather that shortened the growing season . These were effects of a larger ecological event now known as the Little Ice Age .
 The Qing conquest of the Ming was a period of conflict between the Qing dynasty and the ruling Ming dynasty of China . The Qing dynasty was established by the Manchu clan Aisin Gioro in Manchuria (contemporary Northeastern China), and the Ming .
 Nurhaci began to force the Ming out of Liaoning in southern Manchuria . Shortly afterwards he began forcing them out . The Ming were eventually driven out .
 Nurhaci's conquest of Liaoning province laid the groundwork for the conquest of the rest of China by his descendants . His descendants founded the Qing dynasty in 1644, which led to the creation of China's Qing dynasty .
 On April 24, 1644, Beijing fell to a rebel army led by Li Zicheng, a former minor Ming official . Li became the leader of the peasant revolt and then proclaimed the Shun dynasty .
 Battle of Shanhai Pass was one of the most famous battles fought in China's history . It was the decisive battle of the Second World War in China .
 The Bantu expansion is the name for a postulated millennia-long series of migrations of speakers of the Original proto-Bantu language group . Explain how the Banti Migration impacted the Swahili cultures .
 KwaZulu-Natal is a province of South Africa that was created in 1994 . It was created when the Zulu bantustan of Kwanzulu and Natal Province were merged .
 Between the 13th and L5th centuries, Bantu-speaking states began to emerge in the Great Lakes region . The Monomatapa kings built the famous Great Zimbabwe complex .
 At the onset of the Muslim conquest of North Africa, Egypt was part of the Byzantine/Eastern Roman Empire, with the capital in Constantinople . Discuss the effects of the Islamic conquest on Egypt .
 Afghanistan, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Cyprus, Egypt, Georgia, Iran, Iraq, Israel, Italy, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Oman, Pakistan, Palestine, Qatar, Russia, Saudi Arabia, Sudan, Syria, Tajikistan, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmen
 In the Middle Ages, soon after the mamluks took up the practice of chivalry, or furusiyya in Arabic, they came to be known as knights . Though un-free until after their service, they were known as free knights .
 The Muslim conquest of North Africa continued the century of rapid Arab Muslim military expansion following the death of Muhammad in 632 . Discuss the effects the Islamic conquest of the Maghreb had on the area . Learn about the impact of the conquest on the region .
 Egypt with governor at al-Fustat, Ifriqiya with its governor at Kairouan, and the Maghreb (modern Morocco) with a governor at Tangiers . Egypt with Egypt with its . governor at . al-fustat . Ifriqu
 Historically, they spoke Berber languages, which together form the Berber branch of the Afro-Asiatic family . The Berber language is a Berber form of a Berban language .
 The history of the Muslim conquest of the Maghreb and the history of a greater North African region (reaching far into the Middle East) cannot be sharply distinguished . Consequently, the history . of the . Muslim conquest . of North African . region cannot be distinguished .
 At its greatest extent, the Umayyad Caliphate covered 15 million square kilometers and 62 million people . It was the fifth largest empire in history in both area and proportion of the world's population .
 Next came a force of 10,000 led by the Arab general Ugqba ibn Nafi and enlarged by thousands of others . The Arab general led the force, led by him, led them to victory in the battle .
 After this, Uqba ibn Nafi moved forward until reaching the Atlantic coast . After this he moved to the coast of the Arabian Peninsula .
 The map shows that under Muhammad, the caliphate expanded to cover most of the Arabian Peninsula from 622632 . The map was created by the Prophet Muhammad in 62232 .
 Nubia is a region along the Nile river located in what is today Sudan and southern Egypt . Explain some of the sources of wealth that the Kingdom of Kush had access to .
 Taharga's successor, Tantamani, was chased back to Nubia, and never threatened the Assyrian Empire again . After brief military successes, Tantmani was chased away from the Assyria Empire .
 A native Egyptian ruler, Psaammetichus |, was placed on the throne as a vassal of Ashurbanipal . He was placed in the Egyptian throne as an Egyptian ruler . He is the first Egyptian ruler to be placed in charge of the Egyptian empire .
 A region along the Nile river located in what is today northern Sudan and southern Egypt . Nubia is a region of what is now known as Sudan and Egypt .
 Middle Kingdom stretches from the establishment of the Eleventh dynasty to the end of the Twelfth dynasty . Some writers include the Thirteenth and Fourteenth dynasties in the Second Intermediate Period .
 Mentuhotep II is recorded to have undertaken campaigns against Kush in the 29th and 31st years of his reign . He is said to have taken part in two campaigns against the Kushan kingdom .
 It was during the 25th dynasty that the Nile valley saw the first widespread construction of pyramids since the Middle Kingdom .
 Esarhaddon's successor, Ashurbanipal, sent a 7urtanu with a small but well-trained army . Taharga was forced to flee back to his homeland in Nubia, where he died two years later .
 Unlike Napata, the region around Meroe had enough woodlands to provide fuel for iron working . Historians believe the Kushite rulers may have chosen Meroé as their home because of the woodlands .
 The Kanem Empire at its height encompassed an area covering much of Chad, parts of southern Libya and eastern Niger, northeastern Nigeria, and northern Cameroon . Learning Objective Locate the Bornu Empire .
 The capital of Njimi grew in power and influence under the Duguwa dynaty . The capital was the capital of the Dunguwa dynasty .
 By the end of the 14th century, internal struggles and external attacks had torn Kanem apart . Kanem was one of the most successful cities in the world .
 Around 1460, a fortified capital at Ngazargamu, to the west of Lake Chad (in present-day Niger), was built, but in the early 16th century Mai Idris Katakarmabe retook Njimi, the former capital . e With control
 The name of the kings (or mai) of the Kanem-Bornu Empire was used to roughly refer to a king . Its history is mainly known from the Royal Chronicle, or Girgam, discovered in 1851 .
 Usman dan Fodio led the Fulani thrust and proclaimed a jihad on the irreligious Muslims of the area . Usman d'Fodio declared a jihad against irreligious Muslim Muslims in the region .
 The Ghana Empire, called the Wagadou Empire by its rulers, was located in what is now southeastern Mauritania, western Mali, and eastern Senegal . The Empire was known as the Ghana Empire .
 Ghana appears to have had a central core region and was surrounded by vassal states . The Ghana Empire lay in the Sahel region to the north of the West African gold fields, and was able to profit by controlling the trans-Saharan gold trade .
 When the Gold Coast became the first country in sub-Saharan Africa to regain its independence from colonial rule, it was renamed in honor of the long-gone empire from which the ancestors to the Akan people of modern-day Ghana are thought to have migrated .
 It was the largest empire in West Africa and profoundly influenced the culture of the region through the spread of its language, laws, and customs along lands adjacent to the Niger River, as well as other areas consisting of numerous vassal kingdoms and provinces .
 Combined forces of northern and southern Manden defeated the Sosso army at the Battle of Kirina in approximately 1235 . Those not living in the mountains formed small citystates .
 The 1599 battle of Dijenné marked the effective end of the great Mali Empire . The empire's total area included nearly all of the land between the Sahara Desert and the coastal forests .
 In 1203, the Sosso king Soumaoro of the Kanté clan came to power . He reportedly terrorized much of Manden, stealing women and goods from both Dodougou and Kri .
 Provinces picked their own governors via their own custom . But governors had to be approved by the mansa and were subject to his oversight . The mansa had to approve governors via his own custom, but governors must be approved .
 Ibn Battuta, a Medieval Moroccan Muslim traveler and scholar, observed the employment of slave labor in the Middle Ages .
 During most of his journey, Ibn Battuta traveled with a retinue that included slaves . Most of the slaves carried goods for trade but would also be traded themselves . Ibn Battuta traveled with slaves, most of whom would be traded for trade .
 The number and frequency of conquests in the late 13th century and throughout the 14th century indicate that the Kolonkan mansas inherited and/or developed a capable military . The number of conquested in the 13th and 14th centuries indicates that the mansas had a capable
 It soanned modern-day Senegal, southern Mauritania, Mali, northern Burkina Faso, northern Niger, western Niger, the Gambia, Guinea-Bissau, Guinea, and Guinea, the Ivory Coast, and northern Ghana .
 He launched an attack on Djenné in 1599 with Fulani allies, hoping to take advantage of Songhai's defeat . Songhai was defeated by the Fulani in the 1599 battle .
 Hamana (or Amana), southwest of Joma, became the southern sphere, with its capital at Kouroussa in modern Guinea . Hamana was the capital of Hamana, southwest of the region .
 The Songhai Empire was a state that dominated the western Sahel in the 15th and 16th centuries . Explain the importance of Timbuktu after locating the Songhai empire in Timbu .
 Songhai, previously a Mali dependency, gained independence under the Sonni Dynasty in 1430s . e Sonni Ali reigned from 1464 to 1492 .
 Morocco invaded Songhai in 1897 . Songhai reached a size of over 1,400,000 square kilometers . The internal political chaos and civil wars within the empire allowed Morocco to invade .
 The Mali Empire was part of the Mali Empire in the 13th century . With the conquests of Sonni Ali (ruled 1464-1492) it became capital of the Songhai Empire .
 Other important cities in the empire were Timbuktu and Djenné, conquered in 1468 and 1475 respectively, where urban-centered trade flourished . The empire was ruled by the French Empire from 1468 onwards .
 In the 1430s, Songhai gained independence under the Sonni Dynasty . Dispute over succession weakened the Mali Empire . Songhai was a Mali dependency .
 He annexed Timbuktu in 1468, after Islamic leaders of the town requested his assistance in overthrowing marauding Tuaregs who had taken the city following the decline of Mali . The city was taken by the Berber people with a traditionally nomadic pastoralist lifestyle .
 At its peak under his reign, the Songhai Empire encompassed the Hausa states as far as Kano (in present-day Nigeria) and much of the territory that had belonged to the empire in the west . The Songhai empire was one of the largest in the world
 The /u//a would form partnerships, and the state would protect these merchants and the port cities of the Niger . The state would also protect the /u //a from these merchants, and from the state .
 The mythical origins of the Oyo Empire lie with Oranyan, who made Oyo his new kingdom . It is known worldwide for its ancient and naturalistic bronze as well as stone and terracotta sculptures .
 The key to rebuilding Oyo was a stronger military and a more centralized government . Yoruba rebuilt Oyo with the help of the Yoruba army .
 In the second half of the 18th century, dynastic intrigues, palace coups, and failed military campaigns began to weaken the Oyo Empire .
 Oduduwa's brother took the three items of creation from him, and climbed down from the heavens on a chain, and threw earth on the primordial ocean . Then put a cockerel on it so that it would scatter the earth, thus creating the land on which I
 By the 8th century CE, Ile-lfe was already a powerful Yoruba kingdom . It was one of the earliest in Africa south of the Sahara-Sahel . It is one of Africa's earliest Yoruba kingdoms .
 Almost every Yoruba settlement traces its origin to princes of Ile-Ife . Yoruba settlements trace their origin to Ile Ife princes .
 Until today, the Ooni (or king) of Ife claims direct descent from Oduduwa . The Ooni is believed to be the king of Ogunja in Ogunjura .
 lle-Ife is known worldwide for its ancient and naturalistic bronze sculptures . The city was a settlement of substantial size between the 12th and 14th centuries . It reached its peak of artistic expression between 1200 and 1400 .
 Ife is known worldwide for its ancient and naturalistic bronze, stone, and terracotta sculptures, which reached their peak of artistic expression between 1200 and 1400 . Bronze head from Ife, probably a king, dated around 1300 lle-lfe, is dated around 1400 l
 The empire traded with Roman traders as well as with Egyptian and Persian merchants . The empire was known as the Roman Empire of Rome .
 In the early times of the empire, giant obelisks to mark emperors’ tombs (underground grave chambers) were constructed, the most famous of which is the Obelisk of Aksum . Furthermore, in the early . times of . the . empire,
 Arab writers of the time continued to describe Ethiopia (no longer referred to as Aksum) as an extensive and powerful state, although it had lost control of most of the coast and tributaries .
 Warsangali Sultanate was a kingdom centered in northeastern and some parts of southeastern Somalia . It was centered around northeastern and in some parts parts of Somalia .
 The Sultanate of Ifat was one of the largest sultanates ever established in the Horn of Africa . It was a medieval Muslim sultanate .
 The Kingdom ruled over parts of what is now eastern Ethiopia, Djibouti, and northern Somalia . The Kingdom was ruled by the Kingdom of Ethiopia .
 Ifat first emerged in the 13th century, when Sultan Umar Walashma conquered the Sultanate of Showa in 1285 . Ifat was first known in the 12th century .
 By the 9th century it was the capital of the Ifat Sultanate and a major port for its successor state the Adal Sultanate . It was also a major city for its successors, the Ifal and Adal, and was a key port for them .
 An Agaw lord named Mara Takla Haymanot founded the Zagwe dynasty in 1137 . The Agaw dynasty is the name of the Agaw king who ruled the kingdom .
 Around 1270, a new dynasty was established in the Abyssinian highlands under Yekuno Amlak . A new dynasty of Abyssinian kings was established around 1270 in the highlands .
 It is not known whether D'mt ended as a civilization before Aksum's (its one possible successor) early stages . It is thought to be one of the smaller states united in the kingdom possibly around the beginning of the lst century .
 A non-Christian female ruler conquered the area about 1000 (presumably 960), though the date is uncertain .
 The new Zagwe dynasty established its capital at Roha, where they built a series of monolithic churches . They built a monolithic church in Roha .
 Between 1528 and 1540, armies of Muslims, under the Imam Ahmad ibn lIbrihim al-Ghazi, entered Ethiopia from the low country to the southeast and overran the Abyssinian Kingdom . The Emperor took refuge in the mountains .
 Not much is known about pre-colonial Namibia . Evidence suggests that a number of diverse peoples settled there as a result of ancient, medieval, and modern migrations . The San are generally assumed to have been the earliest inhabitants of the region .
 During the 17th century, the Herero, a pastoral, nomadic people keeping cattle, moved into Namibia . Their economy was based on farming, cattle, and fishing, but they also produced metal goods .
 Europeans first arrived in Namibia in the 15th century . The territory became one of the first European colonies on the continent . Known as Oorlams, these Khoisan adopted Boer customs and spoke a language similar to Afrikaans .
 Culturally, they are divided into the foraging San, or Bushmen, and the pastoral Khoi, or more specifically Knoikhoi . Culturally they are known as the Khoi . They are also known as Hottentots, or Hottenots .
 Great Zimbabwe was the capital of the Kingdom of Zimbabwe . It flourished as an international gold and ivory trade center . Its architecturally unique ruins remain among the oldest and largest structures in Southern Africa .
 Nyatsimba Mutota established his dynasty at Chitakochangonya Hill in 1220 . The land he conquered would become the Kingdom of Mutapa . There, they would establish the kingdom of Zimbabwe .
 Swahili culture is the culture of the Swahari people inhabiting the swahili Coast . Explain how the Bantu migration impacted Swahali culture . Learn about how the migration of Bantus from Africa to South Africa .
 They are mainly united under the mother tongue of Kiswahili, a Bantu language . They are mostly united under Kiswahaili, the mother language of Kishahili .
 Around the 8th century, the Swahili people engaged in the Indian Ocean trade . Around the same time, they were involved in the world's largest trade routes .
 They were Muslim, cosmopolitan, and politically independent of one another . The pair were Muslim and cosmopolitan . They were also politically independent .
 Kilwa Sultanate was a medieval sultanate, centered at Kilwa, centered in Kilwa . Authority stretched over the entire length of the Swahili Coast at its height .
 The Kilwa Sultanate was originally a Persian colony . Despite its origin, extensive intermarriage and conversion of local Bantu inhabitants and later Arab immigration turned it into a very diverse state .
 Perso-Arab and Bantu cultures in Kilwa are credited for creating Swahili as a distinctive East African culture and language . The diverse history has also resulted in multicultural influences on furniture and architecture, including furniture and art .
 Swahili city-states evolved gradually from the 6th century onward to accommodate for an increase in trade and population growth . They evolved into what would later become known as the Swahil Coast . Archaeologists assumed during the colonial period that Arab or Persian colonizers brought stone architecture and
 Kilwa Sultanate was a medieval sultanate, centered at Kilwa . At its height, authority stretched over the entire length of the Swahili Coast .
 Kilwan lived as middlemen traders, importing manufactured goods from Arabia and India . Bantu-produced agricultural commodities (grain, meats, etc.) for their own subsistence, and precious raw materials that they would export .
 Centuries of intermarriages created the Malagasy people that form nearly the entire population of Madagascar today . The people of Madagascar have intermarried for centuries and form nearly all of the population .
 According to local tradition, the founders of the Sakalava kingdom quickly subdued the neighboring princes, starting with the southern ones, in the Mahafaly area . According to tradition, they subdued the southern princes . The kingdom was founded in the early 1900s .
 A northern Betsimisaraka zana-malata named Ratsimilaho united his compatriots, and around 1712 was elected king of all the Betsimsaraka . He was elected King of all of them .
 Around a century later, the fractured Betsimisaraka kingdom was easily colonized by Radama I, king of Merina . The fractured kingdom was eventually conquered by the Merina kingdom .
 Merina emerged as the politically dominant group in the course of the 17th and 18th centuries . The Merina kingdom reached the peak of its power in the early 19th century .
 Malagasy is an Austronesian language with Bantu, Malay, Arabic, French, and English influences . Centuries of intermarriages created the Malagas people, who primarily soeak Malagare .
 Ramanano, the chief of Vatomandry, was elected in 1710 as the leader of the Tsikoa . He initiated invasions of the northern ports in the northern parts of the country . Ramananos was elected as the chief chief of the Vatomanderry
 In 1712, he forced the Tsikoa to flee, and was elected king of all the Betsimisaraka . He was given a new name, Ramaromanompo, at his capital at Foulpointe .
 The fractured Betsimisaraka kingdom was easily colonized in 1817 by Radama l, king of Merina . The fractured kingdom was quickly colonized by the Merina king .
 The Moche were less of a state or empire and more of a society . They lived in a general geographic area and shared cultural values, but were not governed under a uniform political system . They practiced a number of religious rituals, some of which involved human sacrifice .
 A wild South American camelid that lives in the high alpine areas of the Andes . Moche is a city in modern-day Peru, which is also where the Moche culture was centered .
 The Moche also wove textiles, mostly using wool from vicunas and alpacas . Textiles were mostly made of alpines and vicunias .
 The geoglyphs of Nazca, or ""Nazca Lines,"" are a series of geometric shapes, extended lines that run for miles, and large drawings of animal figures . Nazca Lines were constructed in the Nazca region of Peru .
 The breeding and herding of Ilamas on the north coast since the time of the Moche could have been utilized by the Sican to provide caravans of llamas to transport the goods .
 The Chimu expanded to cover a vast area and include many different ethnic groups . Artisans made notable multi-colored textiles and monochromatic pottery and metalwork .
 Chimu worshipped the Moon as the essential deity of fertility, good weather, and bountiful crops . The Chimu worshiped the moon as an essential deity .
 Sacrifices of soondylus Shells and other precious items were made to the Moon . Sacrifes were made for the Moon in ancient times . Shells were traded to the moon for precious metals .
 Inca society was sophisticated, and boasted around seventy different crops across the empire's various climates . Inca considered finely woven textiles to be an essential commodity, and spun various grades of cloth from Ilama and vicuna wool .
 The administrative, political, and military center of the empire was located in Cusco (also spelled Cuzco) in modern-day Peru . It was also known as the Cuscan Empire . The empire was centered around Cusca, Peru .
 This vast territory was known in Quechua as Tawantin Suyu, or the Four Regions, which met in the capital of Cusco . The vast territory, known as the Four regions, met in its capital, the capital, Cuscan .
 A fine-spun, very soft cloth made from vicuna wool could only be used in religious ceremonies . On the other hand, a fine spun made from the same material could be used to make religious cloth .
 Brightly colored knotted strings recorded numerical information, such as taxes, goods, and labor, using the base number of 10 to record data .
 Distinct districts of the Inca Empire that all reported back to the capital of Cusco .
 Local inspectors called okoyrikog, or “he who sees all,"" reported back to the capital and the emperor . They made immediate decisions regarding punishment in cases where customs were not honored .
 Quipus (also spelled khipus) were colorful bunches of knotted strings that recorded census data, taxes, calendrical information, military organization, and accounting information . The strings were used to record census data .
 Inca ruler was mostly cooperative in captivity, and was finally baptized . He was killed on August 29, 1533, essentially ending the potential for larger Inca attacks on Spanish forces .
 Diseases such as smallpox, diphtheria, tyohus, measles, and influenza devastated large swaths of the population within fifty years . Spanish military gear, including armor, horses, and weapons, overpowered siege warfare more common in the Inca Empire .
 The Olmec lived in south-central Mexico, with their center in La Venta in Tabasco . Learning Objective Give an account of the society, trade, art, and religion of the Omec .
 Little is known about Olmec religion, though scholars believe there were eight main deities . Scholars believe there was eight main gods, but little is known .
 People lived in small agricultural villages outside of urban centers . The villages were mainly for ceremonial use .
 The decline of the Olmec population from 400-350 BCE may have been due to environmental changes . Environmental changes may have led to the decline of Olmic population .
 There is no surviving direct account of Olmec beliefs . However, their notable artwork provide clues about their life and religion .
 At the height of the Aztec Empire (between 1428 and 1521 CE) many Mixtec polities were forced to pay tribute to the ancient Aztec rulers .
 Teotinuacan is 30 miles from modern day Mexico City . Mesoamerican city of Teototuacan was 30 miles away from modern city of modern-day Mexico .
 Other scholars maintain that the largest population group must have been of Otomi ethnicity . Otomi language is known to have been spoken in the area around Teotihuacan both before and after the classic period .
 Many Maya murals represent Teotinucuan and the leaders of the city during its zenith . Many of the murals depict the city's leaders during its height .
 The Aztecs claimed common ancestry with the Teotihuacanos and adopted some of their artistic and architectural styles . The Aztec were also heavily influenced by the architecture, culture, and lore of this ancient city .
 Teotinuacan was the largest city in the pre-Columbian Americas, with a population estimated at 125,000 or more . At its zenith, around the first half of the first millennium CE, it was known as Teotototuacan .
 There is also evidence that at least some of the people living in Teotihuacan immigrated from those areas influenced by the civilization . Zapotec, Mixtec, and Maya peoples are also believed to have been influenced by this civilization .
 As a religious center, Teotihuacan displayed its most prominent gods and goddesses in murals and architecture . The most prominent goddesses are believed to have been buried in the city .
 The Great Goddess of Teotinuacan appears to be the most prominent of these deities . She most likely represented the underworld, war, creation, water, and the earth .
 The city's broad central avenue, called ""Avenue of the Dead", is flanked by impressive ceremonial architecture . The Pyramid of the Sun is the third largest in the World after the Great Pyramid of Cholula and the Great pyramid of Giza . The city is home to the Pyramid
 Teotihuacan is a good example of the Mesoamerican tradition of planning cities, settlements, and buildings as a reflection of the Universe . The layout of Teotinuacan exemplifies Mesoamanic urban planning . Teothuacan City Plan .
 This appears to be the case at Teotihuacan, although the mountain to which it is oriented is not visible from within the complex due to a closer mountain ridge . The image was taken from the site of the ancient city .
 Fine pieces of rare jade, pearl, and obsidian were found in a cache in Oaxaca, Mexico . They were probably used to cleanse religious sites or temples upon the completion of construction .
 By 2000 BCE, there were speakers of Mayan languages in the Southern Maya Area . Gulf of Mexico Southern Maya area was Mayan .
 From west to east, it included the Amada, Izapa, TAkalik Abaj, El Baul, Kaminaljuyu, Chalchuapa, Copan, and Quirigua .
 Complex Cities Middle Preclassic (1000 BCE-400 BCE) By around the year 1000 BCE, centuries of agricultural village life had begun to form the beginnings of a complex society, with an elite class, entrenched religious practices and a military presence .
 Prestige goods, such as obsidian mirrors and jade mosaics, began to appear . The demand for more extensive trade with other language groups, including the Olmecs .
 Canals and irrigation schemes demanding coordinated human effort began to appear with increasing complexity and scale . Canals, irrigation schemes requiring coordinated human efforts began to become more complex .
 Villages began to include central plazas and earthen mounds, occasionally enhanced by masonry . Villages were often built on mounds or mounds with masonry, sometimes with mounds .
 These plazas also suggest a developing religious and hierarchical social structure . The plaza also suggest that religious and social structures are developing .
 Carved stone stele also began to appear during this period, adorned with portraits of rulers but still devoid of writing . Carved stones also appeared in the same period .
 Warfare appears to have intensified during this period, as evidenced by advanced weaponry, rulers beginning to be portrayed as warriors, and the appearance of mass graves and decapitated skeletons .
 Maya civilizations are now thought to have lived on, and also prospered, perhaps for another century after the fall of Teotihuacano influence . The Maya civilizations were believed to have survived and thrived in the past .
 The period after the second collapse of the Maya Empire is called the Postclassic period . The second collapse in the Maya empire is known as Postclassic .
 The Maya cities of the northern lowlands in Yucatan continued to flourish . Explain what happened to the structure of the Maya Empire in the Postclassic period .
 The period after the second collapse of the Maya Empire is called the Postclassic period . The period is known as the 'Postclassic period'
 EI Castillo in Chichén Itza was built by the pre-Columbian Maya civilization sometime between the 9th and 12th centuries CE . El Castillo served as a temple to the god Kukulkan, the Yucatec Maya Feathered Serpent deity .
 The Itza maintained their capital at Tayasal, an archaeological site thought to underlay the modern city of Flores, Flores, Guatemala, on Lake Petén Itza . The city is thought to have been the birthplace of the Itza, who lived there for centuries .
 Much of what is Known about the Toltecs is based on what has been learned about the Aztecs . Identify the Toltec as a group of people who lived in the same region as the Aztec .
 Historicists believe Aztec accounts of the Toltecs can be trusted as historical sources . Historicists say accounts of Toltec accounts are reliable sources of historical accuracy .
 Others believe Aztec accounts are too shrouded in myth to be trusted as sources of truth . Others believe that Aztec stories are too much of a myth to trust .
 Certain Mayan sites, such as Chichén Itza, share distinctive archeological traits with religious monuments and buildings in Tula . Tula is one of the Mayan cities of Tula, Mexico .
 Archaeologist Laurette Sejourné, followed by the historian Enrique Florescano, argued that the ""original"" Tollan was probably Teotihuacan .
 This fourth sun immediately precedes the fifth sun of the Aztec people, which was prophesied to be presided over by Quetzalcoatl . The fourth sun will precede the fifth, which will be presided by the legendary Aztec god .
 Two of the primary architects of the Aztec empire were the half-brothers Tlacaelel and Montezuma |, nephews of Itzcoatl . The Aztec Empire was one of the world's most important cities .
 Teixiptla, by contrast, denoted the physical representations of the tetl as well as the human cultic activity surrounding this physical representation . Texiptla was the name of a group of people who were involved in cultic rituals surrounding the physical representation of the Tetl
 Aztec religious cosmology included the physical earth plane, the underworld (or land of the dead) and the realm of the sky . The Aztec religion included the earth, underworld and the afterlife . Aztec beliefs include the earth and underworld .
 Quetzalcoatl was a feathered serpent god that represented the morning star, wind, and life . The feathered snake god was the god of morning star and the wind .
 Mixcoatl was the Aztec god that was incorporated into Aztec belief and represented war . The “cloud serpent’s god” represented war in Aztec beliefs . Mixcoat was the “Cloud serpent” god of war .
 Huitzilopochtli as depicted in the Codex Telleriano-Remensis . This depiction of the war and sun god shows him in all of his warrior and ritual garb .
 Aztec Calendar shows eighteen months circling around a representation of the sun . Aztec calendar shows the eighteen months circled around a symbol of the Sun .
 The arrival of Hernando Cortés in 1519 marked the beginning of the end for the Aztec empire . Describe the role of the Confederacy of Tlaxcala in the fall of the . Aztec Empire .
 Cortés and the Confederacy of Tlaxcala allied to militarily defeat the Aztecs, who were further weakened by a smallpox epidemic in 1520-1521 and subsequent outbreaks of smallpox .
 Aztec hegemonic structure was re-appropriated to serve the Spanish colonialists . Aztec history was reappropriated by colonialists to serve them .
 The biography of Cortés by Francisco Lopez de Gémara contains a description of the massacre . The massacre was the massacre of the Spanish soldiers .
 When the captured emperor Moctezuma II, now seen as a mere puppet of the invading Spaniards, attempted to calm the outraged populace, he was killed by a projectile . The captured emperor was killed when he tried to calm down the population .
 Bison-oriented indigenous peoples inhabited a portion of the North American continent known as the Great Basin . These bison-orientated indigenous peoples lived in a portion called Great Basin.
 The climate in the Great Basin was very arid, which affected the lifestyles and cultures of its inhabitants . The Great Basin is the most arid desert region in the world . The climate affected the lives of the inhabitants .
 The indigenous peoples of the Pacific Northwest developed complex religious and social ceremonies as well as many fine arts and crafts . Examine how natural resources shaped the cultures of the region .
 Many works of art served practical purposes, such as clothing, tools, weapons of war and hunting, transportation, and shelter . Others were purely aesthetic .
 Pacific Coast was at one time the most densely populated area of North America in terms of indigenous peoples . The Pacific Coast is now the most populated area in North America .
 Archaeological record suggests that humans in the Eastern Woodlands of North America were collecting plants from the wild by 6,000 BCE and gradually modifying them by selective collection .
 Middle Woodland Period saw a shift of settlement to the interior . The beginning of this period saw the beginning of settlement in the interior.
 Late Woodland Period was a time of apparent population dispersal . The late Woodland period was a period of apparent populations dispersing .
 Bow and arrow technology gradually overtook the use of the spear and atlatl, and agricultural production of the ""three sisters"" was introduced .
 Shells used as tempering agents in pottery . Widespread trade networks extending as far west as the Rockies, north to the Great Lakes, south to the Gulf of Mexico .
 The development of the chiefdom or complex chiefdom level of social complexity . e A centralization of control of combined political and religious power in the hands of few or one . e The adoption of the paraphernalia of the Southeastern Ceremonial Complex .
 Leonardo da Vinci's Vitruvian Man shows clearly the effect writers of Antiquity had on Renaissance thinkers . Da Vinci created the masterpiece in the 17th century .
 Leonardo based on specifications in Vitruvius' De architectura (1st century BCE) Leonardo tried to draw the perfectly proportioned man . Leonardo drew the man based on the specifications in the 1st Century BCE .
 Florence became one of the wealthiest cities in Northern Italy . Florence is now one of Italy's wealthiest cities .
 The Italian trade routes that covered the Mediterranean and beyond were also major conduits of culture and knowledge . The trade routes were also important cultural and historical sources .
 Wool was imported from Northern Europe (and in the 16th century from Spain), and together with dyes from the east was used to make high quality textiles . Wool and dyes were used together with other dyes in the east to make textiles, such as wool .
 Their wealth and influence initially derived from the textile trade guided by the guild of the Arte de/la Lana . Their wealth was initially based on textile trade . Their influence was initially limited to the textile industry .
 The Renaissance began in times of religious turmoil . The Church began in the Late Middle Ages . The Renaissance was a period of religious upheaval .
 Nicolaus Copernicus dedicated De revolutionibus orbium orbium coelestium to Paul Ill, who became the grandfather of Alessandro Farnese . Giulio Clovio, arguably the last major illuminated manuscript, the Farnese Hours, was commissioned by Paul Ill .
 The Renaissance had a profound effect on contemporary theology, particularly in the way people perceived the relationship between man and Michelangelo's Pieta in St. Louis Cathedral . In turn, the Renaissance also had an effect on the relationship of man and the Pieta .
 Pope Julius I was one of Italy's most important secular rulers . Julius I often waged campaigns to protect and expand their temporal domains . Julius Il was the head of the church .
 Popes spent lavishly both on private luxuries and public works, repairing or building churches, bridges, and aqgueducts in Rome that still function today .
 Counter-Reformation was a comprehensive effort composed of four major elements . New religious orders (such as the Jesuits), spiritual movements, spiritual movements and political reform were key .
 Humanists reacted against the utilitarian approach to education, seeking to create a citizenry who were able to speak and write with eloquence . Assess how Humanism gave rise to the art of the Renasissance .
 Humanism first began as a predominantly literary movement . Its influence quickly pervaded the general culture of the time . It reintroduced classical Greek and Roman art forms and led to the Renaissance .
 Donatello became renowned as the greatest sculptor of the Early Renaissance . Known especially for his Humanist, and unusually erotic, statue of David David .
 In humanist painting, the treatment of the elements of perspective and depiction of light became of particular concern . The treatment of perspective, light and perspective was the subject of concern .
 Byzantine Greek scholars and émigrés furthered the revival of Greek and Roman literature and science . The end of the Byzantine Empire in 1453 led to the migration of scholars who had greater familiarity with ancient languages .
 Humanists of the Renaissance created schools to teach their ideas and wrote books all about education . Humanism is a movement in education . The Humanist movement was founded in the Renaissance .
 Vittorino da Feltre established the Mantua Humanist School in 1423 in Mantua . It was established to provide the children of the ruler of Mantua with a Humanist education . The school was established by the rulers of the city .
 Humanists sought to create a citizenry able to speak and write with eloguence and clarity, thus capable of engaging in the civic life of their communities and persuading others to virtuous and prudent actions . Humanists wanted to create an ideal citizenry who could engage in civic life
 Humanist schools combined Christianity and classical texts to produce a model of education for all of Europe . The model was created by combining Christianity with classical texts with Christianity .
 This ideology was referred to as the uvomo universale, an ancient Greco-Roman ideal . It was an ancient ideal of the ideal of an ideology known as the Universal Universalism .
 Mannerist artists rebelled against the principles of the High Renaissance . Mannerists tended to represent elongated figures in illogical soaces .
 Renaissance was underway before the Medici family came to power in Florence . Their patronage and political support of the arts helped catalyze the Renaissance into a fully fledged cultural movement . Discuss the relationship between art, patronage and politics during the Renaissance .
 Medici wealth and influence initially derived from the textile trade . Through financial superiority, the Medici dominated their city's government . The Medici's influence was based on their success in the textile industry .
 Medici patronage was responsible for the majority of Florentine art during their reign . Artists only made their works when they received commissions in advance . Artists generally only made work when they receive commissions .
 The Medici family was patrons of Galileo Galilei, who tutored multiple generations of Medici children . The family is well known to have been the patrons of the famous Galilei . Although none of the Medici themselves were scientists .
 Michelangelo painted the altar wall of the Sistine Chapel just before the pontiff's death in 1534 . Pope Clement Vil commissioned Michelangelo to paint the chapel's altar wall just before his death .
 Marie de’ Medici, widow of Henry IV of France and mother of Louis XIll, is the subject of a commissioned cycle of paintings . The Marie de' Medici cycle was painted for the Luxembourg Palace by court painter Peter Paul Rubens in 1622-1623 .
 The huge cornice ripples in a continuous band, giving the appearance of keeping the whole building in a state of compression . Above them the huge cornices give the impression of the building's compression .
 Renaissance literature refers to European literature that was influenced by the intellectual and cultural tendencies of the Renaissance . Literature tn the Renaissance 17.5.1: The Rise of the Vernacular Renaissance literature. Renaissance literature . Renaissance literature is a form of literature influenced by cultural and intellectual tendencies .
 Italian authors began writing in their native vernacular language rather than in Latin, French, or Provencal . Learning Objective Evaluate the influence of the different people, styles, and ideas that influenced Renaissance literature .
 It was only in the 13th century that Italian authors began writing in their native vernacular language rather than Latin, French, or Provencal .
 Petrarch's disciple, Giovanni Boccaccio, became a major author in his own right . His major work, The Decameron, was a source of inspiration and plots for many English authors .
 Dante Alighieri set the stage for Renaissance literature with his Divine Comedy . The Divine Comedy is considered the greatest literary work composed in the Italian language and a masterpiece .
 Dante defended use of the vernacular in literature . In De vulgari eloquentia, he defended use in the  vernacular . Dante defended the use in De Vulgari .
 He fought in the Battle of Campaldino with the Florentine Guelphs against the Arezzo Ghibellines . He was killed in the battle . He fought with the Arezzellines in the Italian city .
 Dante was accused of corruption and financial wrongdoing by the Black Guelphs for the time that he was serving as city prior (Florence's highest position) for two months in 1300 . Dante served as mayor of Florence, Florence, in 1300, during that time . Dante was
 Bruni's Historiarum Florentini popull libri XII is the first modern history book . Bruni is known for his work on Italian history . His most notable work is that of Florence and Italy .
 Christine de Pizan was an Italian-French late medieval author, primarily a court writer . She wrote commissioned works for aristocratic families and addressed literary debates .
 Her work is characterized by a prominent and positive depiction of women who encouraged ethical and judicious conduct in courtly life . Her work was characterized by . prominent . and positive depictions of women .
 Christine's participation in a literary debate about Jean de Meun's Romance of the Rose allowed her to move beyond the courtly circles, and ultimately established her status as a writer concerned with the position of women in society . Much of the impetus for her writing came from her need to earn
 Niccolo Machiavelli was an Italian Renaissance historian, politician, diplomat, philosopher, Humanist, and writer . He was a diplomat, historian, diplomat and philosopher .
 His middle road ("Via Media"") approach disappointed and angered scholars in both camps . The middle road disappointed scholars and angered both sides .
 He is known for signing and dating his work . Signatures were not particularly customary during this time, but helped secure his lasting reputation .
 The concept of a nation-state is notoriously difficult to define . The Learning Objective is to Define a Nation-State .
 The most obvious impact of the nation-state is the creation of a uniform national culture through state policy . Nation-states have their own characteristics that today may be taken-for-granted factors shaping a modern state .
 A global system based on the principle of international law that each state has sovereignty over its territory and domestic affairs, to the exclusion of all external powers . Each state (no matter how large or small) is equal in international law . Westphalian system .
 The Westphalian system did not create the nation-state, but it meets the criteria for its component states . The nation-states meet criteria for their component states, the Westphalia system did .
 European boundaries set by the Congress of Vienna, 1815 . Europe was divided mostly into empires, kingdoms, and confederations . European borders were set by Congress of the Vienna .
 Peace of Westphalia established a new system of political order in Europe based upon the concept of co-existing sovereign states . The Peace of the Peace established the precedent of peace reached by diplomatic congress .
 The Westphalian principle of recognition of another state's sovereignty and right to decide its own fate rests at the foundations of international law today . The principle of recognising another country's sovereignty is the foundation of law today, according to international law .
 The European colonization of Asia and Africa in the 19th century and two global wars in the 20th century undermined the principles established in Westphalia . Europe's colonisation of Asia, Africa and the two wars in 20th Century undermined those principles .
 The principle of international law is that each nationstate has sovereignty over its territory and domestic affairs, to the exclusion of all external powers, on the principle of non-interference in another country's domestic affairs . Each state is equal in international law .
 Protestant Bohemians living in the dominion of Habsburg Austria to revolt against their nominal ruler, Ferdinand Il. Ferdinand I. II . These events caused widespread fears throughout northern and Central Europe, and triggered widespread fears .
 The Empire and its opponent France negotiated in Munster . The empire and its . opponent France, including . allies of each of each, as well as the Republic of the Seven United Netherlands and . its opponent Spain (and their respective allies).
 This principle of international law presumes that each state has sovereignty over its territory and domestic affairs, to the exclusion of all external powers, on the principle of noninterference in another country's domestic affairs . Each state is equal in international law, according to the principle that each country is
 Medieval Spain was the scene of almost constant warfare between Muslims and Christians . By 1250, nearly all of Iberia was back under Christian rule, with the exception of the Muslim kingdom of Granada . Around 1480, Catholic Monarchs Ferdinand II of Aragon and Isabella |
 Arian teachings were first attributed to Arius , a Christian presbyter in Alexandria, Egypt . Arius was a pre-Christian presbyter . He is credited with his teachings .
 Muslim interest in the peninsula returned in force around when Al-Mansur sacked Barcelona in 985 . Muslim interest returned in Spain when Al Mansur sacked the city in 983 .
 The Capitulation of Granada shows Muhammad XII confronting Ferdinand and Isabella . Francisco Pradilla Ortiz was the author of the book, "The Capitulated Granada"
 Between 1480 and 1492 hundreds of those who had converted were accused of secretly practicing their original religion (crypto-Judaism or crypto-Islam) and arrested, imprisoned, interrogated under torture, and some cases burned to death .
 Inquisition was not definitively abolished until 1834, during the reign of Isabella II . Inquisition was abolished in 1834 after a period of declining influence in the preceding century .
 Spain was ruled by the major branch of the Habsburg dynasty over the 16th and 17th centuries . Explain why the Spanish Habburgs grew increasingly feeble as a family .
 In this period, it dominated Europe politically and militarily, but experienced a gradual decline of influence in the second half of the 17th century under the later Habsburg kings .
 Spain's first Habsburg ruler, Charles |, became king of Spain in 1516, Spain became central to the dynastic struggles of Europe . Spain is central to Europe's dynastic struggle for the throne .
 Portugal was lost to the crown for good; in Italy and most of Catalonia, French forces were expelled and Catalonia's independence was suppressed . e Charles’s mental and physical disabilities, caused most likely by the generations of inbreeding among the Spanish Habsburgs, enabled power games
 Spain as a unified state came into being by right only after the death of Charles II in 1700 . Charles II was the last ruler of Spain of the Habsburg dynasty . Spain is now the most populous country in the world .
 Philip Il's government resorted to a tactic that had been resolutely resisted by Philip Il, paying for the budget deficits by the mass minting of increasingly worthless vellones (the currency) causing inflation .
 Philip Il was the most powerful European monarch in an era of religious conflict . Extreme commitment to championing Catholicism against both Protestantism and Islam shaped his domestic and foreign policies .
 During the reign of Philip Il, Spain reached the height of its influence and power, and remained firmly Roman Catholic . Describe Philip II's convictions and how he attempted to carry them out. Describe him as an example of his attempts to carry out his convictions .
 Wars with Dutch Provinces, England, France, and the Ottoman Empire all had the undermining religious aspects of protecting Catholicism in increasingly Protestant Europe or protecting Christianity against Islam . The Ottoman Empire and the Dutch Provvinces of England, England and France were all involved .
 Philip Il was the most powerful European monarch in an era of war and religious conflict . The king's reign and the man himself has become a controversial historical subject . Philip Il is considered one of the world's most powerful men .
 Catholic League was a major participant in the French Wars of Religion, formed by Henry |, Duke of Guise, in 1576 . It was formed in France by Henry .
 monarchs are not to be confused with kings consort, who were merely consorts of their wives, not co-rulers . Similarly, the husband of an heiress could become the legal possessor of her lands jure uxoris, ""by right of wife
 Fear and envy of Spanish success and domination created a wide receptiveness for the worst possible descriptions of Philip Il. Even in countries that remained Catholic, primarily France and the Italian states, fear and envy led to descriptions of him .
 Spanish rule of Naples was important for making connections between Italian and Spanish art . The most influential Spanish painters of the era include El Greco, Diego Velazquez, Francisco de Zurbaran, and Bartolomé Esteban Murillo . e
 E/ Siglo de Oro does not imply precise dates and is usually considered to have lasted longer than an actual century . The E/Siglo is considered to be one of the world's most famous landmarks .
 The last great writer of the period, Pedro Calder6én de la Barca, died in 1681 . His death is usually considered the end of E/ Siglo de Oro in the arts and literature .
 Don Quixote, the first European novel, has endured to the present day as a landmark in world literary history . It was an immediate international hit in its own time . Cervantes's novel was published in 18th Century Spain .
 Pedro Calderén de la Barca is regarded as the culmination of the Spanish Baroque theater . Born when the Spanish Golden Age theater was being defined by Lope de Vega, he developed it further .
 e Philip Il and the Spanish Armada O° O°° ° O° ""Morisco" are both Spanish .
 Queen Elizabeth I was Queen of England and Ireland from 1558 until her death in 1603 . She was queen of England, Ireland and England until 1603.
 Elizabeth never married nor had children and thus was the last monarch of the Tudor dynasty . e Mary's marriage to Philip Il of Spain contributed to the complex relations between England and Spain that after Mary's death dominated Elizabeth's reign .
 Elizabeth's efforts led to the Religious Settlement, a legal process by which the Protestant Church of England was restored and the queen took the title of Supreme Governor of the Church . e Elizabeth's foreign policy was largely defensive .
 Pope Sixtus V, Philip Il of Spain, and the Jesuits were all supporters of this Catholic party . Pope Philip II, Philip III of Spain and Jesuits supported the party .
 Elizabeth I was Queen of England and Ireland from 1558 until her death in 1603 . Elizabeth I of England was born in 1558 . She was queen of England, Ireland and England and England .
 Darnley Portrait was named after a previous owner . Portrait of Elizabeth Elizabeth was commissioned by the National Portrait Gallery .
 After the occupation and loss of Le Havre, Elizabeth avoided military expeditions on the continent until 1585, when she sent an English army to aid the Protestant Dutch rebels against Philip II .
 Thirty Years' War was a series of wars in Central Europe between 1618 and 1648 . A series of armed conflicts and political machinations ended in, among other things, the prosecution of Charles Key .
 The separation of the Church of England from Rome under Henry VIII brought England alongside a broad Reformation movement . The English Reformation differed from its European counterparts .
 Mary's successor, Elizabeth I, restored the Church of England and reasserted the royal supremacy in 1559 . Elizabeth I's successor Elizabeth I restored the church of England in 1558 .
 James | of England, 1605 King of Scotland as James VI from 1567 and King of England and Ireland as James | from the union of the Scottish and English crowns in 1603 until his death . King of Ireland and England as James . of England from 1603 to 16
 Charles married French princess Henrietta Maria . Charles married the French princess in 17th century . Charles and Henrietta married in 1877 .
 Charles I's attempt to impose taxes not authorized by Parliament contributed to the ongoing conflict between the king and Parliament . The 1628 Petition of Right resulted in the passing of the petition of right in 1628 .
 A series of parliamentary declarations establishing a series of personal liberties known as the Reso/utions were prepared after tense debates . In the end, a suggestion to pass the Resolutions as a petition of right won .
 1628 Petition of Right marks the founding of the modern British monarchy . Petition covered discretionary imprisonment, non-Parliamentary taxation, martial law, and forced billeting . Petition was produced by committee of committee members .
 Oliver Cromwell ruled as Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland . The English Civil War ended in the death of the English monarchy . Cromwell was the leader of the Roundheads .
 Charles I's belief, inherited from his father, that the power of the crown is God-given and that the king does not have to respect the position of the English Parliament, shaped his reign and led to a political crisis that in the end would cost him his own life .
 After Ireland first descended into chaos, cities and towns declared their sympathies for one faction or the other . Cities and towns declare their support for one side of the war .
 The English Civil War pitted the supporters of King Charles and later his son and successor, Charles Il, against supporters of Parliament . Charles I and Charles I were supporters of the King and his son Charles II .
 Cavaliers first used by Roundheads as a term of abuse for the wealthier male Royalist supporters of King Charles and his son Charles II of England during the English Civil War .
 Certain duties and taxes were first levied in Edward II's reign on every tun of imported wine, which came mostly from Spain and Portugal, and on every pound weight of merchandise exported or imported . The war was initially a war between Protestant and Catholic states .
 Lrish Catholics feared a resurgence of Protestant power, and struck first . Within months, the lrish Catholics, fearing a resurgence, struck first, and all of Ireland descended into chaos .
 He entered the English Civil War on the side of the ""Roundheads,"" or Parliamentarians . He was an intensely religious man (an Independent Puritan) who entered the Civil War .
 In April 1653, he dismissed the Rump Parliament by force, setting up a short-lived nominated assembly known as Barebone's Parliament . He was invited by his fellow leaders to rule as Lord Protector of England (which included Wales at the time) from December 1653 .
 A constitution of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland . Instrument of Government . Constitution of Commonwealth . Constitution .
 The Protectorate was the period during the Commonwealth when England (which at that time included Wales), Ireland, and Scotland were governed by a Lord Protector . The term "Commonwealth" is sometimes used for the whole of 1649 to 1660 . For other historians, the use of the
 Cromwell passed a series of Penal Laws against Roman Catholics (the vast majority of the population) and confiscated large amounts of their land . Cromwell's Penal Laws were passed by the majority of Roman Catholics in England .
 Richard Cromwell was Lord Protector of England, Scotland, and Ireland after Oliver Cromwell's death in 1658, but he lacked his father's authority . Learning Objective Evaluate why the Stuarts were brought back and restored to the English throne .
 He proved unable to manage the Parliament and control the army and was removed from his office after several months .
 George Monck emerged as a key figure in the restoration of the monarchy and bringing Charles II back to England . Monck was one of the key figures in restoring Charles II to the throne .
 Proclamation announcing the death of Oliver Cromwell and the succession of Richard Cromwell as Lord Protector .
 Charles II issued the Declaration of Breda on April 4, 1660, in which he made several promises in relation to the reclamation of the crown of England . Charles II made promises to re-claim the crown .
 Monck organized the Convention Parliament; on May 8, it proclaimed that King Charles Il had been the lawful monarch since the execution of Charles | on January 30, 1649 . Charles I was executed in 1649; Charles I had been King of England .
 Oliver Cromwell, Henry lreton, Judge Thomas Pride, and Judge John Bradshaw were posthumously attained for high treason . Cromwell and Henry Pride were found guilty of high treason in 17th century .
 In January 1661, the corpses of Cromwell, Ireton, and Bradshaw were exhumed and hanged in chains at Tyburn . Cromwell and Ireton were hanged at the end of 1661 .
 Charles Il of England by Peter Lely, 1675, Collection of Euston Hall, Suffolk . King Charles II was the first monarch to rule after the English Restoration .
 James II ascended the throne upon the death of his brother, Charles II, in 1685 . Analyze the significant changes the Glorious Revolution made to the English government .
 James's greatest political problem was his Catholicism, which left him alienated from both parties in England . During his short reign, he became directly involved in the political battles between Catholicism and Protestantism .
 William and Mary were appointed monarchs in 1689 . The Bill of Rights was passed in order to regulate the relationship between the monarch and Parliament . William arrived on November 5 .
 James II of England was the second surviving son of Charles II . He ascended the throne upon the death of his brother, Charles II, in 1685 . James Il of England became the king of England .
 Detail of Willlam and Mary depicted on the ceiling of the Painted Hall of the Greenwich Hospital .
 Cardinal Richelieu was a French clergyman, nobleman, and statesman, serving as King Louis XIII's Chief Minister from 1624 . Learning Objective Identify his main goals and successes in achieving them .
 Initially Richelieu was closely affiliated with Marie de Médicis, Louis XIlII's mother, and did not enjoy the king's trust . He sought to consolidate royal power and strengthen France's international position . e
 A treaty negotiated by Cardinal Richelieu with Huguenot leaders and signed by King Louis XIII of France in 1629 . Peace of Alais was signed by Louis XIV of France .
 Cardinal Richelieu was a French clergyman, nobleman, and statesman . He served as King Louis XIll's Chief Minister from 1624 .
 Richelieu was also famous for his patronage of the arts . He was also a patron of the Bibliotheque nationale de France .
 Most notably he founded the Académie Francaise, the learned society responsible for matters pertaining to the French language . Most notably, he founded French language matters .
 Cardinal Jules Mazarin was an Italian cardinal, diplomat, and politician . He served as the Chief Minister to the King of France from 1642 until his death in 1661 . Mazarin's goals during his tenure as regent were to achieve his goals .
 He functioned essentially as the co-ruler of France alongside the queen during the regency of Anne, and until his death effectively directed French policy alongside the monarch . e Mazarin continued Richelieu's anti-Habsburg policy and laid the foundation for Louis XIV's expansion
 Mazarin pursued a policy of promises and calculated delay to defuse armed insurrections and keep Huguenots disarmed . He was critical to the negotiations of the Peace of Westphalia, which left France the most powerful state in continental Europe .
 As the Crown needed to recover from its expenditures in the recent wars, the increase of taxes contributed to already growing social unrest . However, the Huguenots never achieved any protection. e
 King Henry IV of France granted Calvinist Protestants substantial rights in the nation . Edict of Nantes was signed probably in 1598 by King of France .
 After serving in the papal army and diplomatic service, he entered the service of France and made himself valuable to King Louis XIlIl's chief minister, Cardinal Richelieu .
 During the negotiations of the Peace of Westphalia, Mazarin represented France with policies that were French rather than Catholic . Mazarin (together with the queen) represented France in the peace negotiations . During the Thirty Years' War he represented France .
 Austria ceded all Habsburg lands and claims in Alsace to France . France acknowledged her de facto sovereignty over the Three Bishoprics of Metz, Verdun, and Toul . Austria ruled by the Habsburger Emperor Ferdinand Ill, ceded the Hapsburg
 In May 1648, a tax levied on judicial officers of the Parlement of Paris provoked a refusal to pay and a condemnation of earlier financial edicts . A scheme of constitutional reforms was framed by a united committee of the parlement (the Chambre Saint-Louis)
 Henri, Viscount of Turenne, as the defender of France and Louis Il, and Prince de Condé as a Spanish invader. Henri, . Henri, as . Louis Il and Louis I, and . Prince de . Condé, as well as the . defender
 At the time of King Louis XIlIl's death in 1643, Louis XIV was only five years old. Describe Louis XIV's views on royal power and how he expanded his own authority . Describe the king's view of royal power as an example of how Louis XIV expanded
 At the time of King Louis XIlIl's death in 1643, Louis XIV was only five years old .
 The principle of cu/us regio, eius religio generally meant that subjects who refused to convert could emigrate . Louis banned emigration and effectively insisted that all Protestants must be converted .
 The Edict of Nantes was issued in 1598 by Henry IV of France . Analyze Louis XIV's persecution of the Huguenots and the consequences that had for France .
 He initially excluded Protestants from office, constrained the meeting of synods, closed churches outside Edict-stipulated areas, banned Protestant outdoor preachers, and prohibited domestic Protestant migration .
 The revocation caused France to suffer a kind of early brain drain, as it lost a large number of skilled craftsmen . The revocation of the French passport led to the loss of skilled craftmen .
 The Edict of Nantes was signed in 1598 by King Henry IV of France . It granted the Calvinist Protestants of France substantial rights in the nation .
 The principle of cu/us regio, eius religio had usually meant that subjects who refused to convert could emigrate . Louis banned emigration and effectively insisted that all Protestants must be converted .
 Louis XIV aspired to make France the leading European power . Identify the consequences of Louis XIV's wars in France .
 The Franco-Dutch War pitted France, Sweden, Munster, Cologne, and England against the Dutch Republic, which was later joined by the Austrian Habsburg lands, Brandenburg-Prussia, and Spain to form a Quadruple Alliance . France, the Netherlands, Germany,
 The 1678-1679 Treaties of Nijmegen declared the Franche-Comté and the Spanish Netherlands French territories, making France Europe's strongest power . After years of fighting and a series of exhausting battles, the Treaties were declared the French territories .
 The Nine Years' War once again pitted Louis XIV against a European-wide coalition, the Grand Alliance . The Grand Alliance was formed by Louis XIV and the French Empire .
 It was signed in 1684 at the Dominican convent at Ratisbon in Bavaria between Louis XIV of France and the Holy Roman Emperor, Leopold I, and the Spanish King, Charles II, on the other .
 The Nine Years' War pitted Louis XIV against a European-wide coalition . The Grand Alliance was led by the Anglo-Dutch King William III, Holy Roman Emperor Leopold I, King Charles II of Spain, Victor Amadeus II of Savoy, and several princes of the
 The French king faced a powerful coalition aimed at curtailing his ambitions . But when Leopold and the German princes resolved to resist, the French king at last faced .
 When Savoy defected from the Alliance, all parties were keen for a negotiated settlement . The Maritime Powers (England and the Dutch Republic) were also financially exhausted, and all parties wanted a settlement .
 Louis accepted William Ill as the rightful King of England, while the Dutch acquired their barrier fortress system in the Spanish Netherlands to help secure their own borders . Louis also accepted William Iain's claim to the throne of England and accepted William III of England .
 Louis XIV and the Grand Alliance would soon embroil Louis XIV in a final war —the War of the Spanish Succession . However, with the ailing and childless Charles Il of Spain approaching his end, a new conflict over the inheritance of the . Spanish Empire . The War of
 In the late 1690s, the declining health of childless King Charles II of Soain deepened the dispute over his succession . Describe the reasons why there was conflict over who should take the throne .
 Charles II of Spain opposed partition and on his deathbed offered the empire to Philip, Duke of Anjou and Louis's grandson, who became King Philip V Spain . Charles II was King Philip of Spain, who was King of Spain .
 Britain, the Dutch Republic, the Holy Roman Emperor, and the petty German states formed another Grand Alliance . Britain declared war on France in 1702 and declared war against the French .
 French and British ministers prepared the groundwork for a peace conference . The Spanish empire was partitioned between the major and minor powers . In 1712 Britain ceased combat operations .
 The agreement proposed that Louis, le Grand Dauphin, would get Naples, Sicily, and Tuscany . Archduke Charles, the younger son of Emperor Leopold I, got the Spanish Netherlands .
 Under the new treaty, Archduke Charles , the second son of Emperor Leopold |, was to become king of Spain when Charles II died, and acquire her oversees colonies . Under the treaty, Charles II would become king when Charles died .
 In the late 1690s, the declining health of childless King Charles Il of Soain deepened the ongoing dispute over his succession . Charles Il's declining health led to a succession dispute .
 The main rivals for the Spanish inheritance were the heirs and descendants of the Bourbon King Louis XIV of France and the Austrian Habsburg Holy Roman Emperor Leopold I . The inheritance was so vast that its transference would dramatically increase either French or Austrian power .
 Louis signed the Treaty of the Hague with William III of England in 1698 . In an attempt to avoid war, Louis signed a treaty with William in order to avoid conflict .
 The signatories omitted to consult Charles II, who was passionately opposed to the dismemberment of his empire . Charles II was vehemently opposed to his empire being dismembered .
 In 1700, Louis and William II] concluded a fresh partitioning agreement, the Treaty of London . The Treaty of Paris was signed by the French king in 1700 .
 Charles VI (the Holy Roman Emperor and Archduke of Austria) received the Spanish Netherlands, the Kingdom of Naples, Sardinia, and the bulk of the Duchy of Milan . Savoy received Sicily and parts of the . Duchys of Milan, while Charles VI received
 Soain ceded Gibraltar and Minorca to Great Britain and agreed to give to the British the Asiento, a monopoly on the oceanic slave trade to the Spanish colonies in America .
 William Ill's life drew towards its conclusion, he was concerned with the question of succession to the Spanish throne . Explain William's stake in the War of the Spanish Succession and the goals of the Grand Alliance .
 He sought to prevent the Spanish inheritance from going to the descendants of either Louis XIV or Leopold I, as he feared this would upset the European balance of power .
 William III ruled France's growing strength made war inevitable . The Tory-dominated House of Commons was keen to prevent further conflict . To William III, war was inevitable .
 Under the new Treaty, Archduke Charles , the second son of the Emperor Leopold I, was to become king of Spain when Charles II died, and acquire her oversees colonies . The Treaty was signed by Charles II in 1883 .
 William III was sovereign Prince of Orange from birth, Dutch Stadtholder from 1672, and King of England, Ireland, and Scotland from 1689 until his death . William III of England and the Spanish Succession was born in Orange, Holland .
 The king of Spain, Charles II, had no prospect of having children . Charles II's closest relatives were Louis XIV and Leopold I, Holy Roman Emperor .
 Louis and William sought to solve the problem of the Spanish inheritance through negotiation based on the principle of partition . Charles I. I. and Charles II. tried to take effect after the death of Charles Il. Charles II . Louis I. died in 1881 .
 Around the same time as the Alliance was formed, the Catholic James Il of England —exiled in SaintGermain since the Glorious Revolution—died . Louis XIV recognized James II's Catholic son, James, as King James III of England .
 The War of the Spanish Succession was a European conflict triggered by the death of the last Habsburg king of Spain, Charles II, in 1700 . Describe the terms of the Peace of Utrecht and their significance across Europe . Use this information to help students understand the terms
 The question of who would succeed him had long troubled ministers in capitals throughout Europe . As he had reigned over a vast global empire, the question of his successor has long troubled governments .
 The balance of victories and losses shifted regularly over the course of the war . Both sides exhausted militarily and financially, with both sides exhausted . The balance shifts regularly in the balance .
 War of the Spanish Succession was a major European conflict triggered by the death of the last Habsburg king of Spain, Charles Il. Charles I. I died in 1700 . The war was triggered by Charles I, the last Spanish king, Charles II .
 By backing the Habsburg candidate (known to his supporters as King Charles Ill of Spain) each member of the coalition sought to reduce the power of France, ensure their own territorial and dynastic security, and restore and improve the trade opportunities .
 The treaties were concluded between the representatives of Louis XIV of France and his grandson Philip V of Spain on one hand, and representatives of Anne of Great Britain, Victor Amadeus II of Sardinia, John V of Portugal, and the United Provinces of the Netherlands .
 Peter's half-brother, lvan V, and ten-year-old Peter became co-tsars . Sophia Alekseyevna, one of Alexis's daughters from his first marriage, acted as regent . Eventually, Peter's sister, Sophia, was acting as reg
 Sophia was eventually overthrown, with Peter | and Ivan V continuing to act as co-tsars . Peter's mother was in charge of the throne .
 The European trip exposed Peter to Western European artists, scientists, craftsmen, and noble families . The mission failed, as Europe was at the time preoccupied with the question of the Spanish succession .
 Members of the highest rank of the feudal Bulgarian, Moscovian, Ruthenian, Wallachian, and Moldavian aristocracies . Second only to the ruling princes , from the 10th century to the 17th century .
 Peter the Great of the House of Romanov ruled the Tsardom of Russia and later the Russian Empire from 1682 until his death . The Romanovs took over Russia in 1613, and the first decades of their reign were marked by attempts to restore peace, both internally and
 Alexis Miloslavskaya was the first wife of Alexis Naryshkin . As he did not leave any children, a dispute arose between the Miloslavsky family and the Naryskin family over who should inherit the throne .
 Boyar Duma chose 10-year-old Peter to become tsar, with his mother as regent . Peter's mother was regent, with her mother as tsar .
 Sophia Alekseyevna, one of Alexis's daughters from his first marriage, led a rebellion of the Streltsy . The Miloslavskys and their allies insisted that Peter and Ivan be proclaimed joint tsars, with Ivan being acclaimed as the senior . However, Sophia Ale
 Sophia was eventually overthrown, with Peter and Ivan V continuing to act as co-tsars . After a power struggle, the Streltsy was forced to shift its loyalty, Sophia was overthrown .
 Peter became independent sovereign after Nataliya died in 1694 . Peter became sole ruler after Ilvan's death in 1696 . Peter was the sole ruler of the kingdom after Natalya died .
 His visits to the West impressed upon him the notion that European customs were superior to Russian traditions . e Heavily influenced by his advisers from Western Europe, he reorganized the Russian army along modern lines .
 One of Peter's most audacious goals was reducing the influence of the boyars, or the feudal elite class . His social reforms included the requirement of Western fashion in his court .
 Peter also taxed many Russian cultural customs (such as bathing, fishing, beekeeping, or wearing beards) Peter also issued tax stamps for paper goods .
 Peter the Great sought to gain more maritime outlets to improve his nation's position on the seas . Analyze Peter's foreign policy goals and the extent to which he achieved them .
 Peter's first military efforts were directed against the Ottoman Turks . The goal of making Russia a maritime power shaped Peter's foreign policy . Peter's goal was to make Russia a stronger maritime power .
 e Peter's foreign policy turned the Tsardom into the Russian Empire . He secured formerly PolishLithuanian territories in Ukraine and had a impact on internal politics in the Commonwealth .
 The parties revived their alliance, which Charles XIl of Sweden had destroyed in the Treaty of Altranstadt . The parties agreed on restoring the Polish crown to Augustus .
 Peter, supported by his allies, declared war on Sweden in 1700 . Sweden was at the time led by eighteen-year-old King Charles XIl. Peter declared war against Sweden, which was then led by Charles XVI .
 Peter the Great recognized the weaknesses of the Russian state and aspired to reform it following Western European models . Explain Peter's domestic reforms and what he hoped to accomplish .
 The boyars were seen as obstacles standing in the way of Europeanization and reform . President Vladimir Putin introduced comprehensive changes into Russia's administration .
 The Orthodox church did not accept Peter's reforms, and Peter refused to accept the power of the patriarch . The patriarch's reforms were rejected by the Orthodox church .
 Saint Petersburg became the political and cultural center of Russia in 1712 . He moved the capital from Moscow to Saint Petersburg, and the city became the capital of Russia .
 Peter's manipulations led to the death of his only male heir and the crowning of his second wife, Catherine, the Empress . Peter died without naming a successor .
 Peter the Great aspired to reform the Russian state, following Western European models . Peter's Reforms of the Russia State was Peter's first major reform of the state . Peter was the first Russian monarch to reform Russia's state .
 Catherine I of Russia by Jean-Marc Nattier . Catherine I was the first woman to rule Imperial Russia . She was Peter's second wife .
 One of several views of epistemology, the study of human knowledge, along with rationalism and skepticism . It emphasizes the role of experience and evidence in the formation of ideas, over the notion of innate ideas .
 Enlightenment writers associated scientific advancement with overthrow of religion and authority . Enlightenment writers and thinkers associated science with the overthrow of traditional authority in favor of free thought .
 Both Spinoza and Leibniz asserted that, in principle, all knowledge, including scientific knowledge, could be gained through the use of reason alone . While empiricism dominated the Enlightenment, Immanuel Kant attempted to combine the principles of empiricism and rationalism .
 Both Spinoza and Leibniz asserted that, /n principle, all knowledge, including scientific knowledge, could be gained through the use of reason alone . Both observed that this was not possible /n practice for human beings, except in specific areas of mathematics .
 Kant named his brand of epistemology (theory of knowledge) ""transcendental idealism" Kant first laid out these views in his famous work, The Critique of Pure Reason .
 They are usually defined in opposition to legal rights, or those bestowed onto a person by a given legal system . They are often defined as opposing legal rights or those granted to people by a system .
 The philosophers of the Age of Enlightenment developed the modern concept of natural rights . The concept has been critical to the modern republican government and civil society . Natural rights have been discussed since antiquity .
 The theory addressed the questions of the origin of society and the legitimacy of the authority of the state over the individual .
 He objected to the attempt to derive rights from ""natural law," arguing that law and right signify opposites . Law refers to obligations, while rights refers to the absence of obligations, he said .
 The most famous natural right formulation comes from John Locke, who argued that the natural rights include perfect equality and freedom, and the right to preserve life and property . John Locke argued that natural rights included perfect equality .
 Other Enlightenment and post-Enlightenment philosophers that developed and complicated the concept of natural rights were John Lilourne, Francis Hutcheson, Georg Hegel, and Thomas Paine .
 The modern European anti-slavery movement drew heavily from the concept of natural rights . Natural rights became central to the efforts of European abolitionists .
 Marco Polo's exploration of Eurasia in the Middle Ages was a prelude to the advent of the Age of Discovery in the 15th Century . European medieval knowledge about Asia beyond the reach of the Byzantine Empire was sourced in partial reports, often obscured by legends .
 e Indian Ocean trade routes were sailed by Arab traders . The map remained the most accurate world map for the next three centuries .
 European expeditions crossing Eurasia by land in the late Middle Ages marked a prelude to the Age of Discovery . The fleets visited Arabia, East Africa, India, Maritime Southeast Asia, and Thailand .
 Others traveled to Asia between 13th and the third quarter of the 15th century . Yaroslav of Vladimir and his sons Alexander Nevsky and Andrey II of Vladimir . Ibn Battuta and André de Longjumeau traveled to various regions of Asia in the 13th to 15
 Tabula Rogeriana is a description of the world and world map created by the Arab geographer, Muhammad alIdrisi, in 1154 .
 In 1154, Arab geographer Muhammad al-lIdrisi created the Tabula Rogeriana at the court of King Roger Il of Sicily .
 The Travels of Marco Polo was originally published during Polo's lifetime but frequently reprinted and translated . Marco Polo's book was first published during his lifetime but was frequently reprinted .
 Marco Polo was on board the ship at the time of Marco Polo's first voyage . Marco Polo had been on the way to the island . He was on the ship when it was attacked by pirates .
 Henry's captain Joao Goncalves Zarco and Tristao Vaz Teixeira were driven by a storm to Madeira in 1419 . The uninhabited island off the coast of Africa had probably been known to Europeans since the 14th century .
 Papal bulls gave Portugal the trade monopoly for the newly appropriated territories, laying the foundations for the Portuguese empire . Later, this monopoly would be enforced by two Papal Bulls . Portugal would have a trade monopoly on the newly annexed territories .
 Following the first American voyage, Columbus made three more . e A division of influence became necessary to avoid conflict between the Spanish and Portuguese . e
 Of equal importance was the Spanish conquest of the Inca Empire under Francisco Pizarro . The Inca empire was conquered by the Spanish conquistador of Peru .
 In 1565, the first permanent Spanish settlement in the Philippines was founded, which added a critical Asian post to the empire . The first Spanish settlement was founded in 1565 .
 The object of the third voyage was to verify the existence of a continent that King John Il of Portugal claimed was located to the southwest of the Cape Verde Islands . King John I claimed that the continent was to be located to southwest of Cape Verdes Islands .
 The Spanish conquest was also facilitated by the spread of diseases common in Europe but never present in the New World, which reduced the indigenous populations in the Americas .
 King Henry VII commissioned John Cabot to lead a voyage to discover a route to Asia via the North Atlantic in 1496 . Cabot's voyage was the first voyage to explore the continent in North Atlantic . He led the ship to the Americas, sailing over the Atlantic to Asia .
 Cartier attempted to create the first permanent European settlement in North America at CapRouge in 1541, but the settlement was abandoned the next year . Cartier's attempt to create a permanent settlement in the U.S. was abandoned .
 By the first decades of the 18th century, the French created and controlled a number of settlement colonies in North America . e While the French lost nearly all of its colonial gains in the Americas, their colonial expansion also covered territories in Africa and Asia . e
 France's most important Caribbean colonial possession was established in 1664, when the colony of Saint-Domingue was founded on the western half of the Spanish island of Hispaniola .
 The eastern half of Hispaniola (today's Dominican Republic) was given to France by Spain in 1795 . The eastern part of the island also came under French rule for a short period in 1796 .
 Wikipedia CC BY-SA 3.0.0: Shepherd Shepherd .
 Bacon's Novum Organum was supposed to replace the methods put forward in Aristotle's Organon . Bacon put forward the methods in Bacon's book Novum organum .
 The term British empiricism came into use to describe philosophical differences perceived between two of its founders, Francis Bacon and René Descartes, who were described as a rationalist . The term was used to describe differences between the two founders .
 Isaac Newton's Principia formulated the laws of motion and universal gravitation that dominated scientists’ view of the physical universe for the next three centuries . The discoveries of Johannes Kepler and Galileo gave the theory credibility and the work culminated in Isaac Newton .
 Studying human anatomy based upon the dissection of human corpses, rather than the animal dissections, as practiced for centuries . The anatomy of human anatomy is based on dissecting human corpses rather than animal corpses .
 Discovering and studying magnetism and electricity, and thus, electric properties of various materials . Discovering magnets and electricity is key to understanding magnetism .
 Modernization of disciplines (making them more as what they are today) includes dentistry, physiology, chemistry, chemistry and optics . Modernization is a modernization of a number of disciplines, such as dentistry .
 Invention of tools that deepened the understating of sciences, including mechanical calculator, steam digester, refracting and reflecting telescopes, vacuum pump, or mercury barometer . Invention of scientific tools included mechanical calculator .
 The philosophy of using an inductive approach to nature was in strict contrast with the earlier Aristotelian approach of deduction . Distinguish between the different key figures of the scientific revolution and their achievements in mathematics and physics .
 European scientists began applying quantitative measurements to the measurement of physical phenomena on the earth in the 16th and 17th centuries .
 Copernican Revolution began with the publication of Copernicus’s De revolutionibus orbium orbium coelestium . The paradigm shift from the Ptolemaic model of the heavens to the heliocentric model with the sun at the center of the solar
 In practice, many scientists (and philosophers) believed that a healthy mix of both was needed . The willingness to question assumptions, yet also to interpret observations assumed to have some degree of validity, is needed .
 René Descartes distinguished between knowledge that could be attained by reason alone (rationalist approach) and the knowledge that required experience of the world (physiological approach) He thought this knowledge was mathematics, which he thought was mathematics . Descarte's thought emphasized the power of reasoning
 To the extent that medieval natural philosophers used mathematical problems, they limited social studies to theoretical analyses of local soeed and other aspects of life . The medieval social studies were limited by mathematical problems .
 Isaac Newton's Philosophie Naturalis Principia Mathematica concluded the Copernican Revolution . Isaac Newton concluded the revolution with the Philosopher's Philosopheria Naturalis .
 The first usage of the word e/ectricity is ascribed to Thomas Browne in 1646 work .
 The development of astronomy during the period of the scientific revolution entirely transformed societal views about nature . Assess the work of both Copernicus and Kepler and their revolutionary ideas. Assess both of the ideas and their work .
 Nicolaus Copernicus' De revolutionibus in 1543 is often seen as marking the beginning of the time when scientific disciplines gradually transformed into the modern sciences as we know them .
 Copernican heliocentrism is the name given to the astronomical model developed by Copernicus . It positioned the sun near the center of the universe, motionless, with Earth and the other planets rotating around it in circular paths . For over a century, few astronomers were
 Kepler's work on Mars and planetary motion further confirmed the heliocentric theory . Kepler worked on Mars, Mars and planets' motion . Kepler's theory of solar system formation confirmed by Kepler's findings .
 Galileo Galilei designed his own telescope, with which he made a number of critical astronomical observations . Galilei used the telescope to make his observations of the world .
 During the Renaissance, experimental investigation, particularly in the field of dissection and body examination, advanced the knowledge of human anatomy and modernized medical research . List the discoveries and progress made by leading medical professionals during the Early Modern era .
 De humani corporis fabrica by Andreas Vesalius emphasized the priority of dissection and what has come to be called the ""anatomical"" view of the body . Vesalii emphasized the importance of dissections .
 Ambroise Paré is considered one of the fathers of surgery and forensic pathology . He was a pioneer in surgical techniques and battlefield medicine, especially in the treatment of wounds .
 A system of medicine detailing the makeup and workings of the human body . Adopted by the Indian Ayurveda and Ancient Greek and Roman physicians and philosophers .
 French surgeon Ambroise Paré (c.101590) is considered one of the fathers of surgery and modern forensic pathology . Paré was a pioneer in surgical techniques and battlefield medicine .
 He is widely known for writing the first complete scientific description of dentistry . Le Chirurgien Dentiste was published in 1728 . He is also known for his work on dental science .
 Andreas Vesalius, De corporis humani fabrica libri septem, illustration attributed to Jan van Calcar (circa 1499-1546/1550) Illustration of De Humani Corporis Fabrica .
 Thomas Hobbes was an English philosopher and scientist . He was one of the key figures in the political debates of the Enlightenment period . Describe Hobbes' beliefs on the relationship between government and the people .
 Hobbes was the first modern philosopher to articulate a detailed social contract theory . Despite advocating the idea of absolutism of the sovereign, he developed some of the fundamentals of European liberal thought .
 Hobbes argued that in order to avoid chaos, people accede to a social contract and establish a civil society . One of the most influential tensions in Hobbes' argument is a relation between the absolute sovereign and the society . In it, Hobbes set out his doctrine of the foundation
 His writings were immensely influential for the development of social contract theory . He was influential in the theory of the social contract relationship .
 Locke's work on political theory is divided into the First Treatise and the Second Treatise . Locke's most important work is the First and Second Treatises of Government .
 He assumed that the sole right to defend in the state of nature was not enough . People established a civil society to resolve conflicts in a civil way with help from government . He believed that human nature is characterized by reason and tolerance .
 Locke's conception of natural rights is captured in his best known statement that individuals have a right to protect their ""life, health, liberty, or possessions"" Locke's belief that the natural right to property is derived from labor . Locke believed that the right to a person's life, health
 Montesquieu was a French lawyer, man of letters, and one of the most influential political philosophers of the Age of Enlightenment . He was one of France's most influential thinkers . Describe his solution for keeping power from falling into the hands of any individual .
 The Spirit of the Laws is a treatise on political theory that was first published anonymously by Montesquieu in 1748 . His political theory work, particularly the idea of separation of powers, shaped modern democratic government .
 republican political systems vary depending on how broadly they extend citizenship rights . Another major theme in The Spirit of Laws concerns political liberty and the best means of preserving it .
 William's successful invasion of England with a Dutch fleet and army led to his ascending of the English throne as William Ill of England jointly with his wife Mary II of England in conjunction with the documentation of the Bill of Rights in 1689 .
 Voltaire was a French Enlightenment writer, historian, and philosopher . He was famous for his wit, attacks on the established Catholic Church, and his advocacy of freedom of religion, freedom of expression . Discuss Voltaire's thoughts on the masses and government .
 Voltaire had an enormous influence on the development of historiography through his work . His two most famous works elaborating the concept are The Treatise on Tolerance and The Philosophical Dictionary .
 Voltaire's best-known works are The Age of Louis XIV and The Essay on the Customs and the Spirit of the Nations . e Voltaire hardly spared anyone in his criticism of French society and existing social structures .
 The monarchic-aristocratic, social, and political system was established in the Kingdom of France from approximately the 15th century until the latter part of the 18th century . Under the late Valois and Bourbon Dynasties, the system was known as Ancien .
 Voltaire Francois-Marie Arouet, known by his literary pseudonym Voltaire, was a French Enlightenment writer, historian, and philosopher . Voltaire was famous for his wit, attacks on the established Catholic Church, and his advocacy of freedom of religion, freedom of expression, and separation
 Voltaire's first major philosophical work in his battle against ""l'infame" was The Treatise on Tolerance . Voltaire calls for tolerance between religions and targets religious fanaticism, especially that of the Jesuits .
 In The Discourse on the Origins of Inequality Among Men, he maintained that the stage of human development associated with what he called ""savages"" was the best or optimal in human development . Rousseau argued that the arts and sciences corrupt human morality .
 Rousseau's philosophy of education concerns itself with developing the students’ character and moral sense, so that they may learn to practice self-mastery and remain virtuous even in the unnatural and imperfect society in which they will have to live . Rousseau: "Rousseau’
 Rousseau was a believer in the moral superiority of the patriarchal family on the antique Roman model . Rousseau believed in the idea of a family of moral superiority .
 The private sphere as Rousseau imagines it depends on the subordination of women . The public sphere and the public political sohere must function in order for both it and the sohere to function . Rousseau says women must be subordinated to the power of the state .
 He launched a career as a mathematician, soon reaching international fame . He became famous for his work in mathematics and science .
 e Condorcet took a leading role when the French Revolution swept France in 1789 . However, his political ideas, particularly that of radical democracy and opposition to Slavery, were criticized heavily .
 He was educated at the Jesuit College in Reims and at the Co//lége de Navarre in Paris . He gained his first public distinctions in mathematics .
 Mary Wollstonecraft was an English writer, philosopher, and advocate of women's rights . Her philosophy differed from the other Enlightenment thinkers . Summarize the ways in which Wollstoncraft's philosophy differed .
 Until the late 20th century, Wollstonecraft's life received more attention than her writing . e The majority of her early works focus on education .
 In response to Burke's Reflections on the Revolution in France, Wollstonecraft's A Vindication of the Rights of Men attacks aristocracy and republicanism . She also advocates the education of women, a controversial topic which she would return to throughout her career . e
 In it, Wollstonecraft argues that women should have an education commensurate with their position in society . Claims that women are essential to the nation because they educate its children and because they could be ""companions"" to their husbands .
 Scholars of feminism still debate what extent Wollstonecraft was, indeed, a feminist . She does call for equality between the sexes in particular areas of life, such as morality, but does not explicitly state that men and women are equal .
 Wollstonecraft addresses her writings to the middle class, and represents a class bias by her condescending treatment of the poor . She represents her class bias in her writings, and she represents the poor in her work .
 Wollstonecraft married the philosopher William Godwin, one of the forefathers of the anarchist movement . After two ill-fated affairs, she had a daughter, Fanny Imlay, with Henry Fuseli .
 She assembled an anthology of literary extracts ""for the improvement of young women"" entitled The Female Reader . She assembled a collection of extracts for young women .
 Ni colas_ de LargilliC3%A8re, Fran%C3%.A7oisMarie Arouet_dit Voltaire (vers 17241725)
 Pasquale Cati painted the Council of Trent in the 1920s and 1930s . He painted a portrait of the council .
 His translation of the Bible into the vernacular (instead of Latin) made it more accessible to the laity . The event had a tremendous impact on both the church and German culture .
 Calvinism follows the theological tradition and forms of Christian practice of John Calvin and other Reformation-era theologians . Calvinism is a major branch of Protestantism . Compare and contrast Calvinism with Lutheranism .
 Calvin's theological critiques mostly broke with the Roman Catholic Church . He differed from Luther on certain theological points, such as the idea that Christ died only for the elect instead of all humanity .
 Calvin's ""Ordinances"" of 1541 involved a collaboration of church affairs with the Geneva city council and consistory to bring morality to all areas of life . Calvin's 'Ordinances' were created by Calvin in 1541 .
 Protestantism also spread into France, where the Protestants were derisively nicknamed ""Huguenots,"" and this touched off decades of warfare in France .
 Calvin's /nstitutes of the Christian Religion was one of the most influential theologies of the era . The book was written as an introductory textbook on the Protestant faith . It was written in 17th century .
 The Reformed Church of France made steady progress across large sections of the nation, in the urban bourgeoisie and parts of the aristocracy, appealing to people alienated by the Catholic establishment .
 The doctrine holds that this purposeful influence of God's Holy Spirit cannot be resisted . The doctrine is that this influence cannot be stopped .
 The English Reformation was associated with the wider process of the European Protestant Reformation . Henry VIII's desire for an annulment of his marriage was at the outset more of a political affair than a theological dispute .
 After Henry's death his son Edward VI was crowned, and the reformation continued with the destruction and removal of decor and religious features . The reformation changed the church forever .
 From 1553, under the reign of Henry's Roman Catholic daughter, Mary I, the Reformation legislation was repealed, and Mary sought to achieve reunion with Rome .
 During Elizabeth I's reign, support for her father's idea of reforming the church continued with some minor adjustments . During her reign, the idea was largely successful .
 From 1553, under the reign of Henry's Roman Catholic daughter, Mary I, the Reformation legislation was repealed . Mary I sought to achieve reunion with Rome with Rome .
 Protestant ideas were first introduced to France during the reign of Francis I, who firmly opposed Protestantism, but continued to try and seek a middle course until the later stages of his regime . Discuss how the patterns of warfare that took place in France affected the Huguenots .
 Henry Il continued the harsh religious policy that his father had followed during the last years of his reign . Henry I continued to follow his father's strict religious policy .
 The Swiss were his allies, and had come to invade France to free him from subjection . Henry III insisted that their invasion was not in his favor, but against him, forcing them to return home .
 In early modern Europe, there was widespread hysteria that malevolent Satanic witches were operating as an organized threat to Christianity . Demonstrate how natural events and pandemics contributed to the hysteria surrounding witch trials of the 16th through 18th centuries .
 Black Death was a turning point in peoples’ views of witches in medieval Europe . Those who were accused of witchcraft were portrayed as being Devil worshipers .
 The peak of the witch hunt was during the European wars of religion, peaking between 1580 and 1630 . Over the entire duration of the trials, which spanned three centuries, an estimated total of 40,000-100,000 people were executed .
 Image of a witch feeding her familliars taken from a publication that dealt with the witch trials of Elizabeth Stile, Mother Dutten, Mother Devell, and Mother Margaret in Windsor, 1579 .
 Claude Tholosan had tried over two hundred people, accusing them of witchcraft in Briancon, Dauphiné, by 1420 . The cause of eliminating witches from society was taken up by a number of individuals .
 It has been argued that the supposedly misogynistic agenda of works on witchcraft has been greatly exaggerated, based on the selective repetition of a few relevant passages of the Ma/leus Maleficarum . Nevertheless, it has been . argued that . the supposedly . misogynistic agendas of
 Interior of the Oude kerk in Amsterdam (south na eee ee ee SS SS eS ee ""John. John. "John. The Oude Kerk" is the largest Dutch museum in the world .
 His rule coincided with the Thirty Years' War and his aim was to restore Catholicism as the only religion in the empire and suppress Protestantism . Ferdinand II was a zealous Catholic who wanted to restore Roman Catholicism to the empire .
 Ferdinand II was a devout Roman Catholic and relatively intolerant when compared to his predecessor, Rudolf Il. II . He was a relatively tolerant and devout Catholic compared to Rudolf II .
 The Peace established the principle Cu/us regio, elus religio (""Whose realm, his religion""), which allowed Holy Roman Empire state princes to select either Lutheranism or Catholicism within the domains they controlled .
 Habsburg emperors who followed Charles V were content to allow princes of the empire to choose their own religious policies . Much to the consternation of their Spanish ruling cousins, their Spanish cousins, were contented with Charles V's policy .
 Ferdinand Il, educated by the Jesuits, was a staunch Catholic who wanted to impose religious uniformity on his lands . Ferdinand Il was a devout Catholic who tried to impose a uniform uniformity .
 Ferdinand Il Ferdinand II was Holy Roman Emperor and King of Bohemia . His aim, as a zealous Catholic, was to restore Catholicism as the only religion in the empire . His actions helped precipitate the Thirty Years' War .
 Emperor Matthias, realizing he would die without an heir, arranged for his lands to go to his nearest male relative . Archduke Ferdinand II of Austria was the staunchly Catholic archduke of Austria . Ferdinand II died in 1881 .
 Peace of Augsburg settled religious disputes in the Holy Roman Empire by enshrining the principle of Cu/us regio, e/us religio, allowing a prince to determine the religion of his subjects .
 Emperor Matthias sought to assure an orderly transition during his lifetime by having his dynastic heir . Ferdinand of Styria, later Ferdinand II, Holy Roman Emperor, elected to separate royal thrones of Bohemia and Hungary .
 Danish king, Christian IV, feared recent Catholic successes threatened his sovereignty as a Protestant nation, led troops against Ferdinand . After the Bohemian Revolt was suppressed by Ferdinand Il, the Danish king led troops .
 Treaty of Lubeck in 1629 stated that Christian IV could retain control over Denmark if he would abandon his support for the Protestant German states . Christian IV believed to have been able to retain control of Denmark if Christian IV was allowed to return to Germany .
 Christian IV of Denmark received homage from the countries of Europe as mediator in the Thirty Years' War . Christian IV was a mediator between Denmark and Denmark .
 The Swedish intervention in the Thirty Years' War was a major turning point of the war . King Gustav II Adolf of Sweden ordered a full-scale invasion of the Catholic states .
 King Gustav Il Adolf of Sweden ordered a full-scale invasion of Catholic states . Sweden invaded the Catholic states after several attempts by the Holy Roman Empire to prevent the spread of Protestantism .
 Gustav was heavily subsidized by Cardinal Richelieu, the chief minister of Louis XIIl of France, and by the Dutch . Gustav was concerned about the growing power of the Holy Roman Empire, and like Christian IV before him, was heavily subsidised by the French .
 Ferdinand Il became dependent on the Catholic League after dismissing Wallenstein in 1630, from fear he was planning a revolt . Ferdinand Il was forced to rely on the League after Wallenstein's dismissal .
 This success largely reversed many of the effects of their defeat at Nordlingen . However, it was not without creating some tensions between Banér and Leslie . This success has created tensions between the pair .
 In 1648, the Swedes and the French defeated the imperial army at the Battle of Zusmarshausen, and the Spanish at Lens . The Swedish, French and Spanish armies defeated imperial armies in 1648 .
 In 1648, the Swedish army entered Prague and captured Prague Castle, where the Defenestration of Prague had taken place thirty years before .
 Christians living in principalities where their denomination was not the established church were guaranteed the right to practice their faith in public during allotted hours and in private at their will . e General recognition of the exclusive sovereignty of each party .
 The Age of Enlightenment was a philosophical movement that dominated the world of ideas in Europe in the 18th century . Identify the core ideas that drove the Age of the Enlightenment . Key Points e
 There is little consensus on the precise beginning of the Age of Enlightenment . Centered on the idea that reason is the primary source of authority and legitimacy . This movement advocated such ideals as liberty, progress, tolerance, fraternity, constitutional government .
 The Enlightenment took hold in most European countries, often with a specific local emphasis . Most scholars use the last years of the century to date the end of the Enlightenment .
 Enlightenment ideals were not originally envisioned as universal in the today's sense of the word . Historians of race, gender, and class note that Enlightenment ideals not originally intended to be universal .
 Many cite the publication of Isaac Newton's Principia Mathematica in 1687 . In France, many cite the release of Newton's work as the reason for their success .
 Cras big epee “tied 2: 5: i yee s Sopwichy & 2: oe a: Word Baxzetre F Zonds Four . “Tied’s” is a word word for a word .
 Science came to play a leading role in Enlightenment discourse and ideas . Describe advancements made in science and social sciences during the 18th century . Use this information to help students understand the history of science .
 18th-century astronomers refined telescopes, produced star catalogs, and worked towards explaining the motions of heavenly bodies and the consequences of universal gravitation . Building on body of work forwarded by Copernicus, Kepler and Newton .
 The 18th century witnessed the early modern reformulation of chemistry that culminated in the law of conservation of mass and the oxygen theory of combustion . The law was the result of the theory of oxygen theory .
 The Age of Enlightenment was also when the first scientific and literary journals were established . The first scientific journal was established in the 17th century .
 In 1705, astronomer Edward Halley correctly linked historical descriptions of particularly bright comets to the reappearance of just one . The discovery was based on his computation of the orbits of comets .
 The resulting product was termed ca/x, which was considered a dephlogisticated substance in its true form . Ca/x is considered to be considered a "dephlogisticallyated substance"
 Francesco Mario Pagano's work Saggi Politici argued against torture and capital punishment . He advocated more benign penal codes . Pagano also argued against capital punishment and torture .
 Science during the Enlightenment was dominated by scientific societies and academies . Academies largely replaced universities as centers of scientific research and development .
 Scientific academies and societies grew out of the Scientific Revolution as the creators of scientific knowledge in contrast to the scholasticism of the university . The academies were created by the scientific revolution of the 19th century .
 National scientific societies were founded throughout the Enlightenment era in the urban hotbeds of scientific development across Europe . They were founded in the cities of France, Germany and Italy .
 Academies and societies disseminated Enlightenment science by publishing works of their members . Academies published Enlightenment works by publishing their members' works . Enlightenment science was disseminated by members of society .
 Independent periodicals were a mix of reviews, abstracts, translations of foreign texts, and sometimes derivative, reprinted materials . The journals of academies primarily published scientific papers .
 Dictionary and encyclopedias have existed since ancient times . During the Enlightenment they evolved from a simple list of definitions to more detailed discussions of those words .
 Encyclopaedia, or a Systematic Dictionary of the Sciences, Arts, and Crafts, is the most well-known of the 18th century encyclopedic dictionaries . The most well known of these dictionaries is EncyclopAedia of the sciences, Arts and
 During the Enlightenment, science began to appeal to an increasingly larger audience . Science began to be popular with an increasingly large audience .
 The Kungliga Vetenskapsakademien (Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences) was created in St. Petersburg, Russia .
 Most of the texts were published in the local vernacular, so their continental soread depended on the language of the readers . Most of these texts were . published in . the language of the . readers .
 Vol I For Anno ane and 1666, In the SAVOT, printed by ‘TN. for John Martyn at the Bell, alicele without Temple-Bar , and Fames Alleftry in Duck Lane ;' Printers to che Royal Society,
 Frederick the Great wrote an essay defending the system of enlightened despotism . He ruled Prussia from 1740 to 1786 . The monarchs of enlightened absolutism strengthened their authority by improving their lives .
 Unlike other enlightened despots, Maria Theresa found it hard to fit into the intellectual sohere of the Enlightenment and did not share fascination with Enlightenment ideals . e Joseph was a proponent of enlightened despotism but his commitment to modernizing reforms subsequently engendered significant opposition, which eventually culminated in
 Catherine the Great was the most renowned and the longest-ruling female leader of Russia . She ruled Russia from 1762 until her death in 1796 . Catherine II of Russia was the first female ruler of Russia to rule the country .
 Maria Theresa found it hard to fit into the intellectual sohere of the Enlightenment . However, Maria Theresa was able to find the Enlightenment hard to do so .
 Joseph II of Austria was Holy Roman Emperor from 1765 to 1790 and ruler of the Habsburg lands from 1780 to 1788 .
 Joseph Il is plowing the field near Slawikowitz tn rural southern Moravia on 19 August 1769 . Joseph Il was plowing a field in rural Moravia in 1769.
 Joseph Il struck vigorously at papal power . Calling himself himself the guardian of Catholicism, Joseph I. I struck vigorously against papal authority . I was born in Rome .
 Frederick William's son, Frederick IIl, was allowed to elevate Prussia to the status of a kingdom . In return for aiding Emperor Leopold | during the War of the Spanish Succession, Frederick William was given Prussia a kingdom in return for his help .
 The Swabian branch ruled the principalities of Hohenzollern-Hechingen and Sigmaringen until 1849 . The branch also ruled Romania from 1866 to 1947 .
 The next elector, Frederick Il, forced the submission of Berlin and Colln, setting an example for the other towns of Brandenburg . Frederick Il. forced Berlin to submit, setting the example for other towns .
 When he was 18, Frederick plotted to flee to England with his close friend Hans Hermann von Katte and other junior army officers . Margaret Goldsmith, a biographer of Frederick's, suggests the attachment was of a sexual nature and as a result Keith was sent away .
 Niccolod Machiavelli's "The Prince" is a 16th-century political treatise by the Italian diplomat and political theorist . The Prince is the work of Niccood Machavelli, a political theorist and Italian diplomat .
 His birth was particularly welcomed by his grandfather, Frederick I, as his two previous grandsons both died in infancy . Frederick I's two previous granddaughters both died of infancy .
 Frederick was keenly interested in land use, especially draining swamps and opening new farmland for colonizers . Frederick wanted to increase the kingdom's food supply .
 The resulting program created 60,000 hectares of new farmland, but also eliminated vast swaths of natural habitat . The resulting land re-fostering program was created in the 1980s .
 Protestantism became the favored religion and Catholics were not chosen for higher state positions . Frederick was largely non-practicing and tolerated all faiths in his realm .
 Catherine Il. recognized the educational skills the Jesuits had as an asset for the nation and was interested in attracting a diversity of skills to his country .
 Frederick the Great's actual goals against his stated rationale for the War of Austrian Succession . Charles VI of the Habsburg dynasty issued an edict known as the Pragmatic Sanction, which aimed to ensure that the Hapsburg hereditary possessions could be inherited by a daughter .
 The 1537 Treaty of Brieg was a pretext for the invasion . The War of the Austrian Succession escalated and involved most of the powers of Europe .
 The war included King George's War in North America, the War of Jenkins' Ear, the First Carnatic War in India, the Jacobite rising of 1745 in Scotland, and the First and Second Silesian Wars . The combination of two or more states with the same monarch
 In 1804, the Holy Roman Emperor Francis Il, who was also ruler of the lands of the Habsburg Monarchy, founded the Empire of Austria . Francis Il founded the Emperor of Austria in 1804 . He was the first Austrian monarch to take over the throne of Austria from
 A resolution passed by the Re/chstag of the Holy Roman Empire in 1803 and ratified by the Emperor Francis Il. lt proved to be the last significant law enacted by the Empire before its dissolution in 1806 .
 It was signed in Pressburg, at that time in Hungary, by Johann | Josef, Prince of Liechtenstein and the Hungarian Count Ignaz Gyulai for Austria and Charles Maurice de Talleyrand for France .
 Serious attempts at centralization began under Maria Theresa and especially her son Joseph Il in the mid to late 18th century . Many of these were abandoned following large-scale resistance to Joseph's more radical reform attempts .
 When Francis died in 1765, Maria Theresa continued to rule the Habsburg lands, but her son, Joseph II, secured the title of the Holy Roman Emperor .
 In 1804, the Holy Roman Emperor Francis Il founded the Empire of Austria, comprising all his lands . The Empire was also ruler of the lands of the Habsburg Monarchy, and was ruler of all the lands .
 The Pragmatic Sanction was an edict issued by Charles Vil on April 19, 1713 . It was issued to ensure that the Habsburg hereditary possessions could be inherited by a daughter .
 Charles soon expressed a wish to amend this pact to give his own future daughters precedence over his nieces . Charles said he wanted to amend the pact to allow his future daughters to have precedence .
 The Pragmatic Sanction of 1713 was the first such document to be publicly announced . As such it required formal acceptance by the estates of the realms it concerned .
 Charles VI labored with the support of his closest advisor Johann Christoph von Bartenstein to have his sanction accepted by the courts of Europe and by Habsburg's hereditary territories . For 10 years, Charles VIII labored to have the sanction accepted .
 If both brothers die leaving no sons, the daughters of the elder brother Joseph would have absolute precedence . The eldest daughter of Joseph would ascend all the Habsburg thrones . However, if both brothers leave no sons the eldest daughter would ascend .
 In 1705, Leopold | died and was succeeded by his elder son, Joseph I . Six years later, Joseph | died leaving behind two daughters, Archduchesses Maria Josepha and Maria Amalia .
 Maria Theresa was the only female ruler of the Habsburg dominions and the last of the House . Maria Theresa's reforms and policies included reforms and reforms .
 Maria Theresa was a devout Roman Catholic and believed that religious unity was necessary for a peaceful public life . Maria Theresa believed religious unity necessary for peaceful public relations .
 Maria Theresa implemented significant reforms to strengthen Austria's military, financial, and bureaucratic efficiency . Maria Theresa's reforms include significant reforms in the military and financial sector . Austria's economy has been hit hard by austerity measures in recent years .
 Her title of Holy Roman Empress meant that she was the wife of the Emperor, Francis |, wno secured the title as one of Austria's gains in the same war . However, her title meant she was in fact the wife .
 The council lacked executive or legislative authority, but nevertheless was distinguishable from the form of government employed by Frederick II of Prussia . The council had no legislative or executive authority .
 Joseph Il became the absolute ruler over the most extensive realm of Central Europe in 1780 . Contrast Joseph's domestic reforms with those of his mother . Contrasts his domestic reforms .
 serfdom was abolished in the Empire only in 1848 . It was enforced differently in all the various Habsburg lands . Serfdom was abolished only in the Emarchy in 1848, but was abolished by the Empire .
 Joseph continued education and public health reforms initiated by his mother . Joseph continued his mother's education and health reforms . Joseph is now a successful businessman .
 Joseph Il attempted to destroy the economic subjugation through related laws, such as his Tax Decree of 1789 . Joseph Il recognized the importance of further reforms, continually attempting to destroy economic subjugations .
 Emperor Joseph II's ambition to modernize Habsburg society would have allowed for the end of corvée and the beginning of lesser tax obligations . This new law would have finally realized Emperor Joseph's ambition, allowing for the . end of the .
 The War of the Austrian Succession had seen belligerence align on a time-honored basis . Recall the parties involved in the Diplomatic Revolution and what changed between them as a result of this event .
 The War of Austrian Succession made it clear that Britain no longer viewed Austria as powerful enough to check French power but was content to build up other states like Prussia . The Seven Years' War was triggered by a separation of interests between Austria, Britain, and France .
 In 1758, the Anglo-Prussian Convention between Great Britain and the Kingdom of Prussia formalized the alliance . France and Austria signed a new offensive alliance, the Second Treaty of Versailles . e
 In 1762, the Russian Empress Elizabeth died and her successor, Peter Ill, recalled Russian armies from Berlin and mediated Frederick's truce with Sweden . Peter Ill's successor, the Empress Elizabeth, mediated the truce .
 The question of whether the Seven Years' War was indeed the first world war remains ambiguous . The conflict certainly had global impact and marked a shift in the European balance of power .
 Although the war did not result in major territorial changes in Europe, a new political order emerged . The war ended in 1918, but the war was not the end of the conflict .
 With Britain becoming the main colonial power, Prussia confirming its position as a military, economic, and political European power, and Austria and Russia proving their growing military potential, France lost influence in Europe .
 Second Hundred Years' War is a periodization or historical era term used by some historians to describe the series of military conflicts between Great Britain and France that occurred from about 1689 to 1815 .
 When the Seven Years' War between France and Great Britain started in 1756, Spain and Portugal remained neutral . Everything changed when Ferdinand VI died in 1759 and was succeeded by his younger half-brother Charles IIl .
 France captured Minorca and British trading posts in Sumatra . Spain captured the border fortress of Almeida in Portugal and Colonia del Sacramento in South America . Most of these territories were restored to their original owners .
 Treaty of Paris gave Britain the east side of the Mississippi, with New Orleans remaining in French hands . Treaty gave Britain east side the Mississippi .
 The Treaty of Hubertusburg was signed five days later by Prussia, Austria, and Saxony . The treaty was signed in 1815 .
 The Treaty of Paris was to give Britain the east side of the Mississippi . The Ile d'Orléans was granted to Spain along with the territory to the west the larger portion of Louisiana .
 Elizabeth I was the Empress of Russia from 1741 until her death in 1762 . She was the daughter of Peter the Great and his second wife, Catherine .
 In 1743, the Treaty of Abo was signed, with Sweden ceding to Russia all of southern Finland east of the Kymmene River . The triumphs of Elizabeth's foreign policy were credited to the diplomatic ability of Aleksey Bestuzhev-Ryumin, the
 A year before the Seven Years' War formally ended, Elizabeth died . She entered into an alliance with France and Austria against Prussia .
 Elizabeth's first cousin, Empress Anna, ruled Russia after her father's death in 1730 . She was the daughter of Peter the Great's elder brother Ivan V .
 Peter III's decision to turn Russia from an enemy to an ally of Prussia and domestic reforms did not convince the Russian nobility to support the unpopular emperor .
 Pro-Prussian emperor withdrew Russian forces from the Seven Years' War and concluded a peace treaty with Prussia . e After Peter succeeded to the Russian throne, the pro-Prussia emperor withdrew his forces .
 One of Peter's most widely debated reforms was a manifesto that exempted the nobility from obligatory state and military service and gave them freedom to travel abroad . The decision proved to be extremely unpopular in his own court and greatly contributed to his quick demise .
 Catherine staged a coup and had her husband arrested, forcing him to sign a document of abdication and leaving no one to dispute her accession to the throne . Although the exemption from obligatory service was welcomed by the Russian elites, the overall reform did not convince them to support their emperor
 Catherine the Great was born to the family of impoverished German aristocracy . She overthrew the prospective tsar Peter Ill, whom she overthrew to become the Empress of Russia .
 Catherine the Great's journey from German Princess to sole ruler of Russia . Catherine II of Russia reigned Russia from 1762 until her death in 1796 .
 Catherine was born Sophia Augusta Fredericka to Christian August, Prince of Anhalt-Zerbst, and Princess Johanna Elisabeth of Holstein-Gottorp . Catherine spared no effort to ingratiate herself not only with the Empress, but also with her husband
 Count Andrei Shuvalov, chamberlain to Catherine, is credited as the source of rumors regarding the monarch's intimate affairs . On the following day, the formal betrothal took place in Saint Petersburg .
 Peter succeeded to the throne as Emperor Peter III and Catherine became empress consort . After the death of Empress Elizabeth in 1762, Peter succeeded in the throne .
 Catherine staged a coup and had her husband arrested and forced him to sign a document of abdication . The tsar's eccentricities and policies, including a great admiration for Frederick the Great of Prussia, alienated the same groups that Catherine cultivated .
 Catherine II of Russia was the longest-ruling female leader of Russia . She ruled from 1762 until her death in 1796 at the age of 67 .
 Sophia of Holstein-Gottorp was the wife of the prospective tsar Peter of Hofenberg . The choice of Sophia as wife of her second cousin resulted from diplomatic management in which Count Lestocq, Peter's aunt, and Frederick the Great of Prussia took part
 Lestocg and Frederick wanted to strengthen the friendship between Prussia and Russia . They wanted to weaken Austria's influence and ruin the Russian chancellor Bestuzhev, on whom Empress Elizabeth relied .
 Peter was believed to have taken a mistress . Catherine carried on liaisons with Sergei Saltykov and Grigory Potemkin . She had affairs with Alexander Vasilchikov and others . Peter was said to have had affairs .
 Peter III's temperament became unbearable for those who resided in the palace . Peter III became quite unbearable for the palace's residents .
 In 1754, Catherine and Peter welcomed a son, the future tsar Paul I . There is considerable speculation as to the actual paternity of Paul .
 After the death of Empress Elizabeth in 1762, Peter succeeded to the throne as Emperor Peter III . Catherine became empress consort and Peter succeeded as Emperor .
 The period of Catherine's rule is often considered the Golden Age of the Russian Empire and Russian nobility . Catherine the Great's domestic policies and to what extent she can be considered an enlightened despot .
 Her religious policies aimed to control populations and religious institutions in the multi-religious empire, she says . Her policies were not an expression of religious freedom, she adds .
 Catherine did not advocate democratic reforms but addressed some modernization trends, including dividing the country into provinces and districts . The Charter of the Towns distributed all people into six groups as a way to limit the power of nobles and create a middle estate .
 A group of predominantly East Slavic-speaking people who became known as members of democratic, self-governing, semi-military communities, predominantly located in Ukraine and in Russia .
 They inhabited sparsely populated areas and islands in the lower Dnieper, Don, Terek, and Ural river basins . They played an important role in the historical and cultural development of both Russia and Ukraine .
 Smolny Institute was Russia's first educational establishment for women . It was established under Catherine the Great's rule . It continued to function under the personal patronage of the Russian Empress until just before the 1917 revolution .
 Catherine took many approaches to Islam during her reign but her pro-Islam policies were all an attempt to control Muslim populations in the empire . Catherine's policies were aimed at controlling Muslim populations of the empire in the Muslim world .
 Catherine made Russia dominant power in southeastern Europe after her first Russo-Turkish War against the Ottoman Empire . Under her rule, some 200,000 square miles were added to Russian territory .
 Catherine's triumph in Crimea is linked to a concept of Potemkin villages . This war, catastrophic for the Ottomans, legitimized the Russian claim to the Crimea .
 Russia pioneered for Russia the role that Britain later played through most of the 19th and early 20th centuries as a mediator in disputes that could, or did, lead to war . In 1780, she established a League of Armed Neutrality, designed to defend neutral shipping from the
 The Confederation of Bar was formed at the fortress of Bar in Podolia in 1768 to defend the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth against Russian influence . The term comes from stories of a fake portable village supposedly built only to impress Empress Catherine II .
 Treaty of Jassy was signed at Jassy in Moldavia in 1792 . It ended the Russo-Turkish War of 1787-92 and confirmed Russia's increasing dominance in the Black Sea .
 The treaty formally recognized the Russian Empire's annexation of the Crimean Khanate via the Treaty of Kucuk Kaynarca of 1783 . It transferred Yedisan to Russia making the Dniester the Russo-Turkish frontier in Europe and leaving the Asiatic frontier unchanged
 A 1774 peace treaty signed in Kucuk Kaynarca (today Kaynardzha, Bulgaria) between the Russian Empire and the Ottoman Empire . The treaty was signed in 1774 . It was the first peace treaty between the two empires .
 The Treaty of Kucuk Kaynarca gave the Russians territories at Azov, Kerch, Yenikale, Kinburn, and the small strip of Black Sea coast between the rivers Dnieper and Bug .
 The term comes from stories of a fake portable village, built only to impress Empress Catherine Il during her journey to Crimea in 1787 . The village was built to impress the Empress, who traveled to Crimea .
 A 1791 British caricature of an attempted mediation between Catherine and Turkey, by James Gillray, Library of Congress . Catherine was supported by Austria and France, supported by France and France . Catherine's sister, Katharine Syne, was killed in 1791 .
 Louis XV was a monarch of the House of the Bourbon who ruled as King of France from 1715 until his death . Louis XV ruled as king of France between 1715 and death .
 Louis XIV was not born as the Dauphin but was the heir to the throne of France at the age of five . Until he reached maturity in 1723, his kingdom was ruled by Philippe d'Orléans, Duke of Orléans as Regent of France .
 At the age of 15, he was married to Marie Leszczyfhska, daughter of Stanistaw I, the deposed king of Poland . He was also married to the daughter of the king of the Polish kingdom .
 In 1723, the king's majority was declared by the Parlement of Paris, which ended the regency . The birth of Louis XV ensured the survival of the dynasty for the first time since 1712 . Louis XV became extremely popular .
 Later in life he advocated the creation of departments in physics and mechanics at the College de France . Later in his career he advocated creation of new physics departments .
 The Ancien Régime was the social and political system established in the Kingdom of France from approximately the 15th century until the latter part of the 18th century . The estates of the realm were the broad orders of social hierarchy used in Christian Europe from the medieval period to early
 The Second Estate was the French nobility and royalty, other than the monarch himself, who stood outside of the system of estates . The monarch himself was the only monarch to stand outside the system .
 The Ancien Régime was the social and political system established in the Kingdom of France from approximately the 15th century until the latter part of the 18th century under the late Valois and Bourbon dynasts .
 The rural included peasants who owned their own land (and could be prosperous) and peasants who worked on nobles' or wealthier peasants’ land . The rural part of the rural part included peasants working on wealthier peasants' land . Rural part of rural America included peasants with own land .
 Bibliotheque Nationale de France carries the First and Second Estate on its back . Caricature on the Third Estate carries the first and second and third .
 Louis XIV believed in the divine right of kings, which assert that a monarch is above everyone except God . Louis XIV was born in France in 17th century .
 He continued his predecessors' work of creating a centralized state governed from Paris . He sought to eliminate remnants of feudalism in France, and subjugated and weakened the aristocracy .
 Louis XIV failed to reform the unjust tax system that greatly favored the nobility, but instituted reforms in military administration and compelled many members of the nobility to live in Versailles . Louis XIV also forced many of the noble elite, especially the noble members, to live at the palace . Louis
 Louis XV failed to establish himself as an absolute monarch of Louis XIV's stature . Louis XV attempted to continue his predecessor's efforts to weaken the aristocracy .
 During the reign of Louis XV, the parlements challenged the crown for control over policy, especially regarding taxes and religion . Eventually, the twentieth became a mere increase in the already existing taille, the most important direct tax of the monarchy .
 Louis XIV also instituted reforms in military administration through Michel le Tellier and his son Francois-Michel, Marquis de Louvois . Louis XIV instituted reforms through his son and son .
 The twentieth became a mere increase in the already existing ta///e, the most important direct tax of the monarchy . Privileged classes were exempt from the tax, but privileged classes were exempted .
 Louis XIV began his personal reign with effective fiscal reforms . Louis XIV was the first king of the 16th century .
 Many concessions and exemptions were won by nobles and bourgeois . Reform lost much of its value when it was won by bourgeois and nobles .
 Louis encouraged industry, fostered trade and commerce, and sponsored the founding of an overseas empire . The powerful position of Louis XIV's France came at a financial cost that could not be balanced by his reforms .
 Louis XV also attempted to impose new taxes on the First and Second Estates . With all the exemptions and reductions won by the privileged classes the burden of the new tax once again fell on the poorest citizens .
 Peasants were also obligated to their landlords for rent in cash, a payment related to their amount of annual production, and taxes on the use of the nobles' mills, wine-presses and bakeries .
 Caricature showing the Third Estate carrying the First and Second Estates on its back, Bibliotheque Nationale de France, 1788 . The Third Estate was carrying the Second and Third Estates in 1788.
 Several additional tax systems were created, including the ""capitation"" (begun in 1695), which touched every person including nobles and the clergy . The ""dixieme"" was enacted to support the military, which was a true tax on income and property value .
 Known as the ""vingtiéme"" (or “one-twentieth”), it was enacted to reduce the royal deficit . It was enacted in 1881 to reduce royal deficit.
 In 1756, the king overruled his ministers and signed the Treaty of Versailles with Austria . The attitude was internationally hailed, but at home the king became unpopular .
 In 1756, Frederick the Great invaded Saxony without a declaration of war, initiating the Seven Years' War . The Treaty of Paris forced France to cede Canada, Dominica, Grenada, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, and Tobago to Britain .
 There was a general resentment at what was seen as a foolish throwing away of advantages . The phrases Béte comme la paix and La guerre pour le roi de Prusse became popular in Paris in 1748 .
 The 1777 capture of a British army at Saratoga encouraged the French to formally enter the war in support of Congress . Benjamin Franklin negotiated a permanent military alliance in early 1778 . France became the first country to officially recognize the Declaration of Independence .
 France supported the United States in North America but as the enemy of Britain, it was also involved in the Caribbean and Indian theaters of the American Revolution . France's material gains in the aftermath of the Revolution were minimal, but its financial losses were huge .
 The French support was weak, however, and the status quo ante bellum 1784 Treaty of Mangalore ended the war . The French supported the British, but the French was weakened .
 At the outset of the reign of Louis XVI, Marie Antoinette had limited political influence with her husband . Later, the queen's political impact rose significantly . She played an important role in introducing French meditation in the process of ending the War of Bavarian Succession .
 Maria Theresa died in 1780 and Marie Antoinette feared that the death of her mother would jeopardize the Franco-Austrian alliance . She played a key role in supporting the American Revolution and influenced nominations for critical state positions .
 Thousands of soldiers died from disease and starvation, earning the conflict the name Kartoffelkrieg in Prussia and Saxony . The war consisted of only a few minor skirmishes, but thousands of soldiers were killed by starvation .
 Marie Antoinette was born in Vienna as the youngest daughter of Empress Maria Theresa, ruler of the Habsburg Empire, and her husband Francis |, Holy Roman Emperor . She was the youngest child of Maria Theresa and Francis II .
 The queen played a very important role in supporting the American Revolution by securing Austrian and Russian support for France . The queen also played a key role in the establishment of a neutral league that stopped Great Britain's attack in 1780 .
 In 1783, the queen also played a decisive role in the nomination of Charles Alexandre de Calonne as ControllerGeneral of Finances . The baron de Breteuil was the Minister for the Maison du Roi (Minister of the Royal Household)
 Joseph Il visited his sister in 1781 to reaffirm the Franco-Austrian alliance . Marie Antoinette was rumored to have been sending money from the French treasury to Austria . Joseph Il's visit was tainted with rumors that she was sending money .
 The marriage of Louis-Auguste and Maria Antonia provoked very strong and ambiguous reactions in France . Characterize the relationship between the royals and the French people at the beginning of Louis XVI's reign .
 The wealth and lavish lifestyle that the royal couple provided for their favorites outraged most aristocratic families, who resented the influence of the selected few . The queen's lifestyle fueled the increasing popular disapprobation toward Marie Antoinette .
 Marie Antoinette dans son salon, Jean-Baptiste André André Gautier-Dagoty, 1774 . The queen was crowned queen of France at the end of the 17th century .
 Marie Antoinette appointed the duchesse de Polignac after the princesse de Guéméné went bankrupt in 1782 . She appointed her favorite favorite, the princess of Guémené, to the post . The duchess was the first woman to
 The entire Polignac family benefited greatly from the royal favor in titles and positions, but its sudden wealth and lavish lifestyle has fueled most aristocratic families . Marie Antoinette is considered the most popular French aristocrat in Paris .
 The French economy began to enter a true crisis in 1775, not until 1775 . Compare the efforts made by French finance ministers under Louis XVI to revitalize the treasury .
 Anne Robert Jacques Turgot was appointed ControllerGeneral of Finances in 1774 . He was appointed as the Controller of Finance in France . He died in 1776 .
 His attacks on privilege won him the hatred of the nobles and the parlements . His attempted reforms in the royal household, that of the court, and his free trade legislation, were also hated . His views on religious tolerance that of clergy .
 Marie Antoinette disliked Turgot for opposing the granting of favors to her proteges, which played a key role in the end of his career . Marie Antoineette disliked him for opposing favors granted to her protéces .
 In 1783, Louis replaced Necker with Charles Alexandre de Calonne . He increased public spending to buy the country way out of debt . Although he was recalled twice, he failed to introduce effective reforms .
 He opposed on grounds of economy, the participation of France in the American Revolutionary War, although without success . He suppressed, however, a number of octro/s (a local tax collected on various articles brought into a district for consumption) and minor duties .
 He put a stop to the rebellion in the Dauphiné by legalizing its assembly . He then set to work to arrange for the summons of the Estates-General of 1789 .
 Estates-General convened for several weeks in May and June 1789 . King Louis XVI convened them to propose solutions to his government's financial problems .
 On May 5, 1789, the Estates-General convened. The most controversial and significant decision remained the nature of voting. e
 By trying to avoid the issue of representation and focus solely on taxes, the King and his ministers gravely misjudged the situation . The King and ministers should not have ignored the issue and focus on taxes .
 The Estates-General ceased to exist, becoming the National Assembly . The King tried to resist but after failed attempts to sabotage the Assembly and keep the three estates separate, the Estates General ceased .
 Repeated attempts to implement tax reform failed due to lack of the Par/ement of Paris support . Parlement judges felt that any increase in tax would have a direct negative effect on their own income .
 A political pamphlet written in January 1789, shortly before the outbreak of the French Revolution . Written by French thinker and clergyman Abbé Emmanuel Joseph Sieyes .
 Following the storming of the Bastille on July 14, the National Assembly became the effective government of France . The National Assembly is sometimes called the Constituent Assembly .
 Sieyés authored a pamphlet What Is the Third Estate? in January 1789 . It was a response to finance minister Jacques Necker's invitation for writers to state how they thought the Estates-General should be organized . Sieyééé wrote the pamphlet in response to Ne
 On August 4, 1789, the National Constituent Assembly abolished feudalism . The action was triggered by numerous peasant revolts .
 Amid the Assembly's preoccupation with constitutional affairs (many competing ideas were debated) The financial crisis continued largely unaddressed and the deficit only increased . The Assembly was dominated by constitutional affairs .
 The crowd broke open the prisons of the Abbaye to release some grenadiers of the French guards, reportedly imprisoned for refusing to fire on the people . Louis XVI dismissed his finance minister, Jacques Necker, who had been sympathetic to the Third Estate .
 While the French Revolution provided rights to a larger portion of the population, there remained a distinction between those who obtained rights in the Declaration of the Rights of Man and Citizen and those who did not .
 The arguments typically posit that individuals have consented, either explicitly or tacitly, to surrender some of their freedoms and submit to the authority of the ruler or magistrate . In exchange for protection of their remaining rights, individuals surrender some freedoms, the argument says .
 A model for the governance of a state (or who controls the state) first developed in ancient Greece . The term comes from a 1762 book by Jean-Jacques Rousseau which discussed this concept .
 The Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen is a fundamental document of the French Revolution and in the history of human and civil rights . The Declaration was published in France in 1903 .
 Honoré Mirabeau played a central role in conceptualizing and drafting the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen . The Declaration was published in August 1789 .
 It was translated as soon as 1793-1794 by Colombian Antonio Narino, who published it despite the Inquisition and was sentenced to be imprisoned for ten years for doing so .
 The march turned into a more general revolutionary upsurge, this fear remained at its roots . While the march turned . into a . more general revolution, this . fear remained .
 The lavish banquet was reported in newspapers as nothing short of a gluttonous orgy, which outraged the commoners . It was reported as nothing less than nothing short .
 Market women were infuriated by the chronic shortage and high price of bread . A young woman struck a marching drum at the edge of a group of market women . The drum was struck by a young woman who was angered by the shortage of bread and high prices .
 Although the fighting ceased quickly and the royal troops had cleared the palace attacked by the revolutionaries, the crowd was still everywhere outside .
 As a result of the march, the monarchist faction in the Assembly effectively lost its significance . Robespierre raised his public profile considerably, Lafayette found himself tied too closely to the king . Maillard returned to Paris with his status as a local hero made permanent .
 The Women's March on Versailles was October 5, 1789 . The march was the first of its kind in France .
 The king was allowed a suspensive veto to balance out the interests of the people . e The constitution was not egalitarian by today's standards. e The King was allowed to veto a suspension of veto .
 A 12-member Constitutional Committee was convened on July 14, 1789 (coincidentally the day of the Storming of the Bastille) to draft most of the articles of the French constitution .
 The committee became very important in the days after the Champs de Mars Massacre . The committee was created in the wake of a wave of opposition against popular movements .
 They were committed to the ideals of the Revolution and thus inclined to side with the left . They would also occasionally back proposals from the right .
 The September Massacres and the trial of Louis XVI were the two most significant factors in the split between the Montagnards and the Girondins . The terms ""left"" and ""right"" used to refer to political parties is one of the lasting legacies of the French Revolution
 Jacobins were known for creating a strong government that could deal with the needs of war, economic chaos, and internal rebellion . The Jacobins created a government capable of dealing with war and economic chaos .
 Frederick William II of Prussia and the Habsburg Holy Roman Emperor Leopold Il, Marie Antoinette's brother, issued a statement on August 27, 1791 at Pillnitz Castle near Dresden .
 The Brunswick Manifesto was issued by Charles William Ferdinand, Duke of Brunswick, commander of the Allied Army . The proclamation was issued during the War of the First Coalition .
 Austrian emperor Leopold Il, brother of Marie Antoinette, wished to avoid war but died in March 1792 .
 The Brunswick Manifesto was written by the French king's cousin, Louis Joseph de Bourbon, Prince de Condé, the leader of an émigré corps within the Allied army . The duke then issued a proclamation issued by the prince .
 The king tied his hopes of political salvation to the dubious prospects of foreign intervention . From the autumn of 1791 on, 1791, he tied his political hopes with the prospect of intervention . The king's political hopes were tied to the possibility of intervention from abroad .
 Relations between the king and the Legislative Assembly were hostile . The members were generally young, and since none had sat in the previous Assembly they largely lacked national political experience . e
 King dismissed Girondins from the Ministry . King formed a new cabinet mostly of Feuillants, the breach with the king and the Assembly on one side .
 The Girondins made a last advance to Louis, offering to save the monarchy if he would accept them as ministers . Louis accepted the offer and Louis accepted it . Louis died in 1877 .
 The Brunswick Manifesto is a proclamation issued by Charles William Ferdinand, Duke of Brunswick, commander of the Allied Army . It was issued during the War of the First Coalition in 1792 .
 Medal of the First French Legislative Assembly was awarded to Augustin Challamel in 1842 . Challamel was awarded the medal by the French President of France .
 The Feuillants were conservative members of the bourgeoisie that favored a constitutional monarchy . The Feusillants felt that the revolution had already achieved its goal . The first were conservative .
 The People Storming the Tuileries on 20 June, 1792, Jacques-Antoine Dulaure, Esquisses historiques des principaux événemens de la revolution, 2, Paris, Baudouin freres .
 The Insurrection of August 10, 1792, led to the creation of the National Convention, charged with writing a new constitution . Learning Objective: Evaluate the decision to execute the king and queen of the 1792 revolt .
 On September 20, the Convention became the new de facto government of France . The next day it abolished the monarchy and declared a republic . The Convention was the new government .
 A commission was established to examine evidence against the King . The Convention's Legislation Committee considered legal aspects of any future trial .
 Most Montagnards favored judgement and execution of Louis XVI . Girondins were divided concerning Louis XVI's fate . The Montagnardans were divided on the execution of XVI XVI .
 Given overwhelming evidence of Louis' collusion with the invaders during the ongoing war with Austria and Prussia, the verdict was a foregone conclusion . The verdict was given by the verdict of Louis as a result of the evidence .
 She was guillotined on October 16, 1793, in France . In France, the Reign of Terror followed . e
 Most Montagnards favored judgement and execution, while Girondins were divided concerning Louis's fate . Some argued for royal inviolability, others for clemency, and still others for either lesser punishment or death .
 The task of lead counsel eventually fell to Raymond Deséze, assisted by Francois Denis Tronchet and Guillaume-Chrétien de Lamoignon de Malesherbes . The task was eventually led by Raymond Deséze and Francois
 The former Louis XVI, now simply named Citoyen Louis Capet, was executed by guillotine . Former Louis XVI was executed at the end of his reign .
 Members of the Montagnards established the Committee of Public Safety under Robespierre, which would be responsible for the Terror (September 5, 1793 July 28, 1794) The Terror was the bloodiest and most controversial phase of the French Revolution .
 The foundation of the Terror was centered around the April 1793 creation of the Committee of Public Safety . The Committee was created in 1793 .
 Its power peaked between August 1793 and July 1794 under the leadership of Robespierre, who established a virtual dictatorship . The French Revolution was founded by the French Revolution .
 In June 1793, Paris sections took over the Convention, calling for administrative and political purges, a low fixed price for bread, and a limitation of the electoral franchise .
 On June 24, the Convention adopted the first republican constitution of France . The French Constitution of 1793 was adopted by the Convention in Paris .
 Robespierre, who favored deism over atheism, recommended that the Convention acknowledge the existence of his god in June 1794 .
 About 8% of those condemned were aristocrats, 6% clergy, 14% middle class, and 72% were workers or peasants accused of hoarding, evading draft, desertion, or rebellion .
 His fall was brought about by conflicts between those who wanted more power for the Committee of Public Safety and moderates who completely opposed the revolutionary government .
 The National Convention was a single-chamber assembly in France from September 20, 1792, to October 26, 1795, during the French Revolution . Recall the composition and role of the National Convention in France .
 Historians have also identified a centrist faction called the Plain . Many historians tend to blur the line between the Plain and the Girondins . The political deadlock had repercussions all over France .
 In June 1792, under the pressure of armed sans-culottes, the Girondins ceased to be a political force . e Throughout the winter of 1792 and spring of 1793, Paris was plagued by food riots .
 In July 1794, Robespierre was overthrown, the Jacobin club was closed, and the surviving Girondins were reinstated . The Jacobin Club was closed in 1794 . The surviving members of the club were reinstated in July 1796 .
 The law ordered the arrest of all avowed enemies and likely enemies of the Revolution . The law included nobles, relatives of émigrés, officials removed from office, officers suspected of treason .
 A 1794 coup d'état within the French Revolution against the leaders of the Jacobin Club that dominated the Committee of Public Safety . The coup was a revolt within the Jacobi Club .
 The Thermidorian Reaction was a coup d'état within the French Revolution against the leaders of the Jacobin Club who dominated the Committee of Public Safety . Describe the events of the reaction in this article .
 Robespierre's apparent total grasp on power became increasingly illusory . The apparent total control of the Revolution in France became increasingly difficult to maintain .
 Robespierre's tight personal control of the military, distrust of military might and banks, and opposition to supposedly corrupt individuals in government made him the subject of a number of conspiracies .
 The prime mover for the events was the Montagnard conspiracy, which was gradually coalescing and came to pass . The Montagnards finally swayed the deputies of the right over to their side .
 A 1794 coup d'état within the French Revolution against the leaders of the Jacobin Club that dominated the Committee of Public Safety . The coup was a coup d’état in 1794 against the Jacobins .
 The name Thermidorian refers to Thermidor 9, Year II (July 27, 1794), the date according to the French Republican Calendar when Robespierre and other radical revolutionaries came under concerted attack in the National Convention . The name refers to the date of the 1794 attack
 Robespierre was the sole remaining strongman of the Revolution following the assassination of Jean-Paul Marat and the executions of Jacques Hébert, Georges Danton, and Camille Desmoulins . His apparent total grasp on power became increasingly illusory, especially support
 The following day, Thermidor 10 (July 28, 1794), he was executed with 21 of his closest associates . He was executed in 1794 with the help of 21 others .
 A new constitution called the Constitution of the Year Ill was drawn up, which eased back some of the democratic elements of the 1793 Constitution of 1793 . The constitution of the year Ill was called Constitution of The Year Ill . A new Constitution of Peace was also drawn up in 1793
 Only one of the five original members served on the Directory throughout its entire existence . e State finances were in total disarray . Only one member of the original members of the Directory .
 A five-member committee governed France from November 1795 to November 1799 . It was overthrown by Napoleon Bonaparte in the Coup of 18 Brumaire (November 8-9, 1799)
 The Directory defeated a resurgence of the War in the Vendée, but failed in its venture to support the Irish Rebellion of 1798 and create an Irish Republic . The Directory failed to support an Irish Rebellion and create a Republic .
 Bonaparte was commissioned as a second lieutenant in an artillery regiment . Napoleon graduated from the prestigious Ecole Militaire in September 1785 .
 He was promoted to captain in 1792, despite exceeding his leave of absence and leading a riot against a French army in Corsica . He supported the republican Jacobin movement and was promoted in 1892 .
 A five-member committee that governed France from 1795 to 1799 . It was overthrown by Napoleon Bonaparte in the Coup of 18 Brumaire (November 8-9, 1799)
 As Napoleon I, he was emperor of the French from 1804 until 1814, and again in 1815 . Napoleon I was Napoleon II of France . He was Napoleon III of France, who was emperor from 1814 to 1815, and Napoleon II .
 Bonaparte graduated from the prestigious Ecole Militaire in Paris in September 1785 . He was commissioned as a second lieutenant in an artillery regiment .
 Napoleon Bonaparte, aged 23, was lleutenant-colonel of a battalion of Corsican Republican volunteers, paitning by Henri Felix Emmanuel Philippoteaux, ca.34. He was aged 23 .
 1,400 royalists died and the rest fled in the battle of October 5, 1795 (13 Vendémiaire in the French Republican Calendar) The battle took place in Vendémire, France, in 1795 . The battle was fought by a young cavalry officer named
 Napoleon returned to a hero's welcome at the end of the 18th Brumaire . Despite the failures in Egypt, Napoleon was greeted with a hero welcome .
 He allied with a number of prominent political figures tooverthrew the Directory by a coup d'état on November 9, 1799 (Coup of 18th Brumaire) He closed down the Council of Five Hundred .
 Napoleon's father Nobile Carlo Buonaparte, an attorney, was named Corsica's representative to the court of Louis XVI in 1777 . His first language was Corsican and he always spoke Corsican .
 Napoleon took command of most of Europe from an obscure village in Corsica to command of Europe . Napoleon's ambition was the strength of the ambition that took him from a Corsica village to command the continent .
 Carlo Maria is dressed as a gentleman of the Ancien Régime with powdered wig and a coat laced with gold . In this half-length posthumous portrait, Carlo Maria appears in a gold-coloured coat .
 He was christened Napo/eone di Buonaparte in his 20s . He adopted the more French-sounding Napo-éon Bonaparte after he adopted the name in his youth .
 She was decreed ""Madam, the Mother of His Imperial Majesty The Emperor" Imperial Highness in 1804 or 1805 . She was decreeed "Madam" by Emperor .
 Napoleon was admitted to the elite Eco/e Militaire in Paris in 1784 . On completion of his studies at Brienne, Napoleon became a major force in France . Napoleon was born in France and died in France in 1903 .
 Upon graduating in 1785, Bonaparte was commissioned a second lieutenant in La Feére artillery regiment . He was commissioned to become a second Lieutenant in the French artillery regiment.
 Napoleon's arrival from Egypt led to the fall of the Directory in the Coup of 18 Brumaire, with Napoleon installing himself as Consul . He returned to the streets of Paris despite the Royal Navy's critical triumph at the Battle of the Nile .
 The coronation ceremony took place at Notre Dame de Paris in December 1804 . Despite his own affairs, their relationship was never the same after he learnt about hers .
 Napoleon first crowned himself, then put the crown on Josephine's head, proclaiming her empress . e When after a few years it became clear Josephine could not have a child, Napoleon began to think seriously about the possibility of divorce . e
 Josephine agreed to the divorce so the Emperor could remarry in the hope of having an heir . The Emperor showed his dedication to Josephine for the rest of his life . e Despite his divorce from Josephine, he showed dedication to her .
 The Coup of 30 Prairial VII une 18 (30 Prairials) ousted the Jacobins and left Emmanuel Joseph Sieyés as the dominant figure in the government . The Coup was the overthrow of the Jacobinists and left the government in disarray .
 Napoleon plotted a coup within the coup, ultimately gaining power for himself rather than Sieyes . However, from the moment of his return, Napoleon plotted his own coup . Napoleon plotted to take over from Sieyes in the coup .
 On the 18 of Brumaire, three of the five Directors resigned, which prevented a quorum and thus practically abolished the Directory . The Directory was abolished after the death of three Directors .
 The Constitution preserved the appearance of a republic but in reality established a dictatorship . Originally devised by Sieyés to give Napoleon a minor role but rewritten by Napoleon and accepted by popular vote .
 Bonaparte completed his coup within a coup by the adoption of a constitution under which the First Consul, a position he was sure to hold, had greater power than the other two consuls . The constitution was adopted under the constitution .
 The Coup of 18 Brumaire left Emmanuel-Joseph Sieyeés as the dominant figure of the French government . It prefigured the Coup that brought Napoleon Bonaparte to power . It left Emmanuel Joseph Sieyeéééés as a dominant figure in government .
 The Coup of 30 Prairial VII une 18 (French Revolution) ousted the Jacobins and left Emmanuel Joseph Sieyés, a member of the five-man ruling Directory, dominant figure in government .
 The use of military force had certainly strengthened Napoleon's hand vis a vis Sieyes and the other plotters . Napoleon's use of force strengthened his hand vis- vis vis vis-vis Sieyes, the other conspirators .
 The first of the constitutions since the Revolution without a Declaration of Rights . The commissions then drew up the Constitution of the Year Vill Vill .
 A portrait of the three Consuls, Jean Jacques Régis de Cambacéres, Napoleon Bonaparteand CharlesFrancois Lebrun by Henri-Nicolas Van Gorp .
 By consolidating power, Bonaparte was able to transform the aristocratic constitution of Sieyeés into a dictatorship . The French Revolution was founded by Napoleon Napoleon III in France .
 The Sénat conservateur (Conservative Senate) allowed him to rule by decree . The more independent Conseil d'Etat (Council of State, which drafted bills) and Tribunat (debated bills) were relegated to unimportant roles .
 The War of the First Coalition was the first attempt by the European monarchies to defeat the French First Republic . Discuss Napoleon's early military successes against Austria and Britain . Discuss the early successes of Napoleon and his early military victories .
 Napoleon did not enter the war as the leader of the French army until 1796 . He faced the British forces at the 1793 Siege of Toulon, where he played a major role in crushing the royalist rebellion by expelling an English fleet .
 The Mediterranean campaign of 1798 was a series of major naval operations surrounding a French expeditionary force sent to Egypt by Napoleon Bonaparte . The campaign was a bridge between the War of the First Coalition and the Second Coalition . It is believed that the Mediterranean campaign was part of a series
 Napoleon failed to stop the British dominance once it moved to Egypt . Napoleon's campaign was initially Napoleon's success but he didn't stop it in Egypt .
 The War of the Second Coalition was the second war on revolutionary France by the European monarchies, led by Britain, Austria and Russia . The Ottoman Empire, Portugal, and Naples also fought in the war . The Second Coalition included the Ottoman Empire and Portugal .
 Austrians negotiated the Treaty of Lunéville, basically accepting the terms of the previous Treaty of Campo Formio . In the end of the treaty, the Austrians accepted the terms . The Austrians were forced to accept the terms, which included a treaty of peace .
 Napoleon and his allies overthrew the Directory by a coup d'état on November 9, 1799 (the Coup of 18 Brumaire) Napoleon's Constitution and whether it upheld the ideals of the French Revolution . Assess Napoleon's constitution and assess whether it upholds the ideals
 The Constitution of the Year VIII was adopted on December 24, 1799, and established the form of government known as the Consulate . e The Constitution preserved the appearance of a republic but established a dictatorship . e
 The Conservative Senate was a governmental body equal to the three legislative assemblies . All actual power was held by the First Consul, Bonaparte, who never intended to be part of an equal triumvirate .
 On February 7, 1800, a public referendum confirmed the new constitution . As the years progressed, he moved to consolidate his own power as First Consul .
 Napoleon was genuinely popular among many voters . The Constitution was amended twice and in each case, strengthened Napoleon's already concentrated power . e
 In 1804, the Constitution of the Year XII established the First French Empire with Napoleon Bonaparte as Napoleon I, Emperor of the French . The Constitution of 1804 established the French Empire in 1804 . Napoleon I was Napoleon Napoleon II, the French Emperor .
 Napoleon arrived in France to a hero's welcome . The Constitution of the Year VIIll . Despite the failures in Egypt, Napoleon was a hero in France .
 Napoleon's power was confirmed by the new Constitution of the Year VIII . The Constitution was originally devised by Sieyes to give Napoleon a minor role, but rewritten by Napoleon and accepted by direct popular vote .
 The Constitution of the Year VIII was adopted on December 24, 1799 . It established the form of government known as the Consulate . It was adopted during the French Revolutionary Calendar .
 As the years progressed, he moved to consolidate his own power as First Consul . He left the two other consuls, Jean Jacques Régis de Cambacérés and Charles-Francois Lebrun, duc de Plaisance, weak .
 Napoleon became the First Consul for Life in 1802 . He was elected as Emperor of the French . Napoleon was also elected as Napoleon in 1803 .
 Like the old monarchy, he reintroduced plenipotentiaries, an over-centralized, strictly utilitarian administration that constructed or consolidated the funds necessary for national institutions, local governments, a judiciary system, organs of finance, banking, codes, and a conscientious well-disciplined
 Napoleon was largely able to quell dissent within government by expelling his more vocal critics . Napoleon was able to do so by quelling dissent within the government . Napoleon's most vocal critics were expelled from Napoleon's government .
 Napoleon created the elite order of the Légion d-honneur . The Legion of Honor was a substitute for the old royalist decorations and orders of chivalry .
 Praised for its Gallic clarity, it soread rapidly throughout Europe and the world . The end of feudalism where it took effect, it marked the end of the feudalism .
 The highest French order for military and civil merits, established in 1802 by Napoléon Bonaparte . Legion of Honor is the highest French award for military or civil merits .
 Joseph Fouché was Talleyrand's opponent, but the two served together under Napoleon . Napoleon's second most important person in his government was Joseph Talérand . Fouche was Talaryrand's main opponent .
 It discarded the old right of primogeniture (where only the eldest son inherited) and required that inheritances be divided equally among all the children . The new law requires all children to share inheritances equally .
 He moved the clergy and large numbers of devout Catholics from hostility to the government to support for him . The Catholic system was reestablished by the Concordat of 1801 that allowed the Church return to normal operations .
 In the middle of the 18th century, a series of colonial conflicts began between France and Britain, resulting in the destruction of most of the existing French colonial empire and the expulsion of France from the Americas . e Modest recovery of the French empire was made during the French intervention in the American
 During the following years Napoleon did not manage to turn the country into an important colonial power . A brief peace in Europe allowed Napoleon to focus on the French colonies . e
 The acquisition of the Louisiana territory (828,000 square miles) by the United States from France in 1803 . The Louisiana Purchase was the Louisiana Purchase of the U.S. from France .
 The Seven Years' War was a particularly bad defeat for the French, with the British conquering New France and most of France's West Indian colonies and all of the French Indian outposts .
 Saint-Domingue slave revolt in 1791 . German copper engraving, author unknown . St.D.Mle .
 During the French Revolution, the National Assembly took Church properties and issued the Civil Constitution of the Clergy, which made the Church a department of the state . The Concordat of 1801 effectively removed the Church from papal authority .
 Napoleon looked for recognition by the Church of the disposition of its property and geographical reorganization of bishoprics . Rome sought the protection of Catholics and the recognition of a special status of the Catholic Church in the French State .
 Napoleon presented another set of laws called the Organic Articles . Napoleon presented them as a part of the Concordat . The Organic Articles were created as a result of Napoleon's success in France .
 During the French Revolution, the National Assembly took Church properties and issued the Civil Constitution of the Clergy, which made the Church a department of the state . It effectively removed the Church from papal authority .
 Leaders of the Catholic Church taking the civil oath required by the Concordat of 1801, Henri Gourdon de Genouillac, Paris a travers les siécles, 4, Paris, 1881 .
 The 1804 Napoleonic Code replaced the fragmented laws of prerevolutionary France . It recognized the principles of civil liberty, equality before the law . It also recognized the secular character of the state .
 Other codes were commissioned by Napoleon to codify criminal and commerce law . Praised for its clarity, the Code spread rapidly throughout Europe and the world .
 Napoleonic Code was a fundamental change in the nature of the civil law system . It formed the basis of the law systems across most of continental Europe . It has had a lasting impact on civil law codes in other regions, including the Middle East .
 Jean-Jacques Régis de Cambacérés led the drafting process of a single civil law code in France . The code was created in the 1930s .
 It discarded the old right of primogeniture and required that inheritances be divided equally among all children . The new law was passed in 1883 .
 There is no rule of stare decisis (binding precedent) in French law, but decisions by important courts have become more or less equivalent to case law .
 The constitution tailor-made the position of First Consul to give Napoleon most of the powers of a dictator . e The constitution was amended twice and in each case, the amendments strengthened Napoleon's authority .
 Napoleon I on His Imperial Throne by Jean-Auguste-Dominique Ingres, 1806 . Napoleon I was born in 1806 in Paris .
 Napoleon formed the Confederation of the Rhine out of various German states in July 1806 . The path to war seemed inevitable and the final straw was Napoleon's formation of the Confederation . The final straw in the end of the war was the formation of a confederation of states .
 The formation of the Confederation was the final nail in the coffin of the Holy Roman Empire . It was formed as a result of the formation of a confederation of statesmen .
 Napoleon consolidated the various smaller states of the former Holy Roman Empire into larger electorates, duchies, and kingdoms to make the governance of non-Prussian and Austrian Germany more efficient . Napoleon consolidated smaller states to make governance efficient .
 The Confederation was at its largest in 1808, when it included 35 states and collapsed in 1813 . In return for continued French protection, member states were compelled to supply France with many of their own military personnel .
 The Grande Armée of France defeated a larger Russian and Austrian army led by Tsar Alexander | and Holy Roman Emperor Francis Il . Napoleon's victory is widely regarded as the greatest victory achieved by Napoleon in France .
 On August 1, the members of the confederation formally seceded from the Holy Roman Empire . On August 6, following an ultimatum by Napoleon, Francis Il declared the Holy . Roman Empire dissolved following the death of Napoleon .
 Napoleon forced the abdications of Charles IV and Ferdinand Vil of Spain in 1808 . He granted the Spanish crown to his brother Joseph, provoking a violent conflict that overlapped with the Peninsular War . The Spanish crown was granted to Joseph's brother, Charles IV .
 The abdications led to what the Spanish-speaking world calls the Spanish War of Independence . The Spanish war overlaps with the Peninsular War, which overlaps .
 In 1797, Napoleon signed the Treaty of Campo Formio, by which the Republic of Venice was annexed to the Austrian state, dashing Italian nationalists' hopes that it might become an independent state . Napoleon then entered Milan where he was welcomed as a liberator .
 The Italian Republic became the Kingdom of Italy in 1805 . The constitution gave the republic some level of sovereignty, but in practice it was largely controlled by Napoleon .
 Kingdom of Italy was a French client state founded in Northern Italy by Napoleon . It was fully influenced by revolutionary France, that ended with Napoleon's defeat and fall .
 Napoleon invaded Italy in 1796 with the aims of forcing the First Coalition to abandon Sardinia and forcing Austria to withdraw from Italy . The French Army of Italy invaded Italy under Napoleon . The First Coalition had been forced to leave Sardinia after the invasion .
 Victor Amadeus Ill of Sardinia was forced to sign an armistice . Within only two weeks of war, he had to sign a cease-fire with Italy .
 The Kingdom of Italy was established in 1805 with the same man as King of Italy and the 24-year-old Eugééne de Beauharnais as his viceroy .
 Great Britain was the central force in encouraging and financing alliances against Napoleonic France . Identify Napoleon's goals with the Continental System . Use this information to help students understand Napoleon's aims .
 Napoleon's exclusively landbased customs enforcers could not stop British smugglers . Napoleon's exclusive land based customs enforcer was Napoleon's only landbased enforcer . Napoleon had to rely on land enforcer to stop smugglers .
 Swedish allies, including Sweden and Portugal, refused to comply with the orders . The British allies were forced to comply, which resulted in damaging wars .
 A political cartoon showing merchants dodging the ""Ograbme,"" which is ""Embargo"" spelled backwards . Ograbme is a political cartoon of merchants dodging "Embargo"
 The Holy Alliance was a coalition created by the monarchist great powers of Russia, Austria, and Prussia . Identify the members of the coalition and explain the function of the Holy Alliance .
 Austrian state chancellor Prince Klemens von Metternich made the Alliance a bastion against democracy, revolution, and secularism . Ostensibly, the alliance was formed to instill the divine right of kings and Christian values .
 The Alliance is usually associated with the later Quadruple and Quintuple Alliances, which included the United Kingdom and France . The monarchs of the three countries involved used it to band together to prevent revolutionary influence from entering these nations .
 The last meetings revealed the rising antagonism between Britain and France, especially on Italian unification, the right to selfdetermination, and the Eastern Question . The meetings also revealed the rise in tensions between the two countries .
 The Holy Alliance was the brainchild of Tsar Alexander I . Most European monarchs did not want to offend the Tsar by refusing to sign it . The alliance gained a lot of support because of its popularity .
 The monarchs of the three countries involved used it to band together to prevent revolutionary influence (especially from the French Revolution) from entering these nations . They banded together to stop revolutionary influence .
 The Alliance is usually associated with the later Quadruple and Quintuple Alliances, which included the United Kingdom and France . The Alliance was formed in the 1930s .
 The Holy Alliance was the brainchild of Tsar Alexander I . Most European monarchs did not want to offend the Tsar by refusing to sign it . The alliance was created by Alexander I in 1903 .
 The Treaty of Schonbrunn, which ended the 1809 war between Austria and France, had a clause removing Western Galicia from Austria and annexing it to the Grand Duchy of Warsaw . Learning Objective Critique Napoleon's decision to invade Russia was a key decision .
 Napoleon ignored repeated advice against an invasion of the Russian heartland and prepared for an offensive Campaign . Russia's withdrawal from the Continental System was a further incentive for Napoleon to start a campaign against it .
 Following the Campaign, a saying arose that the Generals Janvier and Février anuary and February (January and February) defeated Napoleon, alluding to the Russian Winter . Napoleon's defeat of Napoleon is said to have been the result of the French Winter .
 Michail Ilarionovich Kutuzov (1745 1813), commander-in-chief of the Russian army on the far left, with his generals at the talks deciding to surrender Moscow .
 Prussia and Austria took advantage of the situation by forming a Sixth Coalition against France . The retreat from Russia turned into a new war on German soil .
 The battle ended when the French commanders surrendered the city to Tsar Alexander on March 31 . The city was taken over by the Russian tsar Alexander in 1803 .
 Napoleon was defeated at the so-called Battle of Nations (October 1619, 1813) Napoleon defeated in October 1619 . Napoleon died at the end of the battle .
 The Russian Tsar Alexander I ordered all Coalition forces in Germany to cross the Rhine and invade France . Alexander I was the supreme commander of the Coalition forces and the paramount monarch .
 The Senate declared Napoleon deposed on April 2, 1814 . Bogdan Willewalde defeated Napoleon in the Battle of Paris of 1814 by Bogdan .
 The franchise was now limited to men with considerable property holdings and just 1% of people could vote . The King had the power to propose or sanction laws and appoint or recall ministers .
 It was liberal in spirit and gave the French people rights which were previously unknown to them . The French people were given rights which they had previously unknown .
 The Charter was adopted by a plebiscite on June 1, 1815, by an immense majority of the five million voters . Many eligible voters abstained, although many eligible voters did not .
 Marshal Michel Ney, who had pledged loyalty to the restored Bourbon king, kissed his former emperor and forgot his oath of allegiance to the Bourbon monarch . The soldiers quickly responded with, ""Vive L'Empereur "" Marshal Ney .
 The invasion of France was planned for July 1, 1815 . Some time after the allies began mobilizing, the allies mobilized . The invasion was planned .
 The two Coalition armies entered Paris on July 7, 1944 . Napoleon III was forced to abdicate after he failed to do so . Joseph Fouché was acting president of the provisional government .
 French forces crossed the river Sambre at Charleroi . They placed their forces between the cantonment areas of Wellington's Army and Blucher's army to the east .
 Napoleon received from Fouché an intimation that he must leave Paris . Napoleon received the same day, Napoleon received an intimment that he had to leave Paris. Napoleon left Paris in 1803 .
 Great Powers of Europe started planning for the postwar world in the wake of the Napoleonic Wars . To bring about a balance of power in Europe and prevent further conflict, they developed the Concert of Europe .
 The Congress of Vienna dissolved the Napoleonic world and attempted to restore the monarchies Napoleon had overthrown . The Congress was held in Vienna, Austria, Russia and Austria respectively .
 The Concert of Europe formed the basic framework for European international politics until the outbreak of the First World War in 1914 .
 Britain, Russia, Prussia, Austria, and France pledged to meet regularly to resolve differences .
 The leading personalities of the Congress were British foreign secretary Lord Castlereagh, Austrian Chancellor Klemens von Metternich, and Tsar Alexander | of Russia .
 Charles Maurice de Talleyrand-Périgord of France was largely responsible for quickly returning France to its place alongside the other major powers in international diplomacy after their defeat in the Napoleonic Wars . The three leaders in the Congress are known for their conservatism, aimed at creating lasting
 War broke out as a continuation of the French Revolution, which had plunged the European continent into war since 1792 . A reactionary A person who holds political views that favor a return to the status quo ante, the previous political state of society .
 King Frederick William III of Prussia was also in Vienna, playing his role behind the scenes . He was in Vienna at the start of the war .
 He allied himself to a Committee of Eight lesser powers to control the negotiations . The talks are expected to last until the end of the year .
 Pedro de Sousa Holstein, Count of Palmela and Anténio de Saldanha da Gama . Counts of Porto Santo, Palmela, Porto São Gama, and Joaquim Lobo da Silveira. Count of Port
 Every canton had its own delegation . The Netherlands Earl of Clancarty, the British Ambassador at the Dutch court, was at the Netherlands .
 The Papal States Cardinal Ercole Consalvi Republic of Genoa Marquise Agostino Pareto, Senator of the Republic Bavaria . Maximilian Graf von Montgelas Wurttemberg . Georg Ernst Levin von Wintzingerode Hanover
 The Final Act, embodying all the separate treaties created at and around the Congress of Vienna, was signed on June 9, 1815 . It ushered in major territorial changes to Europe to create a balance of power between nations .
 Russia gained much of Poland, while Prussia added smaller German states in the west, Swedish Pomerania, and 40% of the Kingdom of Saxony . Prussia also added smaller states to the Prussian border .
 The term is used almost exclusively in Europe, where in the present day there is no sovereign duchy left . The term "duchy" is almost exclusively used in Europe .
 During the wars, Portugal lost its town of Olivencga to Spain and moved to have it restored . Portugal lost the town to Spain during the wars .
 The diplomatic system developed by the Congress by which the main powers could propose a conference to solve a crisis had failed . However, by 1823 the diplomatic system had failed to solve the crisis .
 In 1818, the British decided not to become involved in continental issues that did not directly affect them and did not support the Tsar in his vision to prevent revolution . The Tsar's vision was to prevent a revolution .
 No Congress was called to restore the old system during the great revolutionary upheavals of 1848 . Thus, nationalism and liberalism began to triumph over the conservatism of the Congress system .
 The diplomatic alliances that formed out of the Congress were shattered during the Crimean War, in which Russia was defeated by the other Powers . The Crimean War was Russia's defeat .
 A more tangible source of antagonism was the pressure applied to possessors of biens nationaux by the Catholic Church and returning emigrés attempting to repossess their former lands . The Catholic Church applied pressure on possessors and emigrators to take over their land .
 Talleyrand was influential in seeing that the Bourbons reigned . Fouché, Napoleon's minister of police during the Hundred Days, was Napoleon's police chief . Talleyand was influential again in the Second Restoration .
 Guillaume Marie Anne Brune was savagely assassinated and his remains thrown into the Rhéne River . Brune was the French president of France . Brune's remains were thrown in the river .
 The monarchic, aristocratic, social, and political system was established in the Kingdom of France from approximately the 15th century until the latter part of the 18th century . Ancien Régime was established under the late Valois and Bourbon dynasties .
 The ascension to the throne of Charles X coincided with the Ultras' control of power in the Chamber of Deputies . Thus, the ministry of the comte de Villele was able to continue .
 Some innovations were included upon request by Villéle . Although Charles was hostile towards the 1814 Charter, commitment to the ""constitutional charter"" was affirmed with four of Napoleon's generals in attendance . Some innovations included .
 At 4:30 pm, commanders of the troops of the First Military division of Paris and the Garde Royale were ordered to concentrate their troops, and guns, on the Place du Carrousel facing the Tuileries, the Place Vendéme, and the Place de la Bast
 Eugene Delacroix's Liberty Leading the People is a painting commemorating the July Revolution of 1830 . The July Revolution toppled King Charles X of France .
 In 1830, the discontent caused by Charles X's authoritarian policies culminated in an uprising in the streets of Paris known as the 1830 July Revolution . Charles was forced to flee and Louis-Philippe d'Orléans, a member of the Orléans branch of the family, ascended
 The French Kingdom, commonly known as the July Monarchy, was a liberal constitutional monarchy in France under Louis Philippe I . The July Revolution of 1830 and 1848 ended with the Revolution of 1848 in France . The French monarchy ended in 1848 .
 Louis Philippe proclaimed himself Roi des Francais rather than ""King of France" emphasizing the popular origins of his reign . Louis Philippe was a member of the traditionally more liberal Orl€ans branch of the House of Bourbon . He proclaimed himself "Roi de Francais" rather than
 There was an increase in workers' demonstrations, with riots in the Buzancais in 1847 . In 1847, riots broke out in a city of Buzanca .
 The crowds directed their anger against the Citizen King Louis Philippe and his chief minister for foreign and domestic policy, Francois Pierre Guillaume Guizot .
 Following the overthrow of King Louis Philippe in February, a provisional government (Constituent Assembly) was created, which was disorganized as it attempted to deal with France's economic problems created by the political upheaval . Frustration among the laboring classes arose when the Constituent assembly did
 Charles Louis Napoléon Bonaparte staged a coup d'état in 1851 . In 1848, Charles Louis was elected as President of the Republic, and pretexting legislative gridlock, he staged the coup .
 In 1852 he had himself declared Emperor Napoléon Ill of the Second Empire of France . Finally, in 1852, he had declared himself Emperor Napoleon Napoleon III of the French Empire .
 Election of Napoleon III and a Short-Lived Republic was keenly contested . The democratic republicans adopted as their candidate Ledru-Rollin, the “pure republicans"" Cavaignac, and the recently reorganized Imperialist party Prince Louis-Napoléon Bon
 The new National Constituent Assembly was heavily composed of royalist sympathizers of both the Legitimist wing and the Orleanist (Citizen King Louis Philippe) wing .
 The Second French Empire was the Imperial Bonapartist regime of Napoleon III from 1852 to 1870 . It was between the Second Republic and the Third Republic . The era was an era of great industrialization, urbanization (including the massive rebuilding of Paris)
 Napoleon entered the Franco-Prussian War without allies and with inferior military forces . The French army was rapidly defeated and Napoleon III was captured at the Battle of Sedan . Napoleon went into exile in England, where he died in 1873 .
 Franco-Prussian War was a conflict between the Second French Empire of Napoleon Ill and the German states of the North German Confederation led by the Kingdom of Prussia . The war was fought between the French and German states in Germany .
 Napoleon I was blocked by the Constitution and Parliament from running for a second term . He organized a coup d'état in 1851 and then took the throne as Napoleon IIl on December 2, 1852 . Napoleon I's coronation was 48 years after his coronation .
 Emperor Napoléon Ill remains the longest-serving French head of state since the French Revolution . A vast public works program was commissioned by his prefect of the Seine .
 Haussmann's work met with fierce opposition and was finally dismissed by Napoleon ll in 1870 . Work on his projects continued until 1927, but he was eventually dismissed .
 In 1848, Louis-Napoleon Bonaparte was elected President of France through universal male suffrage . He took 74% of the vote, taking 74% .
 Napoleon Ill is best known today for his grand reconstruction of Paris, carried out by his prefect of the Seine, Baron Haussmann . Napoleon Ill died in 1818 at the hands of the French Revolution .
 Napoleon III modernized the French banking system, greatly expanded and consolidated the French railway system, and made the French merchant marine the second largest in the world . Napoleon III also expanded the French bank system and expanded the country's railway system .
 French soldiers assaulted by German infantry during the Franco-Prussian War, 1870, which led to the defeat of Napoleon Ill and the end of the Second French Empire . Painting depicting the FrancoPrussian war depicts the French soldiers .
 Emperor Napoleon Ill stressed his own imperial role as the foundation of the government . Napoleon stressed his imperial role in the creation of the French Empire . Napoleon's role was the foundation for the French government .
 The anti-parliamentary French Constitution of 1852 was instituted by Napoleon Ill on January 14, 1852 . The constitution was largely a repetition of that of 1848 . Napoleon Ill instituted the constitution in 1852 in a bid to keep it in power .
 He succeeded to the throne after his father was murdered . He was born in Saint Petersburg to Grand Duke Paul Petrovich, later Emperor Paul I . He succeeded his father in Russia .
 Alexander's reign was ruled by the Orthodox Church . At first, the church exercised little influence on Alexander's rule .
 Mikhail Soeransky became one of the Tsar's closest advisors . He drew up many plans for elaborate reforms . Soeranks was one of Russia's most influential advisors .
 A Peasant Leaving His Landlord on Yuriev Day was the only time of the year when the Russian peasants were free to move from one landowner to another before the abolition of serfdom in 1861 .
 The tsar's greatest triumph came in 1812 as Napoleon's invasion of Russia proved a total disaster for the French . Napoleon invaded Russia in the summer of 1812 and the tsar died of his injuries .
 He formed the Holy Alliance to suppress revolutionary movements in Europe . He saw them as immoral threats to legitimate Christian monarchs . The Holy Alliance was formed to suppress anti-revolutionary movements .
 Under Alexander, Russia gained disputed territory in the Caucasus region . The region provides vital access to the Black Sea and Caspian Sea . Alexander also fought a successful war with Persia .
 Peter the Great ruled the Tsardom of Russia and later the Russian Empire from May 7, 1682, until his death . Through a number of successful wars, he expanded his empire into a much larger empire that became a major power .
 Decembrist officers and sympathizers displayed contempt for the regime by rejecting court lifestyle, wearing cavalry swords at balls and committing themselves to academic study . Meanwhile, spurred by their experiences of the Napoleonic Wars and realizing many of the harsh indignities through which the peasant soldiers were forced
 Officers refused to swear allegiance to new tsar Nicholas I, proclaiming instead their loyalty to Constantine and their Decembrist Constitution . On the morning of December 26, officers commanding about 3,000 men assembled in Senate Square .
 After soending most of the day in fruitless attempts to parley with the rebel force, Nicholas ordered a cavalry charge which slipped on the icy cobbles and retired in disorder . Nicholas ordered the cavalry charge .
 Alexander I Nicholas inherited his brother's throne despite the failed Decembrist revolt against him and went on to become the most reactionary of all Russian leaders . He was the younger brother of his predecessor, Alexander I . Nicholas .
 Nicholas's policy towards the Ottoman Empire was to use the Treaty of Kugcuk Kaynarca, which gave Russia a vague right to be the protector of the Orthodox peoples in the Balkans, to place the Ottomans in the Russian sphere of influence .
 Peter the Great, the Tsar of Russia from 1672-1725, started a trend in Russia of modernization and westernization of Russian culture and economics . Compare and contrast the opinions and goals of the Westerners and the Slavophiles .
 Peter implemented absolute social modernization by introducing French and western dress to his court . Catherine the Great, who ruled from 1762 until her death in 1796, continued Peter's project and helped herald the Russian Enlightenment, transforming education and culture to mirror the European Enlightenment .
 Rural life was praised by the movement, which opposed industrialization and urban development . Protection of the ""mir"" (peasant village communities) was an important measure to prevent the growth of the working class . Rural life in rural areas was praised .
 Aleksey Khomyakov and his devoutly Orthodox colleagues elaborated a traditionalistic doctrine that claimed Russia has its own distinct way that should avoid imitating ""Western institutions"
 Over 50 countries were affected, but with no coordination or cooperation between their respective revolutionaries . Peasant village communities, as opposed to individual farmsteads or khutors, were affected by the revolution in Russia .
 Alexander Il Tsar of Russia from March 2, 1855, until his assassination in 1881 . Alexander Il The Tsar was the Russian Tsar from 1855-1881 .
 Large parts of common land were passed to the major land owners as otrezki (""cut off lands""), making many forests, roads, and rivers accessible only for a fee . Many forests and roads were made accessible only by a fee for access to forests and rivers .
 German Confederation was a loose association of 39 states designed to coordinate the economies of separate German-speaking countries . It acted as a buffer between Austria and Prussia to preserve the Concert of Europe . Most historians have judged the Confederation as weak and ineffective .
 It collapsed due to the rivalry between Prussia and Austria, warfare, and the inability of the multiple members to compromise . It was replaced by the North German Confederation in 1866 .
 It collapsed because of the rivalry between Prussia and Austria, warfare and the 1848 revolution . It collapsed due to the inability of members to compromise and the inability to compromise .
 The era until the failed 1848 revolution when tensions escalated is commonly referred to as Vormarz . It refers to the outbreak of riots in March 1848, when riots broke out in Russia .
 Further efforts to improve the Confederation began in 1834 with the establishment of a customs union, the Zol/verein . The Zolverein was the first customs union to be established .
 The customs union opened up a common market, ended tariffs between states, and standardized weights, measures, and currencies within member states (except Austria) forming the basis of a proto-national economy . It opened up the common market .
 By the mid-18th century the ""Aufklarung" (The Enlightenment) had transformed German high culture in music, philosophy, science, and literature .
 Travelers both foreign and local complained bitterly about the state of the Heerstra en, the military roads . The military roads were previously maintained for the ease of moving troops . Travelers complained bitterly that the roads were not properly maintained .
 Patriotic songs as ""Die Wacht am Rhein"" by Max Schneckenburger focus attention on geographic space, not limiting ""German-ness"" to a common language .
 The Hambacher Fest is noteworthy for the republicans adopting the black-red-gold colors (used on today's national flag of Germany) as a symbol of the republican movement and of unity among the Germanspeaking people . The Hamburgacher Fest was held in Hamburg, Germany, in
 The Grand Duke of Baden stands beside Wilhelm I, proclaimed here as German Emperor, leading the cheers . Wilhelm I is proclaimed as the German Emperor .
 On December 10, 1870, the North German Confederation Reichstag renamed the Confederation as the German Empire . The title of German Emperor was given to William I, the King of Prussia . Examine the structure of the newly formed German Empire and the role of the Kaiser .
 Between 1904 and 1907, the German colonial government in South-West Africa ordered the annihilation of the local Herero and Namaqua peoples as a punitive measure for an uprising against German colonial rule . Over 100,000 people were killed as a result .
 In the German Revolution, Emperor Wilhelm Il and all German ruling princes abdicated their positions and responsibilities . The German Revolution marked the beginning of the Weimar Republic . Emperor Wilhelm I and all of the ruling princes were deposed .
 On December 10, 1870, the North German Confederation Reichstag renamed the Confederation as the German Empire and gave the title of German Emperor to William I, the King of Prussia . William I was the German Emperor .
 The new constitution (Constitution of the German Confederation) and the title Emperor came into effect on January 1, 1871 . The title Emperor was Emperor of Germany .
 The empire had a parliament called the Re/chstag, which was elected by universal male suffrage . The empire was ruled by the Roman Empire until the end of World War II .
 Executive power was vested in the emperor, or Ka/ser, who was assisted by a chancellor responsible only to him .
 The Norfolk four-course rotation greatly increased crop and livestock yields by improving soil fertility and reducing fallow . Historians dispute whether the developments leading to the unprecedented agricultural growth can be seen as ""a revolution" since the growth was, in fact, a series of significant changes that took place
 Following a two-field crop rotation system common in the Middle Ages, the regular planting of legumes such as peas and beans in the fields that were previously fallow became central and slowly restored the fertility of some croplands .
 Flanders farmers use turnips and clover as forage crops to replace the three-year crop rotation fallow year .
 Two British agriculturalists introduced selective breeding as a scientific practice in the mid-18th century . They used inbreeding to stabilize certain qualities in order to reduce genetic diversity .
 Certain practices that contributed to a more productive use of land intensified, such as converting some pasture land into arable land and recovering fen land and pastures .
 Flanders farmers used turnips and clover as forage crops to replace the three-year crop rotation fallow year . It was the farmers in Flanders (in parts of France and current-day Belgium)
 There was no need to let the soil lie fallow as clover would add nitrates back to the soil . Clover added to soil would add to nitrate levels in soil .
 As a result of a mishap in his foundry, a broken mold caused molten metal to come into contact with cold metal, making the metal surface extremely hard — chilled casting . He advertised as ""self sharpening"" ploughs and received patents for his discovery .
 Seed drills were expensive, unreliable, and fragile . However, seed drills of this and successive types were expensive and unreliable . Seed drills are expensive and fragile.
 Once enclosed, these land uses were restricted to the owner, and the land ceased to be for the use of commoners . The land was enclosed, and it was then used by the owner .
 By the 19th century, unenclosed commons were largely restricted to large rough pastures in mountainous areas and relatively small residual parcels of land in the lowlands . Unenclosed Commons were largely limited to large pastures .
 The process was sometimes accompanied by force, resistance, and bloodshed . It remains among the most controversial areas of agricultural and economic history in England .
 Parliamentary enclosures consolidated strips in the open fields into more compact units and enclosed much of the remaining pasture commons or wastes or wastes . Parliamentary enclosure enclosures consolidate strips of open land into compact units .
 Enclosure faced a great deal of popular resistance because of its effects on the household economies of smallholders and landless laborers, who were often pushed out of the rural areas .
 Some rights of common were said to be /n gross, or unconnected with tenure of land . Rights of common common were also said to have been unconnected to tenure of property .
 The part allocated to ‘common pasture" ts shown in the north-east section, shaded green . The part of ‘Common pasture’ shown in this section is shown to have been allocated to common pasture .
 Agricultural Revolution gave Britain the most productive agriculture in Europe . 19th-century yields as much as 80% higher than the Continental average .
 The increase in food supply contributed to the rapid growth of population in England and Wales . Domestic production gave way to food imports in the 19th century as population more than tripled to over 32 million .
 Agricultural Revolution in Britain did not result in overall productivity per hectare of agriculture that would rival productivity in China . But Britain's lead eroded as European countries experienced their own agricultural revolutions, raising grain yields by 60% .
 Watt formed a partnership with a businessman Matthew Boulton and together they manufactured steam engines that could be used by industry . e With Cartwright's loom, the spinning mule, and the spinning mule, the pieces were in place to build a mechanized textile industry .
 A multi-spindle spinning frame was one of the key developments in the industrialization of weaving during the early Industrial Revolution . Spinning jenny was a key part of the development of weaving in Britain .
 The jenny produced a lightly twisted yarn only Suitable for weft, not warp . Suitable to weft not warp.
 The device reduced the amount of work needed to produce yarn, with a worker able to work eight or more spools at once .
 Edmund Cartwright invented a vertical power loom in 1785 . Cartwright patented the design after the expiration of the Arkwright patent would greatly increase the supply of soun cotton .
 Factories put husbands, wives, and children under the same conditions of the manufacturer masters . e The factory system was partly responsible for the rise of urban living in China .
 The transition to industrialization was not without opposition from the workers who feared that machines would end the need for skilled labor . e One of the best known accounts of factory worker's tragic living conditions during the Industrial Revolution is Friedrich Engels' The Condition of the Working Class in England .
 Work is contracted by a central agent to subcontractors who complete the work in off-site facilities, either in their own homes or in workshops with multiple craftsmen . In it, work is contracted to subcontractor who complete it in a home or workshop .
 Jerénimo de Ayanz y Beaumont received patents in 1606 for 50 steam-powered inventions . His inventions included a water pump for draining inundated mines .
 The 1698 Savery Engine, Institute of Human Thermodynamics and loHT Publishing Ltd. The engine was built in the 1920s .
 e Watt's next improvement to the Newcomen design was to seal the top of the cylinder and surround the cylinder with a jacket . This invention dramatically improved the efficiency of the engine .
 The separate condenser showed dramatic potential for improvements on the Newcomen engine, but Watt was still discouraged by seemingly insurmountable problems before a marketable engine could be perfected . e The improvements led to the fully developed version of 1776 that actually went into production . e
 Watt engine used about 75% less fuel than a similar Newcomen one . Boulton and Watt became an engineering company that was critical to the technological advancements of the Industrial Revolution .
 While the rod moved vertically in a straight line, the beam was pivoted at its center with each side inscribing an arc . Further, it was not possible to connect the piston rod of the sealed cylinder direct/y to the beam .
 This masterpiece of engineering uses a four-bar linkage coupled with a pantograph to produce the required straight-line motion much more cheaply than if he had used a slider type of linkage .
 They supported talents and other companies, creating a culture where firms often shared information that they could use to create new techniques or products .
 Steam engines found many uses in a variety of industries . From mines to mills, steam engines were used in many of the world's industries . Steam engines were often used in mines, mills and mines .
 The use of steam engines on railroads proved extraordinary . Large amounts of goods and raw materials could now be delivered to cities and factories alike at a fraction of the cost .
 Following the advent of the steamboat, the U.S. saw an incredible growth in the transportation of goods and people . The steamboat was key in westward expansion .
 Attributions e Early Steam Engines o ""Aeolipile."" http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AeOLipile .
 Coal was central to the development of the steam engine . The steam engine dramatically increased the efficiency of coal mining . Coal was so abundant in Britain that the supply could be stepped up to meet demand .
 Coke pig iron was hardly used to produce wrought iron in forges until the mid-1750s, when Abraham Darby Il built Horsehay and Ketley furnaces .
 Casting iron became a structural material following the building of the innovative Iron Bridge in 1778 by Abraham Darby IIl. e Wrought iron for smiths to forge into consumer goods was still made in finery forges, as it long had been .
 By the 18th century, the availability of wood for making charcoal had limited the expansion of iron production . England became increasingly dependent on Sweden and then from about 1725 on Russia for the iron .
 Huntsman exported his whole output to France as local producers refused to work with steel harder than they were already using . Huntsman exports his entire output to the French market for years .
 Bessemer perfected what would be known as the process . Goran Fredrik Goransson and Robert Forester Mushet perfected the process in the 1930s .
 Bessemer met with rebuffs and was forced to undertake the exploitation of his process himself . Eventually licences were applied for in such numbers that he received royalties exceeding a million pounds sterling .
 Attributions e The Shift to Coal O° O° 1e) {e) ""Coal.""
 The modern canal network in Britain emerged because the Industrial Revolution demanded an economic and reliable way to transport goods and commodities in large quantities . The canal network responded to the needs of the industrial revolution and fueled its further advancement .
 The British canal system played a vital role in the Industrial Revolution at a time when roads were only just emerging from the medieval mud and long trains of packhorses were the only means of more easily accessible transport .
 From about 1840, railways began to threaten canals . They were often marginalized from land-based society and perceived as strange outsiders living a nomadic lifestyle .
 Within a year of its opening, the price of coal in Manchester fell by about half . It was connected with the rapidly growing town of Manchester and its construction cost £168,000 .
 Surrey lron Railway was the first for public use and on cast iron rails . It was incorporated in 1799 and incorporated in the same year as the Surrey Railway .
 The Monkland and Kirkintilloch Railway was the first public steam railway in Scotland . The railway was empowered to carry passengers in addition to coal and general merchandise .
 To determine which locomotives would be suitable, the L&MR directors organized the Rainhill Trials . Horse-drawn traffic could use the Stockton and Darlington lines .
 A year later George Stephenson, another of Wylam's employees, improved the design with Blucher, the first locomotive to use flanged wheels keeping the locomotive on the track and had cylinder rods directly connected to the wheels in the manner of Catch Me Who Can .
 London and Birmingham Railway opened in 1837 . Grand Junction linking existing L&MR and the new L&BR . The Grand Junction was a link between the two .
 A new railway always needed an Act of Parliament, which typically cost over £200,000 to obtain, but opposition could effectively prevent its construction . Opponents of a new railway could also effectively prevent construction .
 Once an Act was obtained, there was little government regulation, as /a/ssez faire and private ownership had become accepted practices .
 One of the earliest factories was John Lombe's waterpowered silk mill at Derby, operational by 1721 . Learning Objective Describe the factory system and how it functioned .
 Matthew Boulton at his Soho Manufactory, which started operating in 1766, was among the pioneers of mass production on the assembly line principle . Josiah Wedgwood in Staffordshire opened the first true ceramics factory in 1769 .
 Factory system was a new way of organizing labor made necessary by the development of machines, which were too large to house in a worker's cottage . The factory system was the first way to organize labor .
 Workers feared years spent learning a craft would go waste and unskilled machine operators would rob them of their livelihood . They feared that the years they spent learning to be a machine operator would go to waste .
 Richard Arkwright is credited with inventing the prototype of the modern factory . Bicycles were mass produced beginning in the 1880s .
 Workers feared unskilled machine operators would rob them of their livelihoods . They feared that the years they had spent learning a craft would go waste .
 Not everyone lived in poor conditions and struggled with the challenges of rapid industrialization . Some have concluded that living standards for the majority of the population did not grow meaningfully until much later .
 SFA seh vigner Sinffenung unk authetin Daan Ya Frledvidh Eagels. £ripria. Fo. Fo)
 As a result of industrialization, ordinary working people found increased opportunities for employment in the new mills and factories . These were often under strict working conditions with long hours of labor dominated by a pace set by machines .
 In the textile industry, factories set hours of work and the machinery within them shaped the pace of work . The pace of the work was set by the machinery in factories that set the hours .
 It prohibited all girls and boys under ten years old from working underground in coal mines . Over time, more men than women would find that industrial employment and industrial wages provided a higher level of material security than agricultural employment .
 Common in the early 19th century, they pulled a corf full of coal along roadways as small as 16 inches in height . Common particularly in the . early . 19th . century, particularly in . early 19 . century .
 In 1800, there were 20,000 apprentices (usually pauper children) working in cotton mills . The cotton mill industry is now one of the world's largest and fastest-growing industries .
 Working-Class Women Before the Mines and Collieries Act 1842, women (and children) worked underground as hurriers who carted tubs of coal up through the narrow mine shafts .
 The first legislation in response to the abuses experienced by child laborers did not even attempt to ban child labor, but merely improve working conditions for some child workers .
 The Act was introduced by Sir Robert Peel, who became concerned with the issue after an outbreak of a ""malignant fever"" at one of his cotton mills, which he later blamed on ""gross mismanagement"" by his subordinates .
 Peel's Cotton Mills and Factories Act of 1819 paved the way for subsequent Factory Acts and set up effective means of industry regulation . The Cotton Mills Act was passed by Peel in 1819 .
 1802 and 1819 Acts were largely ineffective and after radical agitation by child labor opponents, a Royal Commission recommended in 1833 that children aged 1118 should work a maximum of 12 hours per day . In 1833, children aged 9-11 were no longer permitted to work and children
 The rapid expansion of industrial society during the Industrial Revolution drew women, children, rural workers, and immigrants into the industrial work force in large numbers and in new roles . Describe the grievances that gave rise to organized labor .
 Chartism relied on constitutional methods to secure its aims . e More permanent trade unions followed from the 1850s . Chartism was first chartist movement in England .
 A week of strikes and unrest, also known as the Scottish Insurrection of 1820, that was a culmination of Radical demands for reform in the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland . Radical demands became prominent in the early years of the French Revolution, but were then repressed during the
 The pool of unskilled and semiSkilled labor organized in fits and starts throughout the early phases of industrialization . This pool of labor would later be important arena for the development of trade unions .
 William Ed ward_Kilburn_View_of the Great _Chartist Meeting _on Kenningto n_ Common _Google Art Project.jog. William Ed Wardburn .
 In South America, Sim6n Bolivar and José de San Martin led the final phase of the independence struggle . In South American, they fought for independence from Venezuela .
 The Haitian Revolution was a successful anti-slavery and anti-colonial insurrection . It took place in the former French colony of Saint Domingue from 1791 until 1804 . The revolution was the first of its kind .
 Ogé demanded the right to vote in France . He was convinced that a law passed by the French Constituent Assembly gave full civil rights to wealthy men of color . Ogé died in 1918 .
 Ogé led a brief insurgency in the area around Cap Francais . When the colonial governor refused, he led an insurgency against the colonial government . Ogé was killed by the French colonial governor in 1883 .
 The military and political career of Simon Bolivar included both formal service in the armies of various revolutionary regimes and actions organized by himself or in collaboration with other exiled patriot leaders from 1811 to 1830 . The career was important in the success of the independence wars in South America .
 Bolivar took advantage of the instability caused by Napoleon's Peninsular War and led the revolutionary forces to a victory in 1821, which resulted in the creation of an independent Venezuela . The Venezuelan revolutionary was born in his native Venezuela .
 Throughout his military career, he also lead efforts to oust Spanish rulers from Ecuador, Peru, and Bolivia . Throughout his career he led efforts to topple Spanish rulers .
 Bolivar was passionate about the creation of a unified Latin America . But nationalistic enterprises won out in the end of the war, and nationalist enterprises prevailed .
 He was simultaneously president of Gran Colombia (current Venezuela, Colombia, Panama, and Ecuador) and Peru, while his second in command Antonio José de Sucre was appointed president of Bolivia . He was also president of Peru, Venezuela and Peru .
 His second challenge was implementing a vision to unify the region into one large state, which he believed would be the only guarantee of maintaining American independence from the Spanish in northern South America .
 These caudillos would maintain their control primarily on the basis of a cult of personality, populist politics, and military might . The caudillas would maintain control of the U.S. through the use of cults of personality .
 Gran Colombia was created in 1819 by Sim6n Bolivar as part of his vision for a unified Latin America . It was fraught with political instability and collapsed in 1831 . Gran Colombia encompassed much of northern South America and part of southern Central America .
 The faction that favored constitutional rule coalesced around Vice-President Francisco de Paula Santander . Those who supported the creation of a stronger presidency were led by President Sim6n Bolivar . The faction was led by the President of Venezuela .
 In 1828, the Convention of Ocana began its sessions . The Convention was the first constitutional assembly to hold a constitutional assembly . The convention began in 1828 .
 José de San Martin was one of the prime leaders of Latin America's struggle for freedom from the Spanish Empire . He commanded crucial military campaigns that led to independence for Argentina, Chile, and Peru .
 José de San Martin, along with Sim6n Bolivar, was one of the most important leaders of the Latin American independence movements . Compare the efforts of San Martin's efforts to the Key Points e . Compare San Martin to the famous Revolutionary War hero .
 He left suddenly in 1822 for France, leaving the remainder of the war for independence to be led by Bolivar, who succeeded against the Spanish forces in 1824 . He succeeded against Spain in Spain, but left the war in France .
 In 1817, it crossed the Andes Mountains from the Argentine province of Cuyo (at the current-day province of Mendoza, Argentina) and succeeded in dislodging the Spanish from the country .
 The Order of the Liberator General San Martin is the highest decoration conferred by the Argentine government . The Order was created in his honor .
 The Paraguay and Upper Peru campaigns led the Junta (the provisional government after the May Revolution) to be replaced by an executive Triumvirate in September 1811 . The undesired outcomes of the campaigns led to the overthrow of the provisional government .
 He proposed a similar measure at the national level, but Pueyrred6én encountered severe resistance . He proposed similar measures at a national level .
 He tried instead to divide the enemy forces in several locations, as during the Crossing of the Andes . He tried to trap the royalists with a pincer movement with reinforcements of the Army of the North from the South .
 The Guayaquil Conference was held between Sim6n Bolivar and José de San Martin . The conference took place in Guayquil, Ecuador . The Guayanquil conference was the first of two .
 A painting of the conference between Sim6n Bolivar and José de San Martin is published . The painting shows the conference in which the two leaders met .
 In 1500, navigator Pedro Alvares Cabral landed in what is now Brazil and claimed it in the name of King Manuel | of Portugal . The Portuguese identified brazilwood as a valuable red dye and an exploitable product .
 Pernambuco, Sao Vicente , Captaincy of IIhéus, and Porto Seguro . Captaincies of Sao Vicentuco and IIgéus also included in Sao Viguco .
 The Ccaptaincies gradually reverted to the Crown and became provinces and eventually states of the country . They became provinces, states, and eventually became states and territories .
 An attempt in 1555 of a French expedition led by Nicolas Durand de Villegaignon, viceadmiral of Brittany and corsair under the King, to establish a colony in present-day Rio de Janeiro was motivated in part by the bounty generated by economic exploitation of
 The farm included a casa-grande (big house) where the owner of the farm lived with his family, and a senzal/a, where the slaves were kept .
 African slave traders exchanged cachaca, a distilled spirit derived from Sugarcane, and shells for slaves . Africa played an essential role as the supplier of slaves .
 The Dutch and the French started producing sugar in the Antilles, located much closer to Europe, causing sugar prices to fall . Even though Brazilian sugar had a reputation for quality, the industry faced a crisis during the 17th and 18th centuries .
 The movement initiated by the liberal constitutionalists resulted in the meeting of the Cortes (or Constituent Assembly) that would create the kingdom's first constitution . The Cortes would meet in order to create the constitution .
 Pedro I was acclaimed Pedro I, first Emperor of the newly created Empire of Brazil, a constitutional monarchy . Pedro I became Pedro I in October 12, the Prince of Brazil . Pedro is the son of a Brazilian prince who was assassinated in 1992 .
 Brazil was one of only three modern states in the Americas to have its own indigenous monarchy . The other two were Mexico and Haiti, and Brazil had indigenous monarchy for almost 90 years .
 In 1808, the Portuguese court, fleeing from Napoleon's invasion of Portugal during the Peninsular War, moved the government apparatus to its then-colony, Brazil, establishing themselves in the city of Rio de Janeiro . From where the Portuguese king ruled his huge empire for 15 years
 When the king left Brazil to return to Portugal in 1821, his elder son, Pedro |, stayed in his stead as regent of Brazil . Pedro was the king's elder son . Pedro remained in Brazil until 1821 .
 One year later, Pedro stated the reasons for the secession of Brazil from Portugal and led the Independence War . Pedro stated his reasons for Brazil's secession from Portugal . Pedro later led the independence war .
 He instituted a constitutional monarchy in Brazil, assuming its head as Emperor Pedro . Also known as "Dom Pedro |"" after his abdication in 1831 for political incompatibilities .
 This period was beset by rebellions of various motivations and political instability . This period of unrest was a period of political instability.
 The reign of Pedro II and the Brazilian Empire came to an unusual end . He was overthrown in a sudden coup d'état that had almost no support outside a clique of military leaders .
 Its government was a representative parliamentary constitutional monarchy under the rule of the Emperors Dom Pedro | and his son Dom Pedro Il. Dom Pedro I. I. and Dom Pedro II. The government was representative parliamentary . constitutional monarchy .
 Pedro declared the independence of Brazil on September 7, 1822 . Pedro I was acclaimed on October 12 as Pedro I, the first Emperor of Brazil . Pedro declared Brazil's independence in 1822 after waging war against his father's kingdom .
 Pedro Il inherited an empire on the verge of disintegration . He managed to bring peace and stability to the country, which eventually became an emerging international power . Pedro Il was declared of age in 1877 .
 Pedro Il had become weary of emperorship and despaired over the monarchy's future prospects, despite its overwhelming popular support . Pedro Il became weary of his role as king, but was determined to continue his reign .
 Pedro Il was overthrown while highly regarded by the people and at the pinnacle of his popularity . Some of his accomplishments were soon brought to naught as Brazil slipped into a long period of weak governments and dictatorships .
 Events in Spain during the Peninsular War had profound effects on Spanish America . In 1808, a year after Napoleon invaded Portugal, the French turned on Spain, a previous ally, which led to a political crisis .
 Numerous revolts occurred throughout Spain in response, causing confusion and crisis . The Spanish revolution was a major event in Spain's history .
 A number of juntas were set up Spain to fill the power vacuum and lead the charge against the French . This crisis also resulted in a shift in leadership over the colonies in the Americas, where juntaas were also established .
 The dissolution of the Supreme Junta on January 29, 1810, because of the reverses suffered after the Battle of Ocana by the Spanish forces paid with Spanish American money set off another wave of juntas in the Americas .
 In January 1821, Iturbide began peace negotiations with Guerrero, suggesting they unite to establish an independent New Spain . Guerrero died in 1821 .
 Both the Spanish Cortes and Ferdinand VII rejected the Treaty of Cérdoba . The final break with the mother country came May 19, 1822, when the Mexican Congress conferred the throne on Itrubide .
 Spanish colonists established a caste system in Latin America by which a person's socio-economic status generally correlated with race or racial mix in the known family background, or simply on phenotype (physical appearance) if the family background was unknown . The caste system was related to Spanish ideas about purity of
 After the Spanish conquest of Central America, there were several indigenous uprisings against colonial rule . The Mixt6n War and the Chichimeca War were two of the most successful uprising uprisins .
 After the Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire, the Spanish created the colony and kingdom of New Spain, which placed the indigenous populations at the bottom of the racial hierarchy . Examine some of the indigenous uprisings against the Spanish government .
 The first revolt pitted the viceroy of New Spain against the Caxcanes Indians, who began a rebellion in 1440 . Other natives in densely populated areas suffered continual abuse and oppression .
 After two years of fighting, the stronghold of Mixtén fell to the Spaniards and the rebellion was over . e Skirmishes continued, and by 1550, another war broke out against the Chichimeca Indians .
 The first was in 1541, the Mixton war, in which the viceroy himself led an army against the uprising by Caxcanes . Don Antonio de Mendoza led the army in the 1541 war, which ended in defeat .
 The Mixt6n War was fought from 1540 until 1542 between the Caxcanes and other semi-nomadic indigenous people of the area of northwestern Mexico against Spanish invaders . Aztec and Tlaxcalan allies fought alongside Spanish invaders in the Mixton War
 The war was named after Mixt6n, a hill in the southern part of Zacatecas state in Mexico that served as an Indigenous stronghold . The war is named after the hill in which it was named .
 The Caxcanes were the “heart and soul” of the resistance to the Spanish in the Mixt6n War . Although other indigenous groups also fought against the Spanish .
 The Caxcanes seem to have been sedentary, depending upon agriculture for their livelihood and living in permanent towns and settlements . However, they seem to be sedentary and live in permanent settlements .
 After killing two Catholic priests, many Indians fled the encomiendas and took refuge in the mountains . Many Indians took refuge on the hill fortress of Mixt6n. The fortress was the site of the first massacre .
 Onate attempted to storm Mixtén, but the Indians on the summit repelled his attack . Onate tried to storm the summit of Mixten, but was repelled .
 In early 1542 the stronghold of Mixt6n fell to the Spaniards and the rebellion was over . The rebellion in 1542 was over after the Spanish defeat .
 Reports of excessive violence against civilian Indians caused the Council of the Indies to undertake a secret investigation into the conduct of the viceroy . The reports of the violence against civilians caused the council of the . Indies to conduct a secret . investigation .
 Hidalgo then decided to retreat against the advice of Allende, a decision that has puzzled historians since . The retreat is considered a tactical error, leading to the suppression of the revolt and the execution of Allenden .
 The insurgent forces planned a defensive strategy at a bridge on the Calderdn River, pursued by the Spanish army . The Spanish army pursued the insurgent forces .
 A favorite of the Mexican church hierarchy, Iturbide symbolized conservative criollo values . He was devoutly religious and committed to the defense of property rights and social privileges .
 Mexico would be an independent monarchy governed by King Ferdinand, another Bourbon prince, or some other conservative European prince . Criollos would be given equal rights and privileges to peninsulares (those born in Spain) The Roman Catholic Church in Mexico would retain its privileges and position as
 On August 24, 1821, representatives of the Spanish crown and Iturbide signed the Treaty of Cérdoba, which recognized Mexican independence under the Plan of Iguala .
 Agustin de Iturbide was declared Emperor Augustin I, in 1822 following independence .
 Maximilian chose to remain in Mexico rather than return to Europe and was captured and executed along with two Mexican supporters on June 19, 1867 . The United States pressured Napoleon III to withdraw the French from Mexico, thereby ending the Second Mexican Empire .
 Napoleon III was the only President of the French Second Republic and the Emperor of the Second French Empire . He was Napoleon III of France and the only Emperor of France .
 The War of the French Intervention was an invasion of Mexico in late 1861 by the Second French Empire . Supported in the beginning by the United Kingdom and Spain . The French intervention was a French invasion of the country .
 Maximilian I of Mexico was the only monarch of the Second Mexican Empire . He was a younger brother of the Austrian emperor Francis Joseph I . He accepted an offer by Napoleon to rule Mexico .
 Britain recognized the independence of the U.S. following their defeat at Yorktown in 1781 . America's eagerness to expand westward prompted a long series of American Indian Wars .
 Louisiana Purchase of French-claimed territory in 1803 almost doubled the nation's area . The Louisiana Purchase almost doubled its area .
 A series of military incursions into Florida led Spain to cede it and other Gulf Coast territory in 1819 . Spain ceded Florida to the Florida coast after a series of incursions .
 After the American Civil War, new trans-roads made it easier for the public to travel with Native Americans . After the war, many prominent industrialists were involved in the development of the railways .
 Gradually the United States purchased the Native American tribal lands and extinguished their claims . Most tribes were placed on subsidized reservations .
 The Monroe Doctrine was first promoted in James Monroe's State of the Union Address in 1823 . It stated that Europe should no longer interfere in the affairs of the American continent . At the same time, the United States would not interfere with existing European colonies .
 The doctrine was welcomed and applauded by most Latin Americans, many of whom were in the midst of freeing themselves from European colonialism . Initially, because the United States was not seen as a major military power, the doctrine was largely ignored by Europe .
 In 1862, French forces under Napoleon Ill invaded and conquered Mexico, giving control to the puppet monarch Emperor Maximilian . The puppet state of Mexico was ruled by Napoleon Ill, who died in 1862 .
 Spanish-American War was the result of U.S. intervention in the Cuban War of Independence . The war released Cuba from European influence as per the Monroe Doctrine .
 The Confederation of Canada emerged from multiple impulses . It emerged from several impulses . Describe the Canadian Confederation in this article .
 The British wanted Canada to defend itself; British-Canadian nationalism sought to unite the lands into one country, dominated by the English language and British culture . The fear of possible U.S. expansion northward . On a political level, there was a desire for the expansion of responsible government
 In 1618, Nurhachi announced the Seven Grievances and began to rebel against the Ming domination . In 1635, Nurchaci's son and successor Huangtaiji changed the name of the Jurchen ethnic group to the Manchu . e
 Nurhaci ordered the creation of a written Manchu script based on the Mongolian . He also created the civil and military administrative system, which eventually evolved into the Eight Banners .
 Under the reign of Dorgon, the Qing continued to subdue all areas previously under the Ming . Historians have called him ""the mastermind of the Qing conquest"" and ""the principal architect of the great Manchu enterprise"
 Nurhaci armies played an instrumental role in the unification of the fragmented Jurchen people (later renamed the Manchus) and in the Qing dynasty's conquest of the Ming dynasty . The armies were created in the early 17th century and were instrumental in the unifying of the Jur
 Qing Prince-Regent Dorgon allied with former Ming general Wu Sangui to defeat rebel leader Li Zicheng of the Shun dynasty . Battle of Shanhai Pass in 1644 that led to formation of the Qing dynasty .
 Describe the characteristics of Qing society . During the early and mid-Qing period, the population grew rapidly and was remarkably mobile . Describe Qing society as a remarkably mobile society .
 The corvée system was replaced with a head tax used to hire laborers . To give people more incentive to participate in the market, the tax burden was reduced .
 The relative peace and import of new crops to China from the Americas contributed to population growth . China's population grew rapidly in the 1970s and 1980s .
 The early Qing military was rooted in the Eight Banners first developed by Nurhaci . Nurhac was the founder of the Qing military .
 The majority of the population belonged to the first category and were described as /iangmin, a legal term meaning good people, as opposed to /ianmin meaning the mean people . The majority belonged to a group of people described as good people .
 The eventual decision to turn the banner troops into a professional force led to its decline as a fighting force .
 Nurhaci's forces were organized into small hunting parties of about a dozen men related by blood, marriage, clan, or place of residence, as was the Jurchen custom . Soldiers of the blue banner paraded in front of Emperor Qianlong's forces .
 The poetry of the Qing dynasty is a field studied for its association with Chinese opera, developmental trends of classical Chinese poetry and vernacular language .
 China did not deal with Russia through the Ministry of Tributary Affairs, but rather through the same ministry as the Mongols, seen by the Chinese as a problematic partner . e The Chinese worldview changed very little during the Qing dynasty as China's sinocentric perspectives continued to be informed
 Two wars in the mid-19th century (1839-1842 and 1856-1860) involved Anglo-Chinese disputes over British trade in China and China's sovereignty . Opium Wars were two wars between the British and Chinese empires .
 The First Opium War over the trade and diplomatic relations between Imperial China and Britain began in 1839 . When they refused, Lin stopped trade altogether and placed foreign residents under virtual siege in their factories .
 The Treaty of Nanking demanded war reparations and forced China to open up the Treaty Ports of Canton, Amoy, Fuchow, Ningpo, and Shanghai to western trade and missionaries . The Second Opium War, triggered by further British demands, began in 1856 and
 Qing dynasty Jiaging Emperor issued an imperial decree banning imports of the drug in 1799 . The decree was issued by the Emperor in the early 1800s .
 The promise and the inability of the British government to pay it without causing a political storm was an important casus belli for the subsequent British offensive .
 During the Ming dynasty, opium also functioned as an aphrodisiac . Opium was used by medical practitioners to control bodily fluid and preserve vital force .
 On October 29, a hole was blasted in the city walls and troops entered, with a flag of the United States of America being planted by James Keenan ( United States Consul) on the walls and residence of Ye Mingchen .
 Treaty of Nanking was a step to opening the lucrative Chinese market to global commerce and the opium trade . Opium smokers, 1880, by Lai Afong. a oe .
 Dungan Revolt was a mainly ethnic and religious war fought in 19th-century western China . It was mostly during the reign of the Tongzhi Emperor of the Qing dynasty . The war was fought during the Dungan Revolution .
 The conflict between the Hakka and Punti (Cantonese people) in Guangdong, China, was between 1855 and 1867 . The conflict was the first of its kind .
 In 1856, the Taiping were weakened after infighting following an attempted coup led by the East King, Yang Xiuging . The Taiping lost power in 1856 after an attempt to overthrow the Chinese government .
 Zeng's forces moved down the Yangzi River capturing Anqging in 1861 . While Taiping forces were preoccupied in Jiangsu, Zeng forces moved .
 The Punti-Hakka Clan Wars pitted the Hakka against the Cantonese (Cantonese people) in Guangdong between 1855 and 1867 . The Hakka-Punti Clan Wars took place in Guangzhou, China, in 1855
 The Panthay Rebellion (1856-1873; discussed sometimes as part of the Dungan Revolt) was a rebellion of the Muslim Hui people and other non-Muslim ethnic minorities against the Manchu rulers in Yunnan Province . It was part of a wave of H
 General Zeng Guofan is one of China's most powerful military leaders . General Guoofan was born in China in 1949 . He was assassinated in 1989 .
 The United States felt threatened by other powers' much larger spheres of influence . However, the U.S. worried that it might lose access to the Chinese market if the country was partitioned .
 U.S. diplomat William Woodville Rockhill formulated the Open Door Policy to safeguard American business opportunities and other interests in China . As a response, the policy was set up by a diplomat .
 In 1902, the U.S. protested the Russian encroachment in Manchuria as a violation of the Open Door Policy . The Boxer Rebellion was the result of a Russian invasion of China .
 The United States government acknowledged that Japan had ""special interests"" in China due to its geographic proximity . However, the U.S. government also acknowledged that the United States had "special interests" in China .
 The Lansing-Ishii Agreement was replaced by the 1922 Nine-Power Treaty . The treaty was signed in 1922 .
 In 1899, U.S. Secretary of State John Hay sent notes to France, Germany, Britain, Italy, Japan, and Russia . Hay asked them to declare formally that they would uphold Chinese territorial integrity and would not interfere with the free use of treaty ports within their spheres of influence
 First shogun of the Tokugawa shogunate, first shogun, was born in Osaka Castle . He had a number of qualities that enabled him to rise to power .
 Harsh penalties, including crucifixion, beheading, and death by boiling, were decreed for even the most minor offenses . Criminals of high social class were often given the option of seppuku (""selfdisembowelment""), an ancient form of suicide that
 Third Tokugawa shogun, lemitsu, implemented the sakoku (""closed country"") isolationist policy . Japanese people were not allowed to travel abroad, return from overseas, or build ocean-going vessels .
 Next came the shogun, da/myos, and layers of feudal lords, whose rank was indicated by their closeness to the Tokugawa . The shogun was the most powerful man in Japan .
 The shogunate maintained limited and tightly controlled trade relations with the Dutch, China, Korea, the Ainu people, and the Ryukyu Kingdom . The growing commerce between America and China, the presence of American whalers in waters off Japan and the increasing monopolization of potential
 Perry returned to Hong Kong in 1854, promising to return the next year for the Japanese reply . Perry returned after only half a year after presenting the letter to the Japanese .
 Trade with Ainu people was limited to the Matsumae Domain in Hokkaido . Trade with the RyukyU Kingdom took place in Satsuma Domain . Trade also took place with the Ainu .
 In 1844, King William II of the Netherlands sent a letter urging Japan to end the isolation policy on its own before change would be forced from the outside . Japan's isolation policy has been in place since 1844 .
 Between 1790 and 1853, at least 27 U.S. ships visited Japan, only to be turned away . At least 27 ships were turned away from the country .
 He refused Japanese demands to leave or proceed to Nagasaki, the only Japanese port open to foreigners . He refused to leave, refused to return to Japan, and was forced to leave .
 Matthew Calbraith Perry is the author of the new book, "Cameron Perry" Perry is also the director of the National Geographic Geographic Geographic Center of the Americas .
 When Perry returned to the U.S. in 1855, Congress voted to grant him a reward of $20,000 (USD $514,000 in 2017) in appreciation of his work in Japan .
 During the Edo period, the Japanese studied Western sciences and techniques (called rangaku, ""Dutch studies"") through the information and books received from Dutch traders in Dejima .
 This system of thought was not new during the Edo period . It included a secular view of man and society, ethical humanism, rationalism, and historical perspective of neo-Confucian doctrine .
 Neo-Confucianism was Japan's dominant legal philosophy by the mid-17th century . It contributed directly to the development of the kokugaku . Neo-confucianistism was the dominant legal system in Japan .
 It held that the Japanese national character would reveal its splendor once the foreign influences were removed from the country . It was hoped that Japan would reveal the splendor of its national character .
 NeoConfucianism contributed to transition of the social and political order from feudal norms to classand largegroup-oriented practices . Advanced studies and growing applications of neoConfucanism contributed .
 For the first time, urban populations had the means and leisure time to support a new mass culture . Urban populations have the means to support mass culture, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Their search for enjoyment became known as ukiyo (the floating world), the floating world of fashion, popular entertainment, and the discovery of aesthetic qualities in objects and actions of everyday life . The search for pleasure became known for their search for aesthetic qualities .
 Music, popular stories, kabuki and bunraku (puppet theater), poetry, literature, and art all flourished during the Edo period . Prostitution based on the indentured servitude of girls and young women became the critical component of the district .
 Chonindo (""the way of the townspeople"") arose in cities such as Osaka, Kyoto, and Edo . It was a distinct culture that arose in Japan .
 Prostitutes on display in Yoshiwara during the Meiji period (the period following the Edo period in the Japanese history), possibly by Kusama .
 There is no reason to suspect that Hokusai intended it to be interpreted in that way . Although it is often used in tsunami literature, there are no reasons to suspect it .
 Jippensha Ikku wrote Tokaidochu Hizakurige, a mix of travelogue and comedy . Ikku is a travelogue-and-comedy mix .
 The Meiji Restoration was a chain of events triggered by internal crisis and strong anti-Western sentiments . It ended the Edo period and ended the rule of the Tokugawa shogunate . It restored practical imperial rule to Japan in 1868 under Emperor Meiji .
 The major ideological-political divide during this period was between the pro-imperial nationalists called /shin shishi and the shogunate forces, which included the elite shinsengumi swordsmen . The pro- imperial nationalists were pro-Imperial nationalists .
 An alliance of western Samurai, particularly the domains of Choshu, Satsuma, and Tosa, secured control of the imperial court and influenced the Emperor Meiji . Meiji influenced Meiji's reign .
 To implement the Charter Oath, a short-lived constitution was drawn up in 1868 . The Meiji government assured the foreign powers that it would follow the old treaties .
 Tokugawa Yoshinobu tried to reorganize the government under the Emperor while preserving the shogun's leadership role . The system was known as kobu gattal, a system of government reorganization .
 Fearing the growing power of the Satsuma and Choshu feudal domains, other domains called for returning the shogun's political power to the emperor and a council chaired by the former Tokugawa shogun . Fearing growing power, the domains were returned to the Emperor and
 Yoshinobu surrendered pre-emptively by surrendering some of his previous authority . With the threat of an imminent Satsuma-Choshu led military action, Yoshinobe surrendered some of the previous authority.
 Satsuma and Choshu forces then moved on Kyoto in force, pressuring the Imperial Court for a conclusive edict demolishing the shogunate . The Imperial Court was then pressured to give an edict to end the reign .
 Fearing a feigned concession of the shogunal power to consolidate power, the dispute continued until culminating in a military confrontation between Tokugawa and allied domains with Satsuma, Tosa, and Choshu forces in Fushimi and Toba .
 The Meiji Restoration and the resultant modernization of Japan influenced Japanese self-identity with respect to its Asian neighbors . Japan became the first Asian state to modernize based on the European model, replacing the Confucian hierarchical order that persisted under a dominant China with one based on modernity
 Mutsuhito selected a new reign title --Mei//, or Enlightened Rule -- to mark the beginning of a new era in Japanese history . MutSuhito, who was to reign until 1912, chose a new title: Mei// .
 Kyoto was relocated from Kyoto to Tokyo, the new name for Edo . To further dramatize the new order, the capital was relocated to Tokyo from Kyoto .
 Officials from the favored former han, such as Satsuma, Choshu, Tosa, and Hizen, staffed the new ministries .
 After the Meiji restoration, the leaders of the samurai who overthrew the Tokugawa shogunate had no predeveloped plan on how to run Japan . Extrapolate the main ideas of the Meij Constitution .
 In 1869, the central government led by Okubo Toshimichi of Satsuma felt strong enough to effect centralization . The central government of Japan was led by the Satsumas of Japan .
 Okubo convinced the feudal lords of Satsuma, Choshu, Hizen, and Tosa to surrender their domains to the emperor . The emperor then merged the armies of the two armies .
 Prior to the Meiji Restoration, Japan had no written constitution and the idea of a constitution became a subject of heated debate . Japan's constitution was created in the early 1900s .
 The Meiji Constitution was ambiguous in wording and in many places self-contradictory . It established clear limits on the power of the executive branch and the Emperor and guaranteed some civil rights and liberties .
 Immediately after the resignation of Tokugawa Yoshinobu in 1867, with no official centralized government, the country was a collection of largely semi-independent feudal domains . The country was held together by the military strength of the Satcho Alliance (military alliance between the feudal domains
 Okubo and Kido Takayoshi convinced the feudal lords of Satsuma, Choshu, Hizen and Tosa to surrender their domains to the emperor . They then merged their armies into a combined force .
 The Emperor meets with his Privy Councilors, ukityo-e woodblock prints by Yoshu Chikanobu, 1888 . The Emperor met with his . Privy councilors .
 The Privy Council consisted of a chairman, a vice chairman, 12 councilors, a chief secretary, and three additional secretaries . It was the first of its kind to have a chairman .
 The Industrial Revolution in Japan began about 1870 as Meiji period leaders decided to catch up with the West . Analyze the success of Japan's rapid shift to industrialization .
 In 1871, a group of Japanese statesmen and scholars known as the Ilwakura Mission embarked upon a voyage across Europe and the U.S. The mission was led by statesmen, scholars and scholars from Japan .
 The mission aimed to gain recognition for the newly reinstated imperial dynasty and begin preliminary renegotiation of the unequal treaties . It was the exploration of modern Western industrial, political, military, and educational systems and structures .
 Japan's Industrial Revolution first appeared in textiles, including cotton and especially silk . Textiles were traditionally made in home workshops in rural areas . Cotton and silk was traditionally made from home workshops .
 The government decided that while it should help private business allocate resources and plan, the private sector was best equipped to stimulate economic growth . To promote industrialization, the government decided .
 The private sector embraced the government-promoted Western model of capitalism . Private sector has embraced the idea of capitalism in the past .
 Industrial growth sparked rapid urbanization, and most people lived longer and healthier lives . The phenomenal industrial growth led to urbanization .
 A Japanese diplomatic voyage to the United States and Europe conducted between 1871 and 1873 by leading statesmen and scholars of the Meiji period . Key Terms Iwakura Mission .
 Although it had a number of political, diplomatic, and economic goals, it is most well-known and possibly most significant in terms of its impact on the modernization of Japan after a long period of isolation from the West .
 Zaibatsu Industrial and financial business conglomerates in the Empire of Japan, whose influence and size allowed control over significant parts of the Japanese economy from the Meiji period until the end of World War I . Zaibats were the largest Japanese industrial and financial conglomerates .
 Industrial Revolution in Japan began about 1870 as Meiji period leaders decided to catch up with the West . Industrial revolution began in 1870s as leaders tried to keep pace with Westerners .
 Hand in hand, industrial and financial business conglomerates known as Za/batsu and government guided the nation . Government borrowed technology from the West, borrowing technology .
 He faced opposition from many of his peers, including most conservative samurai, who recognized that these ideas would end the livelihood of thousands of Samurai . The idea was rejected by many of the samurai, including the most conservative .
 Originally formed in 1867, it was dissolved at the conclusion of World War I . It was replaced by a civilian counterpart in 1947 .
 Admiral Matthew C Perry forced the signing of the Treaty of Kanagawa in 1854 . Japanese elites concluded they needed to modernize the state's military capacity or risk coercion from Western powers .
 He also strongly supported the abolition of the han system and with it the numerous private armies maintained by the feudal lords . He considered the private armies of feudal lords a drain on resources and a potential threat to security .
 Omura faced opposition from many of his peers, including most conservative samurai, who saw his ideas as too radical . Omura's idea of modernizing and reforming the Japanese military was met with opposition .
 The law also allowed the military to educate the enlisted, providing opportunities for both basic (e.g., learning how to read) and advanced education and career advancement .
 Kumamoto castle was the site of the first major engagement when garrisoned forces fired on Saigo's army as they attempted to force their way into the castle . The first major battle between the two sides was fought in Kumamoto Castle .
 Two days later, Saigo's rebels encountered advanced elements of the national army en route to reinforce Kumamoto castle . The rebels were attempting to block a mountain pass, but were attacked by the army .
 A few weeks later the national army engaged Saigo's rebels in a frontal assault at what now is called the Battle of Tabaruzuka . The national army fought the rebels in what now known as the Battle of Tabaruzuk .
 Due to conscription, however, the Japanese army was able to reconstitute its forces, while SaigO's was not . The Japanese army reconstitised its forces but was unable to do so due to the conscription .
 Saigo's army was outnumbered seven-to-one, prompting a mass surrender of many samurai . Many samurai surrendered after being outnumbered seven to one by the outnumbered army .
 Meiji Japan's foreign policy was shaped by its need to reconcile its Asian identity with its desire for status and security in an international order dominated by the West . Meiji's foreign policies were shaped by the need to balance Asian identity and Western status .
 The principal foreign policy goals of the Meiji period were to protect the integrity and independence of Japan against Western domination, including gaining international respect through modernization and expansion of the military .
 Japan's unequal status was symbolized by the treaties imposed on the country when it was forcefully opened to foreign influences . The treaties were the result of the country's opening to foreign influence .
 The major task of Meiji diplomacy was to press for the revision of the unequal treaties . Meiji's major task was to push for the revised treaties .
 The newly created military was used to extend Japanese power overseas . Many leaders believed national security depended on expansion and not merely a strong defense .
 Japan gained enormous prestige by being the first non-Western country to operate a modern colony . Perhaps most importantly, Japan gained the title of "Japan's first colony"
 This recognized Japanese interests in Korea and assured Japan they would remain neutral in case of a Russo-Japanese war, but would become more actively involved if another power (an allusion to France) entered the war as a Russian ally .
 In the following Russo-Japanese War , Japan won possession of southern Sakhalin and a position of paramount influence in Korea and southern Manchuria . Japan won control of the region during the war .
 U.S.-Japanese relations at the time were shaped by antiJapanese sentiment, especially on the West Coast . Gentlemen's Agreement of 1907 assured Japan the United States would not bar Japanese immigration if Japan ensured little or no movement to the US . Agreement also rescinded the segregation order of
 Russia secured from China a 25year lease of Dalian (Dairen in Japanese, also known as Port Arthur) and rights to the South Manchurian Railway Company, a semi-official Japanese company, to construct a railroad .
 The Japanese defeated Russia's Baltic Sea Fleet at the Battle of Tsushima in 1905 . Despite tremendous loss of life on both sides, the Japanese won a series of land battles .
 King Charles II granted the EIC the rights to autonomously acquire territory, mint money, command fortresses and troops and form alliances, make war and peace, and exercise both civil and criminal jurisdiction over the acquired areas .
 By an act passed in 1698, a new ""parallel"" East India Company was floated under a state-backed indemnity of £2 million . The new company was officially titled the English Company Trading to the East Indies . The company was floated by the state under an indemnity
 Company painting probably depicts William Fullerton of Rosemount, who joined the East India Company's service in 1744, by Dip Chand, 1760-64 .
 During the wars against the French and their allies in the late 18th and early 19th centuries, the EIC's armies were used to seize the colonial possessions of other European nations, including the islands of Réunion and Mauritius .
 The control of rich Bengal gained in the aftermath of the Battle of Plassey brought India into the public spotlight in Britain . Parliament established regulations to manage the affairs of the East India Company .
 Some wanted the Company's territories to be taken over by the British state . The eventual compromise was that the Company could act as a sovereign power on behalf of the Crown while subject to oversight and regulation by the UK government .
 Under the terms of The Charter Act of 1833, the British Parliament revoked the Company's trade license, which made the Company a part of British governance, but administration of British India remained the responsibility Company officers .
 The Act charged the Governor-General-in-Council with the supervision of civil and military administration of India as well as the exclusive power of legislation . The Act also charged the Governor-General in-Council (to whose title was now added ""of India"") with the
 After the Indian Rebellion of 1857, the British government took control of the Company . The Company was taken over by the government of India in 1857 .
 A princely state was a semi-sovereign principality during the British Raj . It was not directly governed by the British, but rather by a local ruler .
 Until the 1757 Battle of Plassey, the East India Company territories in India consisted largely of the presidency towns of Calcutta, Madras, and Bombay . Town councils, all composed of merchants, were mostly autonomous—and sporadically unmanageable—town councils .
 In London, it provided for a cabinet-level Secretary of State for India and a 15-member Council of India . Members were required to have spent ten years in India no more than 10 years ago .
 The GovernorGeneral in the capital, Calcutta, and the Governor in a subordinate presidency were each required to consult his advisory council . The Governor in the state and the submissionary presidential administrative regencies were required .
 Viceroy Lord Canning found the collective decision making of the Council to be too time-consuming for the pressing tasks ahead . He requested the ""portfolio system"" of an Executive Council, in which the business of each government department (the portfolio) was assigned to and became the
 The mission civilisatrice, a French term that translates literally into English as civilising mission, is a rationale for intervention or colonization, purporting to contribute to the spread of civilization . Used mostly in relation to the colonization and Westernization of indigenous peoples in the 19th and 20
 In India, the British 'civilising mission' focused largely on educational reforms designed to speed up modernization and reduce administrative charges . The British ""civilising mission" focused on education reforms .
 All these benefits went to Indian elites and middle classes, who were expected to serve as loyal supporters of the British rule in India . The benefits, however, went to the Indian elites, but not the middle classes .
 The ""civilising mission" rhetoric continued, but soon became an alibi for British misrule and racism . The ""Civilising mission"" rhetoric continued to become an alibibation for misrule, racism .
 By 1887, of 21,000 mid-level civil service appointments, 45% were held by Hindus, 7% by Muslims, 19% by Eurasians (European father and Indian mother), and 29% by Europeans .
 The Indian Rebellion of 1857 resulted from an accumulation of factors over time rather than any single event . Learning Objective Analyze the reasons for the Great Uprising of the 1857 .
 Some historians have suggested that heavy land-revenue assessment in some areas resulted in many landowning families losing their land or going into great debt . The rebellion began as a mutiny of sepoys on May 10, 1857, in the cantonment of the town of Me
 e The rebellion and its aftermath resulted in the deaths of more than 100,000 Indians . In general, the rebels were disorganized, had differing goals, were poorly equipped, led, and trained, and had no outside support .
 Most of the British press and British public did not advocate clemency of any kind . The rebellion saw the end of the East India Company's rule in India .
 Rural landlords called ta/uqdars lost half their landed estates to peasant farmers . Land reforms came in the wake of annexation of Oudh . Landlords lost half of their estates .
 Both the direct administration of India by the British Crown and the technological change ushered in by the Industrial Revolution closely intertwined the economies of India and Great Britain . Describe the economy of British India and how it fit into Britain's mercantilism . Learn how to read the history of British
 India's industrialization was limited beyond textiles . Despite Britain's position as the global leader of industrial development, India's industry was limited to textiles.
 Jamsetji Tata became the symbol of local industrial success, establishing a company that remains an influential global brand today . He established the Tata empire in the 1930s in India .
 The railways were privately owned and operated and run by British administrators, engineers, and skilled craftsmen . They were privately run and operated .
 Tata imported expensive longerstapled cotton from Egypt and bought more complex ringspindle machinery from the U.S. to spin finer yarn that could compete with imports from Britain .
 Tata Iron and Steel Company opened its plant in 1908 . The Tata iron and steel company was headed by Tata's son Dorabji Tata .
 In 1907, almost all the rail companies were taken over by the government . In 1909, the railway network was the fourth largest railway network in the world .
 During this period, the Congress remained center-left in its social policies while shifting from a socialist to a neoliberal economic outlook . Throughout the post-independence period, Congress leadership was dominated by the Nehru-Gandhi political dynasty .
 With the help of the moderate group led by Ghokhale, Gandhi became president of the Congress . Gandhi formed an alliance with the Khilafat Movement, a pan-Islamic, political protest Campaign launched by Muslims to influence the British government .
 The Khilafat movement soon collapsed and in the years following World War I, the party became associated with Mahatma Gandhi . Gandhi remained its unofficial spiritual leader and icon and remained its spiritual leader .
 Shastri retained many members of Nehru's Council of Ministers . He appointed Indira Gandhi as Minister of Information and Broadcasting . Indira was the daughter of Jawaharlal Nehru and former Congress President .
 Gandhi's cabinet and government recommended that President Fakhruddin Ali Anmed declare a state of emergency . Gandhi's government recommended the move in response to increasing disorder .
 Western-educated elites established organizations that aimed to gain influence in Indian politics . They were not focused on the question of Indian independence . Successful western-educated elite established organizations aimed at gaining influence .
 By 1900, the Indian National Congress had emerged as an all-India political organization . However, its achievement was undermined by its failure to attract Muslims .
 New forms of African nationalism gained strength in the early 20th-century with the emergence of Pan-Africanism . They often referred to the 1941 Atlantic Charter .
 Nearly all Asian colonies gained independence in the aftermath of World War I . The destabilization of European rule led to the rapid growth of nationalist movements .
 In the late 19th and early to mid-20th centuries, it became a pivotal participant in the Indian independence movement, with over 15 million members and over 70 million participants .
 Angkor was established in 802. e after a long series of wars with neighboring kingdoms . The Knmer Empire grew out of the remnants of Chenla . The Ayutthaya Kingdom was sacked in 1432 and abandoned in 1431 .
 e Laos traces its history to the kingdom of Lan Xang in the 14th century . In the 19th century a renewed struggle between Siam and Vietnam for control of Cambodia resulted in the Siamese-Vietnamese War that placed the country under joint suzerainty .
 In 938, the Vietnamese lord Ngo Quyen defeated the forces of the Chinese Southern Han state and achieved full independence for Vietnam . The rebellion failed and Vientiane was ransacked by the Chinese .
 Between the 11th and 18th centuries, Vietnam expanded southward . Eventually conquering the kingdom of Champa and part of the Knmer Empire . Vietnam expanded further southward and conquered the kingdom .
 The term was later adopted as the name of the colony of French Indochina . The entire area is now usually referred to as the Indochinese Peninsula or Mainland Southeast Asia .
 A fully defensible and conclusive explanation for the decline of the Knmer Empire, recognized unanimously by the scientific community, has so far not been produced . As reliable sources from this period are very rare, reliable sources are rare .
 The structure of Lan Xang society was fairly straightforward, especially in comparison to the Khmer with their complex caste system and concepts of a divine kingship .
 Analyze the French reasons for establishing a protectorate in Indochina . The French were determined to establish their presence in Southeast Asia .
 Luang Prabang became a protectorate of France in 1889 . e In 1893, France went to war with Siam .
 Following Siam's acceptance of the ultimatum to cede the lands east of the Mekong including its islands, the Protectorate of Laos was officially established . Cochinchina was the only region of French Indochina with direct rule .
 French Imperial Ambitions tn Indochina . The French had few pretexts to justify their imperial ambitions in the region .
 French troops landed in Vietnam in 1858 and by the mid1880s had established a firm grip over the northern region . See /h ye ae sb a 2 French marine infantrymen in Tonkin, 1884-1888 .
 During the 19th century, Cambodia had been reduced to a vassal state of the kingdom of Siam . Cambodia had annexed its western provinces while growing influence from the Vietnamese Nguyen Dynasty threatened the eastern portion of the country .
 French Indochina was formed on October 17, 1887, from Annam, Tonkin, Cochinchina and the Kingdom of Cambodia . It was formed in 1887 .
 Economically, the French did not develop Laos and Cambodia to the scale that they did Vietnam . All investments aimed to attain immediate high returns for investors, only a small fraction of profit was reinvested .
 French Indochina was seen as a co/onie d'exploitation économique rather than a colonie de peuplement . By 1940 only about 34,000 French civilians lived in the region .
 French Indochina was designated as a colonie d'exploitation by the French government . Both exploitation and economic development differed significantly across the main regions of the colony .
 French suppressed both movements and Vietnamese revolutionaries began to radicalize . The French suppressed the French and Vietnamese revolutionary movements in Vietnam .
 Si Votha led a rebellion to dispose of the French-backed Norodom after returning from exile in Siam . In 1885 he led a revolt against the French government in S. Korea . Si Vothsa was half-brother of Norom and contender for the throne
 In 1884, the governor of Cochinchina, Charles Anthoine Francois Thomson, attempted to overthrow the monarch . Thomson sent a small force to the royal palace in Phnom Penh to establish French control .
 Minor independence movements, especially the Khmer Issarak, began to develop in 1940 among Cambodians in Thailand . Cambodians feared their actions would have led to punishment if they operated in their homeland .
 The geography of North Africa has been reasonably well-known since classical antiquity in Greco-Roman geography . Explain why Europeans were interested in obtaining land in Africa .
 Focus on Africa was limited to the transatlantic slave trade . Starting in the early 19th century, European land holdings in Africa began to shift and increase . Protestant missions were carrying on active missionary work .
 The Portuguese established trade interests in the Kingdom of Mutapa in the 16th century . The Portuguese placed a puppet ruler on the throne in 1629 .
 Nyasa was first reached by the confidential slave of Antdnio da Silva Porto, a Portuguese trader established at Bié in Angola . The Portuguese trader crossed Africa during 1853-1856 from Benguella to the mouth of the Rovuma .
 Du Chaillu had previously, through journeys in Gabon region between 1855 and 1859, confirmed existence of the gorilla, previously thought to be a legend .
 Cape Goal Sig ae European Exploration of Africa . Routes of European explorers in Africa to 1853. Routes in Africa from 1853 .
 European diplomacy treated African indigenous people in the same manner as the New World natives, forming trading relationships with the indigenous chiefs . Learning Objective Describe the ways Europe was already involved in Africa prior to the Berlin Conference Key Points
 With the exception of trading posts along the coasts used to trade goods and slaves around the world, the continent was essentially ignored until the second half of the 19th century .
 Even as late as the 1870s, European states still controlled only 10% of the African continent . By WWI, Europe controlled 90% of Africa .
 King Leopold II explored and colonized the Congo as a private venture with the aid of explorer Morton Stanley . Most notably, he explored the Congo with the help of Morton Stanley in 1903 .
 Leopold extracted a fortune from the Congo through forced labor of ivory and rubber production . Forced labor caused the deaths of 1 to 15 million Congolese people . The deaths were caused by forced labor .
 With the dismissal of the aging Chancellor Bismarck by Kaiser Wilhelm II, the scramble became frantic scramble . The relatively orderly colonization became a frantic scramble.
 Otto von Bismarck called on representatives of 13 nations in Europe as well as the United States to take part in the Berlin Conference in 1884 to work out joint policy on the African continent . The main dominating powers of the conference were France, Germany, Great Britain and Portugal .
 King Leopold Il convinced France and Germany that common trade in Africa was in the best interests of all three countries . The King convinced France, Germany and Germany to agree a trade deal in Africa .
 In 1884, the Berlin Conference was convened to discuss African colonization . The aim of the conference was to set up international guidelines for making claims to African land . List some of the key agreements in the General Act of the Conference .
 At the Conference, participants decided on the ""General Act of the Conference,"" which laid the frameworks for colonization . At the conference, the participants decided to decide on the 'General Act'
 No territory could be formally claimed prior to being directly ruled and administered by the colonial power . The principle of effective occupation was established in the Act of 1897 .
 The conference also resolved to end slavery by African and Islamic powers . Critics have ridiculed the move as a humanitarian facade to garner international support .
 The Scramble for Africa sped up after the Conference, since even within areas designated as their spheres of influence, the European powers had to take possession under the Principle of Effectivity .
 Some critics say diplomats put on a humanitarian facade to garner international support . Diplomats condemned slave trade, prohibited sale of alcoholic beverages and firearms in certain regions .
 An international prohibition of the Slave trade throughout their respected spheres was signed by the European members . The European members signed an international ban on the slave trade .
 The Congo Free State was confirmed as the private property of the Congo Society . The society supported Leopold's promises to keep the country open to all European investment .
 The 14 signatory powers would have free trade throughout the Congo Basin as well as Lake Malawi . The Niger and Congo rivers were made free for ship traffic .
 A Principle of Effectivity was introduced to prevent powers from setting up colonies in name only . A principle of effectiveness was introduced in the 1930s to prevent colonies being set up only .
 Any fresh act of taking possession of any portion of the African coast would have to be notified by the power taking possession or to the other signatory powers in a protectorate .
 A large state in Central Africa from 1885 to 1908 in personal union with the Kingdom of Belgium under Leopold ll. The Congo Free State was a large state of Central Africa between 1885 and 1908 .
 Leopold's regime began various infrastructure projects, such as construction of the railway that ran from the coast to the capital of Leopoldsville . The railway took eight years to complete .
 Africans could only sell their harvested products (mostly ivory and rubber) to the state in a large part of the Free State . Shortly after the anti-slavery conference he held in Brussels in 1889, Leopold issued a new decree .
 FP was required to provide the hands of their victims as proof when they had shot and killed someone, as it was believed they would otherwise use the munitions for hunting . Meanwhile, the FP was ordered to provide their victims' hands as proof .
 Roger Casement, then the British Consul at Boma, was sent to the Congo Free State to investigate . He was then sent to Boma to investigate.
 Congo rubber came from wild vines in the jungle, which cannot be cultivated . Unlike the rubber from Brazil, which was tapped from trees and could be cultivated, can be cultivated in Congo .
 Leopold II was embarrassed into instituting reforms after Abir's abuses . Abir detailed unlawful killings and other abuses by Abir, including unlawful killings, by Leopolds II .
 Richard Mohun was appointed by Leopold II as director of Abir . Mohun's appointment began with the appointment of American Mohun by the King of Egypt .
 French West Africa was a federation of eight French colonial territories in Africa: Mauritania, Senegal, French Sudan (now Mali), French Guinea, Céte d'Ivoire, Upper Volta, Dahomey, and Niger . French Sudan, French Guinea and French Guinea were
 Afrique occidentale francaise (AOF) was a federation of eight French colonial territories in Africa . Mauritania, Senegal, French Sudan, French Guinea, Céte d'lvoire, Upper Volta (now Burkina Faso), Dahomey and Niger
 French North Africa began with the French invasion of Algeria in 1830 . At the height of French colonial control, French control amounted to most of the Maghreb region . Discuss the French presence in Northern Africa .
 From 1848, when France officially made Algeria a colony, until independence in 1962, the whole Mediterranean region of Algeria was administered as an integral part of France . The region was administered by France until 1962 .
 Algeria became a destination for hundreds of thousands of European immigrants . Algeria was once a popular destination for thousands of Europeans . Algeria is now Algeria's most populous country of origin .
 The French protectorate of Tunisia was established in 1881 during the collapse of the Ottoman Empire at the hands of the Russians . It lasted until Tunisian independence in 1956, and lasted until 1956 .
 During French rule of Tunisia, major developments and improvements were undertaken in several areas, including transport and infrastructure, industry, financial system, public health, and administration . French businesses and citizen were favored, to the anger and resentment of the Tunisians .
 The French Protectorate in Morocco was established by the Treaty of Fez in 1912 . The French protectorate had been a Spanish protectorate since 1884 . Morocco was a protectorate of Spain from 1884 until 1883 .
 Morocco abandoned the typical assimilationist approach to culture and education, instead using urban planning and colonial education to prevent cultural mixing . In opposition to the approach taken in Algeria and Tunisia, in Morocco, the French abandoned their typical .
 Until independence, French Algeria had been part of metropolitan France since before World War I . Until its independence, Algerian Algeria was part of French Algeria . Algeria was a French colony of France until the end of WWII .
 French North Africa ended soon after the Evian Accords of March 1962, which led to the Algerian independence referendum of July 1962 . The French occupation of Algerian territory ended in 1962 .
 Germany agreed to allow France to rule in Tunisia . Germany saw it as a way to divert attention from vengeful action in Europe .
 Congress of Berlin resulted in France receiving Tunisia from Britain . Tunisia became the Republic of Tunisia in 1956 when it became the republic of Tunisia .
 First, the protectorate was established only two years before the outbreak of World War I, which brought with it a new attitude toward colonial rule . First, it was established in 1914, and it was set up just two years later . Second, the protectionorate was only established two years
 By adopting French language and culture, indigenous populations under colonial rule could eventually become French, sharing in the equal rights of citizenship . e This policy was put most famously into practice in the oldest French colonial towns, known as the Four Communes .
 The promise of equal rights and respect under the assimilation policy was often merely an abstraction, as assimilationated Africans still faced substantial discrimination in Africa and France .
 In the largest and most populous colonies, there was a strict separation between "sujets francais"" (all the natives) and "citoyens francais" (all males of European extraction), along with different rights and duties, was maintained . In addition, in the largest
 The Four Communes in Senegal (discussed below) are the most populous colonies in the colonies . In the colonies, a strict separation between natives and males of European extraction was maintained .
 After World War Il, the segregationist approach modeled in Morocco had been discredited . Assimilationism enjoyed a brief revival after World War I .
 Describe changes in Egypt after the British began to take a strong interest in the country . In 1882 opposition to European control led to growing tension among notable natives .
 By June Egypt was in the hands of nationalists opposed to European domination of the country . The British succeeded in defeating the Egyptian Army at Tel El Kebir in September .
 The combined Anglo-French-Indian army easily defeated the Egyptian Army at Tel El Kebir in September . The Egyptian army took control of the country putting Tawfig back in control . The combined force was able to defeat the Egyptian army .
 The British solution was to set up complex nets of block houses, strong points, and barbed wire fences, partitioning off the entire conquered territory and relocating civilians into concentration camps . e
 The Fashoda Incident was the climax of imperial territorial disoutments between Britain and France in Eastern Africa in 1898 . The incident was the culmination of a series of territorial disputes between the two countries .
 He founded the southern African territory of Rhodesia (now Zimbabwe and Zambia) Rhodesia was named after him in 1895 . An ardent believer in British imperialism, he founded Rhodesia .
 Djibouti could serve as an eastern anchor to an east-west belt of French territory across the continent . France also had an outpost near the mouth of the Red Sea in Djiboutsi (French Somaliland) Djiboutedi was also a French outpost .
 The British wanted to link their possessions in Southern Africa (modern South Africa, Botswana, Malawi, Lesotho, Zimbabwe, and Zambia) with their territories in East Africa . The British, on the other hand, wanted to connect their possessions with the Nile .
 A cartoon depicting Cecil Rhodes standing over Africa, with one foot in South Africa and the other in Egypt, is published in the New York Times . Cecil Rhodes is depicted as standing in both South and Egypt .
 In 1882, ongoing civil disturbances in Egypt prompted Britain to intervene, extending a hand to France . Civil disturbances in 1882 prompted British intervention in Egypt .
 The attitude toward colonialism shifted again during the reign of Kaiser Wilhelm II, who espoused a Weltpolitik foreign policy that emphasized aggressive diplomacy, the acquisition of overseas colonies, and the development of a large navy . The attitude to colonialism has also shifted in Germany since the end of the
 The aim of We/tpolitik was to transform Germany into a global power through aggressive diplomacy, the acquisition of overseas colonies, and the development of a large navy .
 Otto Von Bismarck's Ambivalence Cartoon from 1884 . Otto Von Aismanck drew the image of a fawn fawn .
 The Herero and Nama genocide was one of the first genocides of the 20th century . It was a campaign of racial extermination and collective punishment . The German Empire undertook the genocide in German South-West Africa (modern-day Namibia)
 During the Scramble for Africa, South-West Africa was claimed by Germany in August 1884 . Assess the argument for classifying the persecution against the Herero as a genocide . Learn about the history of the persecution .
 German colonists arriving in the following years occupied large areas of land . They ignored claims by the Herero and other natives .
 There was continual resistance by the natives, most notably in 1903 when some of the Herero tribes rose in revolt and about 60 German settlers were killed .
 It took until 1908 to re-establish German authority over the territory . Tens of thousands of Africans had either killed or died of thirst while fleeing .
 In recent years scholars have debated the ""continuity thesis"" that links German colonialist brutalities to the treatment of Jews, Poles, and Russians during World War I. The thesis is based on the 'continuity' thesis .
 From around 1800, in the United States, people opposed to slavery were planning ways to achieve freedom for more slaves and ultimately abolish the institution . Learning Objective Describe what distinguishes Liberia from other African states .
 Slaveholders in the South opposed having free blacks in their midst, as they believed the free people threatened the stability of their slave societies . At the same time, slaveholders believed free blacks threatened their societies .
 While mostly free across the North, former slaves and other free blacks suffered considerable discrimination . Some territories and states in the Northwest prohibited migration by free people of color .
 Some abolitionists and slaveholders discussed the idea of relocating freed African-American slaves to a colony in Africa . The American Colonization Society was established in 1816 by Robert Finley of New Jersey . Thousands of free blacks who faced legislated restrictions in the United States moved to Liberia
 Liberia retained its independence throughout the Scramble for Africa by European colonial powers during the late 19th century . The country remained in the American sphere of influence .
 It is bordered by Sierra Leone to its west, Guinea to its north, and Cote d'Ivoire to its east . Sierra Leone is also located in Guinea, Sierra Leone and Guinea .
 Liberian King was the 17th President of Liberia . He was the first president of Liberia from Liberia .
 More rapid modernization took place under Menelik Il and Haile Selassie, but this did not deter another Italian invasion in 1935 . The Italian invasion took place in 1936 .
 Ethiopian ruler Menelik Il was supported by some of his traditional enemies . The Ethiopian ruler was opposed to some of the traditional enemies of his ruler .
 Full-scale war broke out in 1895, with Italian troops having initial success . Ethiopian troops counterattacked Italian positions and besieged Italian fort of Meqgele, forcing its surrender .
 Occurring during the era of the French Third Republic (beginning 1870), it was characterized by optimism, regional peace, economic prosperity and technological, scientific and cultural innovations . Occurring in 1870, the era was characterized as optimism and regional peace .
 The British Empire was the superpower of the 19th century . The Empire was one of the world's most powerful powers .
 The Belle Epoque was named, in retrospect, when it began to be considered a “Golden Age"" in contrast to the horrors of World War I . In the United Kingdom, the Belle Eeroque overlapped with the late Victorian era and the Edwardian era .
 World War I, mass transportation, the spread of literacy, and various citizenship concerns changed this . Mass transportation, mass communication, and literacy concerns have also changed this.
 The Concert's effectiveness ended with the rise of nationalism, the 1848 Revolutions, the Crimean War, the unification of Germany, and the Eastern Question, among other factors .
 Disputes on precedence among nations (and therefore the appropriate diplomatic ranks used) were first addressed at the Congress of Aix-laChapelle in 1818, but persisted for over a century until after World War Il, when the rank of ambassador became the norm . The rank of
 e World fairs are international exhibits displaying the achievements of nations, largely focused on technological and industrial developments . They originated in the French tradition of national exhibitions that culminated with the French Industrial Exposition of 1844 .
 Charles Darwin, Samuel Colt, Charles Dickens, Lewis Carroll, George Eliot, and Alfred Tennyson attended the exhibition . Charles Darwin was the first to visit the zoo . Charles Dickens and Lewis Carroll were also there .
 Heating -Ventilation nga ilitary Science a World Fairs . A poster advertising the Brussels International Exposition .
 The 1900 World's Fair presented the famous diorama in Madagascar . Colonial Exhibitions in Marseilles and in Paris also displayed humans in cages, often nude or semi-nude .
 World War I comprised all the conflicts and hostility of the four decades leading up to the war . War broke out unexpectedly in central Europe in summer 1914 . Rise of Militarism prior to World War was the main cause of the conflict .
 1909 cartoon in Puck shows the United States, Germany, Britain, France, and Japan engaged in naval race in a ""no limit"" game .
 By the early 20th century, Bulgaria, Greece, Montenegro, and Serbia had achieved independence from the Ottoman Empire . Large elements of their ethnic populations remained under Ottoman rule . This ""powder keg"" was thus a major catalyst for the outbreak of World War I .
 Four Balkan states defeated the Ottoman Empire in the first war; one of the four, Bulgaria, suffered defeat in the second war . In 1912 these countries formed the Balkan League and declared war on the Ottomans to reclaim territory .
 Any political or popular movement intended to reclaim and reoccupy a ""lost"" or ""unredeemed"" area . territorial claims are justified on the basis of real or imagined national and historic or ethnic affiliations .
 There was a tangle of Great Power alliances, both formal and informal, public and secret . To complicate matters, in the years prior to World War I, there existed a . tangle .
 The assassination triggered the July Crisis, a series of tense diplomatic maneuverings that led to an ultimatum from Austria-Hungary to the Kingdom of Serbia . The murder was described by Christopher Clark as ""a terrorist event charged with historic meaning" e
 A secret military society formed on May 9, 1911, by officers in the Army of the Kingdom of Serbia . It originated in the conspiracy group that assassinated the Serbian royal couple led by captain Dragutin Dimitrijevic .
 Princip was one of a group of six assassins (five Serbs and one Bosniak) coordinated by Danilo Ili€é, a Bosnian Serb and a member of the Black Hand secret society .
 Young Bosnia was a revolutionary movement active in Bosnia and Herzegovina before World War I . The members were predominantly school students, primarily Serbs but also Bosniaks and Croats . The assassins’ motives were consistent with Young Bosnia .
 The major European powers went to great lengths to maintain a balance of power throughout Europe . According to some historians, this caused a localized conflict to escalate into a global war . The existence of a complex network of political and military alliances led to World War I .
 The Triple Alliance and the Triple Entente formed the two opposing sides of World War I . Italy moved over to ally with the Triple Alliance after the start of the war and other nations pulled in over time . Italy was one of the most important allies in the war .
 When Wilhelm II ascended to the throne as German Emperor, Bismarck was compelled to retire and his system of alliances was gradually de-emphasized . The system was gradually removed from power in Germany .
 Kaiser Wilhelm Il of Germany, King George V of England, and Tsar Nicholas II of Russia were cousins . Kaiser Wilhelm I of Germany and King George I of England were cousins of Tsar I of Russia and Kaiser Wilhelm II .
 Bratianu, also secretly pledged to support the Triple Alliance, but he remained neutral since Austria-Hungary started the war . The Prime Minister of Romania remained neutral during the war, but remained neutral .
 Schlieffen's war plans by the name of Aufmarsch Il and Ost continued to stress that Germany's best hope for survival in a war with the Franco-Russian entente was a defensive strategy . Schlieffenfeld's plans were a defense strategy .
 The Aufmarsch Ii West deployment was changed for the offensive of 1914, despite its unrealistic goals and the insufficient forces Germany had available for decisive success . Germany had insufficient forces available for victory .
 The Western Front was the main theatre of war during World War I . Following the outbreak of war in August 1914, the German Army opened the Western Front .
 Both sides established a meandering line of fortified trenches stretching from the North Sea to the Swiss frontier with France in an attempt to outflank the opposition . e This line remained essentially unchanged for most of the war .
 Battle of the Frontiers is a series of battles along the eastern frontier of France and in southern Belgium shortly after the outbreak of World War I . The battles resolved the military strategies of the French Chief of Staff General Joseph Joffre with Plan XVII .
 Siege of Liége was the opening engagement of the German invasion of Belgium and the first battle of World War I . The attack began on August 5, 1914, and lasted until August 16, when the last fort surrendered .
 The German Army executed a modified version of the Schlieffen Plan, designed to quickly attack France through neutral Belgium before turning southwards to encircle the French Army on the German border . At the outbreak of the First World War, the German Army attacked neutral Belgium .
 First battle in Belgium was the Siege of Liege, which lasted from August 5-16 . First battle was the Battle of Belgium, which was held in Belgium .
 First Battle of the Marne ended German advance into France . German Army came within 43 miles of Paris . French and British troops forced a German retreat by exploiting a gap .
 On the Entente side (those countries opposing the German alliance), the final lines were occupied by the armies of the Allied countries . Each nation was defending a part of the front . Laying Trenches and the First Battle of Ypres were laid out on the front line .
 The most famous use of trench warfare is the Western Front in World War e Trench warfare occurs when a revolution in firepower is not matched by similar advances in mobility . e Barbed wire was a significant hindrance to massed infantry advances .
 Trench warfare occurs when a revolution in firepower is not matched by similar advances in mobility . The defender holds the advantage in a grueling form of warfare .
 The opening of this offensive (July 1, 1916) saw the British Army endure the bloodiest day in its history . The British Army suffered 57,470 casualties, including 19,240 dead, on the first day alone . The opening day of the offensive saw British Army suffer 57,
 On April 22, 1915, at the Second Battle of Ypres, the Germans used chlorine gas for the first time on the Western Front . The Germans (violating the Hague Convention) used the gas on the First Battle of the Ypres .
 Tanks were developed by Britain and France, and were first used in combat by the British during the Battle of FlersCourcelette on September 15, 1916 .
 The End of World War I 29.4.1: American Entry into WWI . The American entry into World War | came in April 1917, after two and a half years of efforts by President Woodrow Wilson to keep the United States neutral .
 The sinking turned public opinion in many countries against Germany, contributed to the American entry into World War I . The sinking became an iconic symbol in military recruiting campaigns .
 At the outbreak of World War I, the United States pursued a policy of non-intervention . The U.S. tried to avoid conflict while trying to broker a peace . The Lusitania was the first ship from the U.N.
 The treaty ceded vast territories, including Finland, the Baltic provinces, parts of Poland, and Ukraine, to the Central Powers . The treaty was effectively terminated in November 1918 when Germany surrendered to the Allies .
 The Treaty of Brest-Litovsk was signed on March 3, 1918, between the Central Powers (Germany, AustriaHungary, Bulgaria, and the Ottoman Empire) It ended Russia's participation in World War I . The treaty was forced on the Bolshevik government by the threat
 At the time, the Russian economy nearly collapsed under the strain of the war effort . At the same time, Russia's economy was nearly bankrupting .
 On October 26, 1917, Viadimir Lenin signed the Decree on Peace, which was approved by the Second Congress of the Soviet of Workers', Soldiers’, and Peasants’ Deputies .
 The signatories were Bolshevik Russia signed by Grigori Yakovlovich Sokolnikov on the one side and the German Empire, Austria-Hungary, Bulgaria, and Ottoman Empire on the other .
 The treaty marked Russia's final withdrawal from World War II . It marked her withdrawal from the war, an enemy of her co-signatories, on unexpectedly humiliating terms .
 Signing of armistice between Russia and Germany, shows German delegates and Soviet delegates sitting and standing along a long table signing the Treaty .
 Allied powers led a small-scale invasion of Russia, partly to stop Germany from exploiting Russian resources . The invasion was to support the ""Whites" in the Russian Civil War . The Allied powers were involved in the invasion to stop German exploitation of Russia's resources .
 Armistice of November 11, 1918, that ended World War |, one of the first conditions was the complete abrogation of the Brest-Litovsk treaty . The treaty was abrogated .
 Shortly after the outbreak of the war, the British navy, the largest and most powerful in the world, began a naval blockade of Germany . e Britain mined international waters to prevent any ships from entering entire sections of ocean . e The German Board of Public Health in December 1918 claimed that 7
 The Hundred Days Offensive was the final period of World War |, during which the Allies launched a series of offensive attacks against the Central Powers . The offensive pushed the Germans out of France and led to their defeat .
 German offensive along the Western Front in the spring of 1918 led to the end of the war . The Allies rallied and drove back the Germans in a series of successful offensives, known collectively as the Hundred Days Offensives .
 The allies continued offensives on several points on the Western Front . Eventually forced the Germans behind the Hindenburg Line, which had been a stable defensive line for Germans .
 On November 4, 1918, the Austro-Hungarian empire agreed to an armistice, ending the war in victory for the Allies . Germany, which had its own trouble with revolutionaries, agreed to a similar agreement on November 11, 1918 .
 The Germans realized that their only remaining chance of victory was to defeat the Allies before the overwhelming human and matériel resources of the United States could be fully deployed . U.S. troops died in the Battle of the Atlantic War .
 German defenses, manned by the German 2nd Army (General Georg von der Marwitz), were relatively weak, having been subjected to continual raiding by the Australians in a process termed peaceful penetration . Finally, the German defenses were weak .
 The Germans signed the Armistice of Compiegne, which ended the fighting on the Western Front . Soon after, the Germans agreed to the end of the fighting .
 USA bryter de diplomatiska for bindelserna_med_Tyskland_ 3 februari_1917.jpg .
 The Treaty of Versailles 29.5.1: Diplomatic Goals at the Paris Peace Conference . United States, Great Britain, France, and Italy made all the major decisions at the conference .
 President Raymond Poincaré won agreement on Germany's payment of large sums for reparations . Nicknamed ""Pére la Victoire" or ""Le Tigre" he took a harsh position against defeated Germany .
 Wilson felt it was his duty and obligation to the people of the world to be a prominent figure at the peace negotiations . Wilson said: "I felt that it was my duty to be part of the peace process"
 Prime Minister, Sir Robert Borden, demanded that Canada have a separate seat at the conference . Ensuring the security of France and removing the threat of the German High Seas Fleet .
 In May 1919 the diplomat René Massigli was sent on several secret missions to Berlin . He was sent to Berlin on secret missions during the war .
 The Fourteen Points was a statement of principles used for peace negotiations following the end of World War I . It was outlined in a January 8, 1918, speech to the U.S. Congress by President Woodrow Wilson .
 This group researched topics likely to arise in the anticipated peace conference . The peace conference will take place at the end of September .
 The speech, known as the Fourteen Points, was authored mainly by Walter Lippmann . It projected Wilson's progressive domestic policies into the international arena .
 It was the clearest expression of intention made by any of the belligerent nations and was generally supported by the European nations . It was a clear expression of intent made by the British .
 The first six points dealt with diplomacy, freedom of the seas, and settlement of colonial claims . The final point regarded the establishment of an association of nations to guarantee the independence and territorial integrity of all nations . The actual agreements reached at the Paris Peace Conference were quite different than Wilson's plan
 The address was well received in the U.S. and Allied nations and even by Bolshevik leader Vladimir Lenin as a landmark of enlightenment in international relations . Vladimir Lenin even called it a landmark in world relations .
 The major decisions at the Paris Peace Conference were the creation of the League of Nations . The awarding of German and Ottoman overseas possessions as ""mandates" chiefly to Britain and France . Describe the final treaty signed by the belligerants .
 Central Powers had to acknowledge responsibility for ""all the loss and damage to which the Allied and Associated Governments and their nationals have been subjected as a consequence of the war imposed upon them by" their aggression . The Central Powers acknowledged responsibility for all the damage caused by the war .
 In the Treaty of Versailles, Article 231 was Article 231, which became known as War Guilt clause . Article 231 became known for its resentment and humiliation it caused many Germans .
 The Treaty of Versailles forced Germany to disarm, make territorial concessions, and pay reparations to certain countries that formed the Entente powers . Germany was forced to disarm and make substantial territorial concessions .
 The redrawing of the world map at these conferences created many critical conflict-prone international contradictions . These became one of the causes of World War I. I.
 The humiliation and resentment this caused is sometimes considered responsible for Nazi electoral successes and indirectly, World War I. I.I.
 The Ottoman Empire was to be partitioned by the Treaty of Sevres of 1920 . The Treaty was signed by the Ottoman Empire in 1920 .
 At the time economists, notably John Maynard Keynes, predicted that the treaty was too harsh . Keynes said the reparations figure was excessive and counter-productive . Views that have since been the subject of ongoing debate by historians and economists from several countries .
 The remaking of the world map at these conferences gave birth to a number of critical conflict-prone international contradictions, which would become one of the causes of World War I. I. II .
 Economic depression, renewed nationalism, weakened successor states, and feelings of humiliation (particularly in Germany) contributed to World War I . Economic depression and renewed nationalism contributed to WWI .
 The League of Nations was formed at the Paris Peace Conference to prevent another global conflict like World War and maintain world peace . Explain the ideals that underpinned the forming of the League of . Nations .
 Unlike former efforts at world peace such as the Concert of Europe, the League was an independent organization without an army of its own . It depended on the Great Powers to enforce its resolutions .
 The League was powerless to intervene in disputes and conflicts . The members were often hesitant to do so, leaving the League powerless to help .
 The United States Congress was resistant to joining the League, as doing so would legally bind the U.S. to intervene in European conflicts . The League was formed in the 1930s, and the League was founded in 1939 .
 In the end, the United States did not join the League, despite being its main architects . The U.S. didn't join the league despite being architects .
 The League would consist of a General Assembly , an Executive Council (with membership limited to major powers), and a permanent secretariat . The League of Nations would be a permanent body of the League, with a permanent Secretariat .
 William Or pen pen %E2%80%93 The Signing of Peace in the Hal |_of Mirrors, Versailles 1919, Ausschnitt.jpg. William Orpen pen .
 Tactical reorganizations (such as shifting the focus of command from the 100+ man company to the 10+ man squad) went hand-in-hand with armored cars, the first submachine guns, and automatic rifles that a single individual soldier could carry and use .
 Although at times they were efficient fleet weapons against enemy naval warships, they were most effectively used in an economic warfare role . They were most effective in enforcing a naval blockade against enemy shipping .
 Many of the deadliest battles in history occurred during World War I, such as Ypres, the Marne, Cambrai, the Somme, Verdun, and Gallipoli .
 Most of these would be forgotten in the interwar period until World War Il revived the need . Most of them were forgotten until the need to be revived in the war .
 Almost the whole of Europe and its colonial empires mobilized to wage World War I . Young men were removed from production jobs to serve in military roles and replaced by women . Women were replaced by men in the production roles .
 All of the powers in 1914 expected a short war . None had made any economic preparations for a long war, such as stockpiling food or raw materials .
 Allies spent $147 billion on the war and Central Powers only $61 billion . Central Powers spent $61billion . Allies spent more than $150 billion on war than Central Powers did . Allied forces spent almost $100 billion on World War One .
 Vickers machine gun was used in the Battle of Passchendaele . It was the first machine gun to use in the battle .
 A program for settling German reparations debts after World War I, written in 1929 and formally adopted in 1930 . The Young Plan was written by the Young Plan, which was formally adopted by 1930 .
 The Weimar Republic came into existence during the final stages of World War I, during the German Revolution of 1918-19 . Describe the Weimar republic and the challenges it faced . Use this information to help students understand the history of the republic .
 In its 14 years, the Weimar Republic faced numerous problems, including hyperinflation, political extremism and political extremism . It also faced contentious relationships with the victors of the First World War .
 The Weimar Republic had some of the most serious economic problems ever experienced by any Western democracy in history . It was also known as the Weimarimar Republic .
 Mustafa Kemal Ataturk, a successful Ottoman commander, rejected the terms enforced at Sevres . Under the guise of General Inspector of the Ottoman Army, left Istanbul for Samsun to organize the remaining Ottoman forces to resist the terms of the treaty .
 Turkey became the only power of World War II to overturn terms of its defeat and negotiate with the Allies as an equal . As a result, Turkey was able to overturn the terms of the defeat . Turkey was the only major power of the war to overturn those terms .
 The dissolution of the German, Russian, Austro-Hungarian, and Ottoman empires created a number of new countries in eastern Europe . Poland, Finland, Yugoslavia, and Turkey were among the new countries formed .
 The right of peoples to self-determination is a cardinal principle in modern international law . Self-Determination is a key principle in international law, according to the U.N.
 It also is derived from principles espoused by United States President Woodrow Wilson following World War |, after which some new nation states formed or previous states revived after the dissolution of empires .
 Leading up to World War I, in Europe there was a rise of nationalism . Greece, Hungary, Poland, and Bulgaria were seeking or winning their independence .
 The Statute of Westminster granted independence to Canada, New Zealand, Newfoundland, the Irish Free State, Commonwealth of Australia, and the Union of South Africa . The British parliament declared itself as incapable of passing laws over them without their consent .
 The Kellogg-Briand Pact was concieved and signed in 1914 . After World War I, many politicians and diplomats created measures that would prevent further armed conflict .
 This effort resulted in numerous international institutions and treaties, such as the League of Nations and the Kellogg-Briand Pact . This effort led to the creation of international institutions, treaties and institutions .
 Practically, the Kellogg-Briand Pact did not live up to its aim of ending war or stopping the rise of militarism . The Pact made no immediate contribution to international peace and proved to be ineffective in the years to come .
 The pact has served as one of the legal bases establishing the international norms that the threat or use of military force in contravention of international law, as well as the territorial acquisitions resulting from it, are unlawful . Nevertheless, the pact has . served as a legal base establishing the . international
 It inspired and influenced future international agreements, including the United Nations Charter . The U.N. Charter was created in 1961 .
 The United States Senate did not add any reservation to the treaty . It did pass a measure which interpreted the treaty as not infringing upon the United States’ right of self-defense and not obliging the nation to enforce it by taking action .
 In January 1905, an incident known as ""Bloody Sunday" occurred when Father Gapon led an enormous crowd to the Winter Palace in Saint Petersburg to present a petition to the tsar . When the procession reached the palace, Cossacks opened fire on the crowd, killing hundreds .
 Tsar Nicholas reluctantly issued the famous October Manifesto in 1905 . It conceded the creation of a national Duma, and affirmed that no law was to go into force without confirmation by the Duma .
 The moderate groups were satisfied, but the socialists rejected the concessions as insufficient and tried to organize new strikes . By the end of 1905, there was disunity among the reformers, and the tsar's position was strengthened .
 £6dz insurrection took place in June 1905 in the Russian-controlled Congress Poland . The uprising was an uprising in Russia-controlled Poland . It was the first uprising in Poland since 1905 .
 Tsarist regime collapsed after World War I, leading to the utter collapse of the regime in 1917 and civil war . Civil war broke out between Russia and Russia in 1918 and 1917 . Tsaristia was ruled by the Tsaristians, who ruled Russia in Russia .
 The Russian Revolution of 1905 was a major factor of the February Revolutions of 1917 . The revolution unleashed a steady current of worker unrest and increased political agitation .
 The idea of a soviet as an organ to coordinate workers’ strike activities arose during the January-February 1905 meetings of workers at the apartment of Voline (later an anarchist) during the abortive revolution of 1905 .
 While rural agrarian peasants had been emancipated from serfdom in 1861, they still resented paying redemption payments to the state, and demanded communal tender of the land .
 Tsar Nicholas Il and his subjects entered World War with enthusiasm and patriotism . The defense of Russia's fellow Orthodox Slavs, the Serbs, was the main battle cry . Tsar's subjects entered the war with enthusiasm .
 By its end, World War | prompted a Russian outcry directed at Tsar Nicholas Il. Tsar's death prompted an outcry . World War II prompted outcry against Tsar .
 The February Revolution of 1917 was focused around Petrograd, then capital of Russia . The February revolution was focused on Petrograd . The Russian provisional government was formed in 1917 .
 The army leadership felt they did not have the means to suppress the revolution, resulting in Tsar Nicholas's abdication and soon after, the end of the Tsarist regime .
 The Duma declared a provisional government headed by Prince Lvov . The Russian Republic is now known as the Russian Republic .
 Petrograd socialists organize elections among workers and soldiers to form a soviet of workers' and soldiers' deputies . Workers and soldiers will form an organ of popular power that could pressure the ""bourgeois"" provisional government .
 The Soviets initially permitted the provisional government to rule, but insisted on a prerogative to influence decisions and control militias . The Soviets insisted on the prerogation of influence, control militias and influence .
 During the chaotic period there were frequent mutinies, protests, and strikes, such as the July Days . During this chaotic period, there were often mutineers, protests and strikes .
 Three days later, the abdication of Tsar Nicholas II was the end of the Romanov dynasty . The abdicated of the Russian Empire was the result of the result . The Romanov family was the last of the dynasty to leave Russia .
 Russian Provisional Government established immediately following the abdication of Tsar Nicholas Il of the Russian Empire on 2 March . Provisional government of Russian Republic was established immediately after the death of Nicholas II of Russian Empire .
 At the beginning of February 1917, Petrograd (Saint Petersburg) workers began several strikes and demonstrations . February Revolution began in Petrograd, Russia, in 1917 .
 The socialists had formed their rival body, the Petrograd Soviet (or workers' council) four days earlier . Petrograd was formed in Petrograd, a rival body formed by the Bolsheviks .
 The policies enacted by this moderate government represented arguably the most liberal legislation in Europe at the time . The policies of the moderate government were arguably the best in Europe in the history .
 In July, following a series of crises known as the July Days, the head of the provisional government resigned and was succeeded by Alexander Kerensky . The July Days undermined the government's authority with the public . The government was overthrown in July after a crisis that undermined its authority
 In the October Revolution (November in the Gregorian calendar) the Bolsheviks overthrew the Russian Provisional Government in Petrograd . The Bolsheviks appointed themselves as leaders of various government ministries and seized control of the countryside, establishing the Cheka to quash dissent .
 Viadimir Lenin was a Russian communist revolutionary, politician, and political theorist . He was a member of the Communist Party of Russia . Lenin was the founder of the Russian Communist Party Party .
 It followed and capitalized on the February Revolution of the Same year, which overthrew the Tsarist autocracy . The revolution was followed by a transfer of power proclaimed by Grand Duke Michael, brother of Tsar Nicolas Il, who declined to take power .
 Wages were fixed at higher rates than during the war, and a shorter, eight-hour working day was introduced . The factories were given to the soviets .
 Russian Revolutionaries Vladimir Lenin, leader of the Bolsheviks, speaking at a meeting in Sverdlov Square in Moscow . Leon Trotsky and Lev Kamenev adjacent to the right of the podium .
 The Whites had backing from Great Britain, France, the U.S., and Japan . The Reds possessed internal support which proved to be much more effective .
 Allied nations provided substantial military aid to the loosely knit anti-Bolshevik forces . They were ultimately defeated by the Soviet Union in 1945 .
 Anti-Communist forces fought the Bolsheviks, also known as the Reds, in the Russian Civil War . The White Army was a loose confederation of anti-communist forces that fought the Reds .
 Denikin, became known as the White movement (sometimes referred to as the ""White Army"") and controlled significant parts of the former Russian Empire for most of the war . The White Army controlled significant areas of Russia's former Soviet-Estonian Empire .
 One to two million people, known as the White émigrés, fled Russia, many with Gen. Gen. Vladimir Putin . Another 1 to 2 million people also fled Russia .
 The Soviet Union had its roots in the October Revolution of 1917, when the Bolsheviks overthrew the Russian Provisional Government that had replaced Tsar Nicholas Il . Assess the reasons for creating the Soviet Union .
 Russia only consolidated as the new government of Russia after the defeat of the White Army during the Russian Civil War in 1922 . However, it only officially consolidated as a new government after defeat of White Army .
 Land, all industry, and small businesses were nationalized and the economy was restricted . Land was nationalized, and all industry was nationalised . The period from 1917 until 1921 is known as the period of war communism .
 The constitution, adopted in 1924, established a federal system of government based on a succession of soviets set up in villages, factories, and cities in larger regions . It culminated in the All-Union Congress of Soviets, which was established in 1924 .
 Marxist theories hold that human societies develop through class struggle . In capitalism, this manifests itself in the conflict between the ruling classes that control the means of production and the working classes that enable these means by selling their labor .
 The Soviet Union had its roots in the October Revolution of 1917 . The Bolsheviks, led by Vladimir Lenin, overthrew the Russian Provisional Government that had replaced Tsar Nicholas Il. Lenin led the Bolsheviks .
 The Soviet Union developed a powerful industrial economy in the years before World War I . Despite the turmoil of the mid-to-late 1930s, the Soviet Union still had a strong industrial sector .
 When stocks plummeted on Black Tuesday, the world noticed immediately, creating a ripple effect on the global economy . Black Tuesday was the first day stocks plummeted, creating an immediate ripple effect .
 The gold standard was the primary transmission mechanism of the Great Depression, driving down the currency of even nations with no banking crisis . The sooner nations got off the gold standard, the sooner they recovered from the depression . In many countries, the negative effects of the Depression lasted until the beginning of
 The purchase of an asset (a commodity, goods, or real estate) with the hope that it will become more valuable at a future date . Speculation is speculation .
 In many countries the negative effects of the Great Depression lasted until the beginning of World War I. However, in many countries it lasted until World War II . The Great Depression was the biggest economic downturn in the history of American history .
 On October 24, the market lost 11 percent of its value at the opening bell on very heavy trading . On "Black Thursday" the market was trading at the start of October 24 .
 Many economists have argued that the sharp decline in international trade after 1930 helped to worsen the Great Depression . Historians partly blame this on the American Smoot-Hawley Tariff Act for reducing international trade and causing retaliatory tariffs .
 This slowed international trade, which in turn exacerbated the depression . The depression has also exacerbated the economic downturn in recent years .
 The situation was made worse by the rise of protectionism throughout the globe . Protectionism is the economic policy of restraining trade between countries through methods such as tariffs on imported goods .
 The 1930 Smoot-Hawley Tariff Act aimed to protect American jobs and farmers from foreign competition . Other nations increased tariffs on American-made goods in retaliation, reducing international trade and worsening the Depression . The act was passed by the U.S. Congress in 1930 .
 The rise of fascism in Italy began during World War |, when Benito Mussolini and other radicals formed a political group supporting the war against Germany and Austria-Hungary . The first meeting of Mussolini's Fasci of Revolutionary Action was held on January 24, 1915 . For the
 Fascist paramilitaries escalated their strategy from attacking socialist offices and homes of socialist leadership figures to violent occupation of cities . During the so-called ""March on Rome,"" Mussolini was appointed Prime Minister of Italy . From 1925 to 1929, Fascism steadily became entrenched in power .
 Mussolini arrived in Rome on October 30 to accept the appointment . Victor Emmanuel Ill decided to appoint Mussolini as Prime Minister of Italy . Mussolini was the first Italian Prime Minister to be appointed by Ill .
 e Fascism is a far-right authoritarian political ideology that emerged in the early 20th century . Fascists believe that liberal democracy is obsolete and regard the complete mobilization of society under a totalitarian one-party state, led by a dictator .
 It holds that liberal democracy is obsolete and that the complete mobilization of society under a totalitarian one-party state is necessary to prepare a nation for armed conflict and to respond effectively to economic difficulties . The term is fin-de-siecle French for end of the century .
 Since the end of World War I in 1945, few parties have openly described themselves as fascist . The term is instead now usually used pejoratively by political opponents .
 Historian Zeev Sternhell traces ideological roots of fascism back to the 1880s . Sternhell has traced ideological roots to the fin-desiecle theme of that time . The historian has also traced the ideology of fascism to the 1980s and 1930s .
 After the end of World War I, fascism rose out of relative obscurity into international prominence . Fascism was formed most notably in Italy, Germany, and Japan, the three of which would be allied in World War Il .
 Adolf Hitler and Benito Mussolini were the two most prominent fascist dictators . They rose to power in the decades after World War I . Photo of Hitler and Mussolini in official military uniforms .
 The 1919 Treaty of Versailles that ended World War | did not recognize the Empire of Japan's territorial claims . It angered the Japanese and led to a surge in nationalism in Japan .
 Emperor Meiji restored practical imperial rule to Japan in 1868 . Event led to enormous changes in Japan's political and social structure and spanning both the late Edo period and the beginning of the Meiji period .
 The 1919 Treaty of Versailles that ended World War | did not recognize the Empire of Japan's territorial claims . International naval treaties between Western powers and Empire of . Japan (Washington Naval Treaty and London Naval Treaty) imposed limitations on naval shipbuilding that limited the size of the Imperial Japanese
 Ikki Kita was an early 20th-century political theorist who advocated a hybrid of state socialism with ""Asian nationalism,"" which blended the early ultranationalist movement with Japanese militarism . Ikki was born in Japan .
 Japan was occupied by foreign powers for the first time in its history, then re-emerged as a major world economic power . After suffering defeat in World War Il, Japan suffered defeat in Japan .
 Spanish Fascism Falangism was the political ideology of the Falange Espanola de las JONS and, afterwards, of the . Falange . Tradicionalista . and of las Juntas de Ofensiva Nacional Sindicalista . It was the ideology
 The Great Depression was one of the major causes of the rise of Nazism in Germany . Fascism was also popular during the Depression era outside of Europe, in Japan, Brazil and Argentina .
 Ernst Nolte argues that fascism arose as a form of resistance to and a reaction against modernity . Historian and philosopher says fascism arose in response to modernity and resistance to modernism .
 Iron Guard is the name most commonly given to a far-right movement and political party in Romania in the period from 1927 into the early part of World War I . The Iron Guard was the name of the Iron Guard during the early 1930s and 1930s .
 In China, Wang Jingwei's Ka/-tsu p’‘ai faction of the Kuomintang supported Nazism in the late 1930s . The Ka/tsu faction supported the Nazis in China .
 In Japan, a Nazi movement called the Tohokai was formed by Seigo Nakano . Nakano was the leader of the movement in Japan .
 Adolf Hitler was born and raised in Austria-Hungary . He was decorated during his service in the German Army in World War I . He began to rise to prominence in German politics with his vitriolic soeeches promoting German nationalism .
 Hitler attacked the Treaty of Versailles and promoted PanGermanism, anti-semitism, and anti-communism with charismatic oratory and Nazi propaganda . e Hitler frequently denounced international capitalism and communism as part of a Jewish conspiracy . e
 The party emerged from the German nationalist, racist, and populist Fre/korps paramilitary culture, which fought against the communist uprisings in post-World War . The party was formed from a German nationalist and racist paramilitary culture .
 The party was created to draw workers away from communism and into vo/kisch nationalism . Party was created in order to draw them away from communist ideology .
 His first six years in power resulted in rapid economic recovery from the Great Depression . Germany's annexation of territories that were home to millions of ethnic Germans gave him support .
 His aggressive foreign policy is considered to be the primary cause of the outbreak of World War Il in Europe . His aggressive policy is believed to have caused World War I .
 Georg Ritter von Schonerer was one influence on Hitler . He advocated Pan-Germanism, anti-Semitism and anti-Slavism . He was a German nationalist .
 In 1914, at the outbreak of World War I, Hitler was living in Munich and voluntarily enlisted in the Bavarian Army . Hitler was in Munich at the start of the conflict in 1914 .
 Hitler with his army comrades of the Bavarian Reserve Infantry Regiment 16 . Hitler in World War I . Hitler was a member of the Bavarian Resort Infantry Regiment .
 Hitler and the SA stormed a public meeting of 3,000 people organized by Gustav Ritter von Kahr in the Burgerbrdaukeller, a beer hall in Munich . The SA stormed the meeting in Munich on November 8, 1923 .
 Adolf Hitler joined the DAP in 1919 and quickly became their main orator and spokesperson . Around that time, the party only had around 60 members . Hitler quickly became the party's most prominent spokesman .
 It has been variously used to describe all Indo-Europeans in general (spanning from India to Europe), the original Aryan people specifically in Persia, and most controversially through Nazi misinterpretation, the Nordic or Germanic peoples .
 Following the defeat of the Third Reich at the conclusion of World War Il in Europe, the party was ""declared to be illegal"" by the Allied powers . The Allied powers carried out denazification in the years after the war .
 In 1918, a league called the Freien Arbe/terausschuss fur einen guten Frieden was created in Bremen, Germany . The party grew out of smaller political groups with nationalist orientation that formed in the last years of World War I .
 Drexler saw the situation of political instability in Germany as the result of the new Weimar Republic being out-of-touch with the masses, especially the lower classes . He also accused international capitalism of being a Jewish-dominated movement .
 Hitler used the campaign Slogan ""Hitler Uber Deutschland" as a reference to his political ambitions and campaigning by aircraft . Hitler used to use the Slogan 'Uber' as his campaign slogan .
 Ranks of SA men served as guards inside the building . Large groups opposing the proposed legislation shouted slogans and threats toward the arriving members of parliament .
 While elections to the Reichstag were still held, voters were presented with a single list of Nazis and pro-Nazi “guests” which carried with well over 90 percent of the vote .
 One of the central tenets of the Nazi regime was a pseudo-scientific racial hierarchy placing the Nordic or Aryan races at the top and Slavs, Romani, and especially Jews at the bottom . Give examples of antisemitism in Germany before World War II .
 In April 1933, Hitler declared a national boycott of Jewish businesses and passed the Law for the Restoration of the Professional Civil Service . All non-Aryan civil servants were forced to retire from the legal profession and civil service . The law was passed by Hitler in 1933 .
 On September 15, 1935, the Nuremberg Laws were passed . The laws included the Law for the Protection of German Blood and German Honour .
 The Reich Citizenship Law declared that only those of German or related blood were eligible to be Reich citizens . The law was passed by the Nazis in 1941 .
 In November 1938, Nazi paramilitary damaged or destroyed synagogues and Jewish property throughout Germany during what became known as Kristallnacht, the ""Night of Broken Glass" e Up until the outbreak of World War II, when the racist policies of the Nazis turned into outright genocide, the
 The Germanic peoples (the Nordic race) were considered by the Nazis to be the purest branch of the Aryan race and therefore viewed as the master race . The Nordic race was viewed as one of the pureest branches of Aryan .
 Nazi policies placed centuries-long residents in German territory who were not ethnic Germans such as Jews (a Semitic people of Levantine origins), Romanis (also known as Gypsies, an Indo-Aryan people of Indian Subcontinent origins), European non-Nordic
 The Jewish community was fined one billion marks to pay for the damage caused by Krista//nacht . Any money received via insurance claims would be confiscated from the Jewish community . The community was told that any money received from insurance claims was confiscated .
 The two laws were the Law for the Protection of German Blood and German Honour . The laws forbade marriages and extramarital intercourse between Jews and Germans . The Reich Citizenship Law declared that only those of German or related blood were eligible to be Reich citizens .
 The ideology of Nazism brought together elements of antisemitism, racial hygiene, and eugenics with panGermanism and territorial expansionism . The goal of obtaining more Lebensraum for the Germanic people was to obtain more Lebsraum .
 The foreign policy of the Nazi regime was outlined by Adolf Hitler in Mein Kampf in 1925 . It expanded upon the German ideas of a ""Greater Germany" that had been discussed and enacted in various ways since the 19th century .
 Lebensraum's territorial aim was combined with the racist ideologies of the Nazis to form the idea that people deemed to be part of inferior races (Slavs and Jews, for example), within the territory of the territory, were subjected to expulsion or destruction .
 The annexation of Austria occurred in 1938 when Hitler ordered troops into Austria to pressure its president to appoint a Nazi chancellor who would orchestrate the unification . Austria was annexed by Hitler in 1938 .
 Within two days of installation, Nazis transferred power to Germany . Wehrmacht troops entered Austria to enforce the Anschluss, which was then ratified by popular vote .
 Hitler's initiative was to convince all Vo/ksdeutsche living outside of Nazi Germany (in Austria and the western districts of Poland) that they should strive to bring these regions ""home"" into Greater Germany . The aim was to persuade all Vo./ksdeutsch living in Austria and
 Nazi Generalplan Ost policy (the Master Plan for the East) was based on its tenets . The Nazi General Plan Ost policy was based upon the tenets of the plan .
 There had been several years of pressure from supporters in Austria and Germany for the movement .
 In March 1933, the Enabling Act, an amendment to the Weimar Constitution, was passed in the Re/chstag . The Act was amended in March 1933 to allow the government to use the power of the government .
 President Hindenburg died on August 2, 1934, and Hitler became dictator of Germany by merging the powers and offices of the Chancellery and Presidency . e Germany was now a totalitarian state with Hitler at its head .
 The official name of the state was Deutsches Reich from 1933 to 1943 and Gro&bdeutsche Reich from 1943 to 1945 . Deutschechhes Reich was the name of Germany from 1933 until 1945 . Gro&B was the German state of Germany between 1933 and
 The Nazi regime came to an end after the Allied Forces defeated Germany in May 1945, ending World War Il in Europe . The Nazis were defeated by Allied Forces in 1945 .
 The Nazis proposed national and cultural renewal based upon the Volkisch movement . The Nazis planned national renewal based on the movement . It was proposed by the Nazis in Germany .
 Regional state parliaments and the Re/chsrat were abolished in January 1934 . The regional state parliament was abolished in March 1934 .
 Socialist agitations that followed the devastation of World War I, inspired by the Russian Revolution, led to counter-revolution and repression throughout Italy . The socialist agitations in Italy were inspired by Russian Revolution .
 The Fascisti formed armed squads of war veterans called Blackshirts with the goal of restoring order to the streets of Italy with a strong hand . Mussolini's Rise to Power was led by one of his close confidants .
 King Victor Emmanuel Ill refused to declare martial law, leading to Facta's resignation . The Albertine Statute held the supreme military power in the Philippines . Facta resigned from the government on October 28 .
 Axis was declared between Italy and Germany on 25 October 1936 . Se, ‘Wi, Se, 'Wi, Hitler and Mussolini met in 1936 .
 Stalin's brutal methods led to millions of deaths in Gulag labor camps and during man-made famine . In August 1939, after failed attempts to conclude anti-Hitler pacts with other major European powers, Stalin entered into a non-aggression pact with Nazi Germany .
 Sources suggest Stalin was approximately 5 feet 4 inches tall when he was a very tall Tsar .
 French foreign policy was of central interest to France during the interwar period . Describe the state of France prior to 1939 . Learn how to use the language of French diplomacy .
 France demanded that Germany assume many of the costs incurred from the war through annual reparation payments . The war's devastation included the death of 1. million French soldiers and the destruction of much of the steel and coal regions .
 As a response to the failure of the Weimar Republic to pay reparations in the aftermath of World War I, France occupied the industrial region of the Ruhr as a means of ensuring reparations payments from Germany .
 In the 1920s, France established an elaborate system of border defenses called the Maginot Line, designed to fight off any German attack . e Socialist Leon Blum, leading the Popular Front, brought together Socialists and Radicals to become Prime Minister from 1936 to 1937 .
 As a response to the failure of the Weimar Republic to pay reparations in the aftermath of World War I, France occupied the industrial region of the Ruhr to ensure repayments from Germany .
 Vienna's Jews were forced to wash pro-independence slogans from the city’s pavements after the Anschluss . Sa ate Figs of the Figs .
 President Roosevelt and the American public supported war with Nazi Germany by 1941 . The U.S. Congress continued to demand American neutrality, but President Roosevelt backed war with Germany in 1941 .
 Non-interventionist tendencies of U.S. foreign policy gained ascendancy in the wake of the First World War . Interwar period in the 1920s and 1930s saw the rise of anti-war tendencies in the United States .
 On September 1, 1939, Germany invaded Poland and Britain and France declared war on Germany, marking the start of World War I . Such activities played a role in American entrance into World War One .
 Isolationists believed that the safety of the nation was more important than any foreign war . The nation's safety was the most important issue for isolationists, not war .
 Protest march to prevent American involvement in World War II before the attack on Pearl Harbor . N( REIGN CNTANGLEMENIS SRITAIN ww i “No Foreign Entanglements"" Protest march .
 First regular act of war took place on September 1, 1939 . Luftwaffe attacked the Polish town of Wielun, killing close to 1,200 people, most of them civilians .
 After a British ultimatum to Germany to cease military operations was ignored, Britain and France declared war on Germany . e On October 8, after an initial period of military administration, Germany directly annexed western Poland and the former Free City of Danzig .
 A false flag operation by Nazi forces posing as Poles on August 31, 1939, against the German radio station Sender Gleiwitz . The operation took place on the eve of World War I in Europe .
 The German invasion began on September 1, 1939, one week after the signing of the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact . The Soviet invasion commenced on September 17 following the Molotsov-Togo agreement that terminated hostilities in the east on September 16 .
 Map shows the beginning of World War II in September 1939 in a European context . The Invasion of Poland was the first invasion of Poland by Poland in 1939 .
 The Second Polish Republic was one of the three original allies of World War Il . It was invaded and divided between the Third Reich and Soviet Union . The Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact divided Central and Eastern Europe .
 On September 3 after a British ultimatum to Germany to cease military operations was ignored, Britain and France, followed by the fully independent Dominions of the British Commonwealth . Australia, Canada, New Zealand and South Africa declared war on Germany .
 The German-Soviet Treaty of Friendship, Cooperation and Demarcation was a second supplementary protocol of the 1939 Hitler-Stalin Pact . The treaty was later known as the German-Russian Frontier Treaty .
 The treaty was a follow-up to the first secret protocol of the MolotovRibbentrop Pact signed on August 23, 1939, between the two countries prior to their invasion of Poland and the start of World War I .
 During the 1930s, the French constructed the Maginot Line, a series of fortifications along their border with Germany . The area immediately to the north of the . Ardennes region was covered by the heavily wooded Ardennes . General Philippe Pétain declared the area to be
 The Dunkirk evacuation, code-named Operation Dynamo, was the evacuation of Allied soldiers from the beaches and harbor of Dunkirk, France between May 26 and June 4, 1940, during World War II . Operation Dynamo was also known as Operation Dynamo and also known known as the Miracle of
 Churchill: "We must be very careful not to assign to this deliverance the attributes of a victory" Churchill said in his soeech to the House of Commons on June 4 .
 The area immediately to the north of the Maginot Line was covered by the heavily wooded Ardennes region . General Philippe Pétain declared the area to be ‘impenetrable’ as long as ""Special provisions"" were taken .
 Vichy France is the common name of the French State headed by Marshal Philippe Pétain during World War I . It is the name of a French state headed by Philippe Pétain during World War II . The French state was known as the French state of Vich
 In particular, it represents the unoccupied ""Free Zone"" (zone libre) that governed the southern part of the country . The zone was unoccupied during the Second World War .
 The Battle of Britain began in early July with Luftwaffe attacks on shipping and harbors . Hitler publicly offered to end the war on July 19, saying he had no desire to destroy British Empire .
 The Luftwaffe was the aerial warfare branch of the German Wehrmacht during World War I . Luftweaffe was a German air force during the Second World War II . It was also known as the German Air Force .
 The failure to destroy Britain's air defenses to force an armistice is considered the Nazis’ first major defeat in World War Il and a crucial turning point in the conflict . Failure to destroy British air defenses is considered to be the Nazis' first major victory in the war .
 The Battle of the Atlantic was the longest continuous military campaign in World War II . It ran from 1939 to the defeat of Germany in 1945, running from 1939 until 1945 .
 The Germans failed to stop the flow of strategic supplies to Britain, which resulted in the build-up of troops and supplies needed for the D-Day landings . The situation changed constantly, with one side or the other gaining advantage as participating countries surrendered, joined, and even changed sides
 He advocated a system known as the Rudeltaktik, in which U-boats would spread out in a long line across the projected course of a convoy . U.S. submarines would spread in a line across a projected convoy .
 During the Atlantic Campaign only 10% of transatlantic convoys that sailed were attacked . Of those attacked only about LO% were lost . In all, only LO% of convoys were attacked during the Atlantic campaign .
 More people died fighting on the Eastern Front than in all other fighting across the globe during World War I . More people were killed fighting in the Eastern front than in any other fighting during the war .
 In 1941, as Germany conquered new territory in eastern Europe, Einsatzgruppen murdered around two million Jews, partisans, and others . By the end of 1942, victims were regularly transported by freight trains to extermination camps where most survived the journey were systematically killed in gas chambers .
 Final Solution The Nazi plan for the total extermination of the Jews during World War Il, carried out in the period known as the Holocaust . Camps designed and built by Nazi Germany to systematically kill millions of Jews, Slavs, and others considered ""sub-human"
 In 1938, legal repression and resettlement turned to violence on Kristal//inacht ("Night of Broken Glass"") When Jews were attacked and Jewish property was vandalized, Jews attacked .
 Base installations such as the power station, shipyard, maintenance, and fuel and torpedo storage facilities, as well as submarine piers and headquarters building, were not attacked .
 The attack led directly to the American entry into World War I in both the Pacific and European theaters . The attack came as a profound shock to the U.S. people and led to the war .
 Clandestine support of the United Kingdom (e.g., the Neutrality Patrol) was replaced by active alliance . Clandestine UK support was replaced with active alliance support .
 Japanese planes are visible in the right center and over the Navy Yard at right at right . The Japanese planes were visible in right center of the photo .
 This Japanese operation sought to eliminate the United States as a strategic power in the Pacific . American cryptographers were able to determine the date and location of the planned attack, enabling the forewarned United States Navy to prepare its own ambush .
 All four of Japan's large aircraft carriers and a heavy cruiser were sunk, while the United States lost only the carrier Yorktown and a destroyer . e After Midway and the exhausting attrition of the Solomon Islands campaign, Japan's capacity to replace its losses in material and men rapidly became insufficient
 The Battle of Midway, along with the Guadalcanal Campaign, is considered a turning point in the Pacific War . USS Yorktown Yorktown was sunk by a torpedo from a Nakajima B5N .
 A second attack from the United States carriers found and destroyed Hiryu, the last remaining fleet carrier available to Nagumo . The U.S. carriers attacked the Japanese carrier a few hours later . Nagumo was forced to withdraw from the fleet carrier .
 Guadalcanal marked the decisive Allied transition from defensive operations to the strategic initiative in the Pacific theater . The campaign led to offensive operations such as the Solomon Islands, New Guinea, and Central Pacific campaigns that eventually resulted in Japan's surrender .
 Japanese made several attempts between August and November to retake Henderson Field . Three major land battles, seven large naval battles (five nighttime surface actions and two carrier battles) culminated in the decisive Naval Battle of Guadalcanal in early November .
 Allies overwhelmed outnumbered Japanese defenders, who had occupied the islands since May 1942 . Allies captured Tulagi and Florida, as well as an airfield that was under construction on Guadalcanal .
 It was a turning point in the European theater of World War I . German forces never regained the initiative in the East and withdrew a vast military force from the West to replace their losses .
 The Battle of Stalingrad was a major battle on the Eastern Front of World War II . Nazi Germany and its allies fought the Soviet Union for control of the city in Southern Russia . The city was on the eastern boundary of Europe .
 It is often regarded as one of the single largest and bloodiest battles in the history of warfare . Marked by constant close-quarters combat and direct assaults on civilians by air raids, it was the most bloodiest battle in history .
 The heavy losses inflicted on the German Wehrmacht make it arguably the most strategically decisive battle of the whole war . The battle was a turning point in the European theater of World War I .
 On June 14, the British Army's 11th Hussars crossed the border from Egypt into Libya and captured the Italian Fort Capuzzo . The British Hussars were assisted by elements of the 1st Royal Tank Regiment, 1st .
 During Operation Compass, the Italian LOth Army was destroyed and the German Afrika Korps—commanded by Erwin Rommel, was dispatched to North Africa during Operation Sonnenblume to reinforce Italian forces and prevent a complete Axis defeat . During Operation Compound compound
 The Axis never had sufficient resources or the means to deliver them to defeat the British . The British missed several opportunities to finish the Campaign by diverting resources to Greece and the Levant .
 Following the defeat of the Axis Powers in North Africa in May 1943, there was disagreement between the Allies as to what the next step should be . Discuss the events of the Sicilian Campaign .
 Joseph Stalin, the Soviet leader, was pressing Churchill and Roosevelt to open a ""second front" in Europe to lessen the German Army's focus on the Eastern Front . Churchill wanted to invade Italy, which he called ""the soft underbelly of the axis"
 Allied forces planned and commanded the invasion of Sicily in July 1943 . Operation Mincemeat was part of a series of deception operations to distract and confuse the Axis . The Allied invasion of Italy was followed by invasion of the Italian mainland .
 The main outcome of the Tehran Conference was the Western Allies commitment to open a second front against Nazi Germany, including an invasion on France . Although the leaders arrived with differing objectives, the main outcome was the opening of the second front .
 Roosevelt, Churchill, Churchill and Stalin all agreed to support Iran's government and the Soviet Union pledged support to Turkey if they entered the war . The Soviet Union also pledged support for Turkey if it entered the conflict .
 The cross-channel invasion of France (Operation Overlord) would be launched during May 1944 in conjunction with an operation against southern France . Operation Overlord was launched by the British Army in May 1944 . The invasion of southern France would be part of the operation to prepare for invasion .
 Wikipedia CC BY-SA 3.0. o ""Troops from_51st_Highland_Division_unloading_sto res from_tank_landing_craft_on_the opening day_of _the Allied _invasion_of Sicily, 10
 Normandy invasion began with overnight parachute and glider landings, massive air attacks, and naval bombardments . Learning Objective: Outline the events of the invasion of Normandy .
 Operation Bodyguard successfully misled the Germans as to the date and location of the main Allied landings . The Allies conducted a substantial military deception in the months leading up to the invasion . The deception was code-named 'Operation Bodyguard' and 'Bodyguard'
 The invasion was costly in terms of men for the Allies, but the defeat inflicted on the Germans was one of the largest of the war . It led to the loss of the German position in most of France .
 D-Day was the first day of the Allied invasion of Normandy in Operation Overlord during World War I . The landing operations on Tuesday, June 6, 1944, were the first days of the invasion . The invasion was part of the first phase of the World War II invasion .
 Normandy landings on June 6, 1944, were the Allied invasion of Normandy in Operation Overlord during World War I . The Normandy Landings were part of the Allied landings of World War II in 1944 .
 Roosevelt wanted Soviet support in the Pacific War against Japan and Soviet participation in the UN . Churchill pressed for free elections and democratic governments in Eastern and Central Europe (specifically Poland) Stalin demanded a Soviet sphere of political influence in the region .
 Roosevelt wanted Soviet support in the United States Pacific War against Japan . Churchill pressed for free elections and democratic governments in Eastern and Central Europe (specifically Poland) Stalin demanded a Soviet sphere of political influence in the USSR .
 After the war, Germany and Berlin would be split into four occupied zones . Stalin agreed that France would have a fourth occupation zone in Germany . Germany would undergo demilitarization and denazification .
 By the time Allied forces launched an invasion of Germany from the Western and Eastern front, Allied victory in Europe was inevitable . Hitler gambled his future ability to defend Germany on the Ardennes offensive and lost .
 On April 30, 1945, the Reichstag was captured, signalling the military defeat of Nazi Germany . e As the Allies advanced on Germany, they began to discover the extent of the Holocaust and liberated many concentration camps along their route .
 Battle of Berlin was the final major offensive of the European theatre of World War II . The Soviet Red Army invaded Berlin, Germany, in 1944 . It was the first major major offensive in the European Theatre of WWII .
 After the battle of Berlin, Soviet soldiers hoist the Soviet flag on the balcony of the Hotel Adlon in Berlin overlooking the street .
 Treblinka, Sobibdér, and Betzec were never liberated, but were destroyed by the Nazis in 1943 . The three were destroyed in 1943, but never liberated .
 Hard-fought battles on the Japanese home islands of lwo Jima, Okinawa, and others resulted in horrific casualties on both sides but finally produced a Japanese defeat . Okinawa and Iwo JimA were the most bloody battles in the war .
 The Battle of Iwo Jima was a major battle in which the U.S. Marines landed on and eventually captured the Japanese Imperial Army . Connect the battles with the greater American ""island hopping"" strategy . The battle was fought during World War II in Okinawa .
 The battle of Iwo Jima in February 1945 was one of the bloodiest battles fought by the Americans in the Pacific War . The battle took place in the Philippines in 1945 .
 Iwo Jima was an eight-squaremile island situated halfway between Tokyo and the Mariana Islands . The island was located in the middle of Japan and is now located in Guam .
 Starting in mid-June 1944, Iwo Jima came under sustained aerial bombardment and naval artillery fire .
 Iwo Jima Raising the Flag is one of the most recognizable images of the war . Joe Rosenthal's photograph won the Pulitzer Prize for Photography in the same year as its publication .
 Four divisions of the United States 10th Army (the 7th, 27th, 77th, and 96th) and two Marine Divisions fought on the island . The island was supported by naval, amphibious, and tactical air forces .
 Some islands that saw major battles, such as Iwo Jima, were uninhabited or previously evacuated . Some of the islands where major battles took place were previously unhabited .
 It also included Germany's demilitarization, reparations, and prosecution of war criminals . Germany's war crimes were prosecuted in the aftermath of the war .
 Truman mentioned an unspecified ""powerful new weapon"" to Stalin during the conference, a reference to the nuclear bombs just developed by the U.S. Towards the end, Japan was given an ultimatum to surrender or meet ""prompt and utter destruction,"" but Prime Minister Kantaro
 Truman became aware of possible complications at the Potsdam Conference . Stalin objected to Churchill's proposal for an early Allied withdrawal from Iran ahead of schedule agreed at the Tehran Conference .
 Agreement on war reparations to the Soviet Union from their zone of occupation in Germany . Agreement on reparations was reached in 1950s .
 German standards of living did not exceed the European average . Ensuring that German standards were at the highest level of living .
 Destruction of German industrial war-potential through the destruction or control of all industry with military potential . Destruction of Germany's industrial war potential through destruction of all industrial potential .
 A Provisional Government of National Unity recognized by all three powers should be created in Poland . Poles who were serving in the British Army should be free to return to Poland, with no security upon their return to the communist country guaranteed . The provisional western border of Poland should be the Oder
 The bombings' role in Japan's surrender and their ethical justification are still debated by historians and other scholars . The bombings’ role in the surrender and ethical justification of the bombings are debated .
 U.S. dropped nuclear weapons on Japanese cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki on August 6 and 9, 1945, during the final stage of World War I . The United States, with the consent of the United Kingdom as laid down in the Quebec Agreement, dropped the bombs .
 The Japanese, facing the same fate, refused to accept the Allies' demands for unconditional surrender and the Pacific War continued .
 On September 2, the U.S. signed the instrument of surrender, effectively ending World War I . The war ended on September 1, 1918 .
 Japan's geography made this invasion plan obvious to the Japanese . They were able to predict the Allied invasion plans accurately and adjust their defensive plan, Operation Ketsugo, accordingly . The Japanese government was able to adjust its defensive plan accordingly .
 The Japanese planned an all-out defense of Kyushu, with little left in reserve for any subsequent defense operations . The Japanese had little left to reserve for subsequent defense .
 This, together with the sea blockade and the collapse of Germany (with its implications regarding redeployment) could also have led to a Japanese surrender . This, along with the . sea blockade, could also lead to the surrender of the Japanese .
 World Hl 31.8.1: Terms of Surrender . The unconditional surrender of Germany on May 8, 1945, and Japan on September 2, 1945 .
 The German Instrument of Surrender ended World War II in Europe on the night of May 8, 1945 . The terms of Germany's unconditional surrender had been discussed since January 1944 .
 Allied powers negotiated peace treaties with minor Axis powers, namely Italy, Romania, Hungary, Bulgaria, and Finland, following the end of World War II in 1945 . Paris Peace Treaties was a series of document wherein victorious wartime Allied powers negotiate details of peace treaties .
 The first instrument of surrender signed at Reims on May 7, 1945 . The German Instrument of Surrender was signed by the Germans at the end of WWII .
 The Treaty of Peace with Italy (one of the Paris Peace Treaties) was signed on February 10, 1947 . It formally ended hostilities between Italy and the victorious powers of World War II .
 Articles 47 and 48 called for the demolition of all permanent fortifications along the Franco-Italian and Yugoslav-Italian frontier . Article 47 called for demolition of the fortifications . Article 48 said that all fortifications should be demolished .
 Some 75 million people died in World War II, including about 20 million military personnel and 40 million civilians . Many of whom died because of deliberate genocide, massacres, mass-bombings, disease, and starvation .
 World War II was the deadliest military conflict in history in terms of total dead . 75 million people casualties including military and civilians . Many civilians died because of deliberate genocide, massacres, mass-bombings, disease, and starvation .
 This represents the most military deaths of any nation by a large margin . The deaths of U.S. military personnel are the most in the history of the world .
 Of the total number of deaths in World War I, approximately 85 percent were on the Allied side and 15 percent on the Axis side . Many of these deaths were caused by war crimes committed by German and Japanese forces in occupied territories .
 Nazi Germany systematically killed over 11 million people including 6 million Jews . Nazi Germany, as part of a deliberate program of extermination, systematically killed 6 million people .
 Mitsuyoshi Himeta reported that 2 million casualties occurred during the Sanko Sakusen . Mitsuyoshimeta reported 2. million casualties .
 No positive or specific customary international humanitarian law with respect to aerial warfare existed before or during World War I . However, there was no specific law regarding aerial warfare in the U.S. prior to World War II .
 Soviet gulags led to the death of citizens of occupied countries such as Poland, Lithuania, Latvia, and Estonia, as well as German prisoners of war and Soviet citizens thought to be Nazi supporters .
 Adherents of the Atlantic Charter signed the Declaration by United Nations on January 1, 1942 . The Declaration was the basis for the modern United Nations .
 Churchill stated that the Charter was only meant to apply to states under German occupation and not to people who formed part of the British Empire . Churchill's statement became controversial and resulted in strong pushback from figures such as Gandhi .
 There was to be global economic cooperation and advancement of social welfare; 6. There was also to be social cooperation and . advancement of . social welfare . 6.50 per cent of the world’s economic and social welfare, according to the UN .
 Adherents of the Atlantic Charter signed the Declaration by United Nations on January 1, 1942 . It became the basis for the modern United Nations . There was to be disarmament of aggressor nations and a post-war common disarmament .
 Winston Churchill's edited copy of the final draft of the Atlantic Charter . Churchill's version of the Charter was published in the 1920s and 1930s .
 The Universal Declaration of Human Rights arose directly from the experience of the Second World War . It represents the first global expression of what many believe are the rights to which all human beings are inherently entitled .
 The Declaration consists of thirty articles which, although not legally binding, have been elaborated in subsequent international treaties, economic transfers, regional human rights instruments, national constitutions, and other laws . e The United Nations was established in 1945 to replace the ineffectual League of Nations . e
 A replacement for the ineffective League of Nations, the organization was established after World War II to prevent another such conflict . It was established in 1946 to prevent a repeat of the World War Two conflict .
 Soviet aggression was fundamentally not aligned with the views of the Russian people or with economic reality, but rooted in historic Russian nationalism and neurosis . e The Soviet government's structure inhibited objective or accurate pictures of internal and external reality . e
 Kennan argued that Stalin would not moderate the supposed Soviet determination to overthrow Western governments . Kennan argues that Stalin will not moderate his supposed desire to overthrow the West .
 NATO an intergovernmental military alliance signed on April 4, 1949 and including the five Treaty of Brussels states (Belgium, the Netherlands, Luxembourg, France, and the United Kingdom) plus the United States, Canada, Portugal, Italy, Norway, Denmark, and Iceland . A term
 Churchill feared that the U.S. might return to its prewar isolationism, leaving the exhausted European states unable to resist Soviet demands . In particular, Churchill feared the United States might return .
 The phrase /ron curtain gained popularity as a shorthand reference to the division of Europe as the Cold War strengthened .
 Politicians and writers may strive to conceal the truth of the achievements of the Soviet order and Soviet culture, but all their efforts are foredoomed .
 Marxist-Leninists support the ideas of a vanguard party, one-party state, state-dominance over the economy, internationalism, opposition to bourgeois democracy, and opposition to capitalism .
 Viadimir Lenin was the leader of the Soviet Union from 1917 to 1924 . He was one of the most influential figures of the 20th Century .
 That turn toward national communism was a shift from the previously held Marxist position that socialism must be established globally (world communism) It was in opposition to Leon Trotsky's theory of permanent revolution . That turn from the Marxist position was opposed by Leon Trotsky .
 The Soviet Union, officially the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, was a federation of Soviet Republics that were outwardly independent nations, but existed essentially as satellite states under the control of Russian power . During the opening stages of World War Il, the Soviet Union laid the foundation for the
 The defining characteristic of communism implemented in the Eastern Bloc was the unique symbiosis of the state with society and the economy, resulting in politics and economics losing their distinctive features as autonomous and distinguishable spheres . Politics and economics are no longer distinct and autonomous spheres .
 The Hungarian Revolution of 1956 or the Hungarian Uprising of 1956 was a revolt against the government of the Hungarian People's Republic and its Soviet-imposed policies . The revolt lasted from October 23 until November 10, 1956 .
 As a result, the country underwent a period of rapid industrialization and collectivization which laid the foundation for its victory in World War Il and post-war dominance of Eastern Europe .
 The Soviet Union created the Eastern Bloc by invading and then annexing several countries as Soviet Socialist Republics by agreement with Nazi Germany in the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact . During the opening stages of World War Il, the Soviet Union invaded several countries .
 EASTERN BLOC AREA BORDER CHANGES 1938 TO 1948 USSR 1938 | BD expsnded’Ssrs iz | Satellite States Soviet Republics Eastern Bloc area border changes between 1938 and 1948 . USSR 1938 to 1948 USSR .
 Culture of the Soviet Union passed through several stages during the USSR's 69-year existence . Culture passed through various stages during that period, from relative freedom to repressive control and censorship .
 During Stalin era, art and culture was put under strict control . Public displays of Soviet life were limited to optimistic, positive, and realistic depictions of the Soviet man and woman . Socialist realism was a style called socialist realism .
 The Soviet government began an all-out war on organized religion in the early 1930s . atheism was vigorously promoted by the government . Despite the strict censorship of the arts and the repression of political dissidence, the Soviet people benefited from some social liberalization .
 Daniil Kharms, Osip Mandelstam, Isaac Babel, and Boris Pilnyak were imprisoned and killed or died of starvation . Many writers were imprisoned, killed or starved, many of whom died in prison .
 In 1930 around 20,000 ""kulaks"" were killed by the Soviet government . Widespread famine ensued from collectivization and affected Ukraine, southern Russia, and other parts of the USSR . The Holodomor, considered a genocide by many historians, killed an estimated 2
 Planners regarded collectivization as the solution to the crisis of agricultural distribution (mainly in grain deliveries) that began in 1927 . Collectivization was a solution to agricultural distribution crisis that started in 1927.
 If Soviet policies and actions were conclusively documented as intending to eradicate the rise of Ukrainian nationalism, they would fall under the legal definition of genocide . The Soviet policies would be conclusively proven to have intended to eradicate Ukrainian nationalism .
 Truman Doctrine was created to contain Soviet geopolitical soread during the Cold War . Truman Doctrine first announced to Congress by President Harry S Truman on March 12, 1947 .
 Truman Doctrine created to counter Soviet geopolitical soread during the Cold War . Truman Doctrine was announced by Harry S Truman to Congress in 1947 .
 Soviet imperialism in Eastern Europe, its withdrawal from lran, and breakdown of Allied cooperation in Germany provided a backdrop of escalating tensions for the Truman Doctrine .
 In 1947, Britain, France, and the United States unsuccessfully attempted to reach an agreement with the Soviet Union for a plan envisioning an economically self-sufficient Germany . The plan was part of the Marshall Plan .
 The years 1948 to 1952 saw the fastest period of growth in European history . Industrial production increased by 35%, some of which has been attributed to the Marshall Plan aid . Some of the growth was due to aid from the Marshall plan .
 The Soviet Union refused the aid because Stalin believed economic integration with the West would allow Eastern Bloc countries to escape Soviet control . Stalin believed that economic integration would allow the West to escape the Soviet Union .
 Soviet Union created the Molotov Plan, later expanded into COMECON, a system of bilateral trade agreements and an economic alliance between socialist countries in the Eastern Bloc . In response to the Soviet Union's economic collapse, the Soviet plan was created .
 The Marshall Plan (officially the European Recovery Program) was an American initiative to aid Western Europe . The U.S. gave over $12 billion in economic support to help rebuild Western European economies after the end of World War II .
 Potsdam Agreement is the 1945 agreement between three of the Allies of World War II, United Kingdom, United States, and USSR, for the military occupation and reconstruction of Germany . The 1945 agreement was the agreement between the UK, U.S. and the USSR for the reconstruction of
 Neither side wanted a war; the Soviets did not disrupt the airlift . Berliners watch a Douglas C-54 Skymaster land at Tempelhof Airport, 1948 .
 Czechoslovak coup d'état by the Communists had overthrown a democratic government . British Foreign Minister Ernest Bevin reiterated that the best way to prevent another Czechoslovakia was to evolve a joint Western military strategy . In addition, the 1948 Czechoslovaks coup d’ét
 Although obliged to respond, they maintain the freedom to choose the method by which they do so . They maintain the right to respond to questions about their actions .
 This policy stated that in the event of an attack from an aggressor, a state would massively retaliate with force disproportionate to the size of the attack, thus deterring an enemy state from initially attacking . This policy was implemented in the 1990s .
 Krushchev developed a similar policy in the USSR, aimed at cutting military soending while creating a nuclear program to match the U.S. The Soviets acquired atomic weapons in 1949, but it took years for them to reach parity with the US .
 An important part of the Cold War nuclear competition was the concept of mutual assured destruction . A full-scale use of nuclear weapons by two sides would cause the complete annihilation of both the attacker and the defender .
 MAD is based on the theory of deterrence, which holds that the threat of using strong weapons against the enemy prevents the enemy's use of those same weapons . MAD is a theory that uses strong weapons to deter the enemy from using them against each other .
 Democrats lost their two-decades-long control of the U.S. presidency . Dwight D Eisenhower was sworn in as United States President in 1953 . The Democrats lost two decades of power .
 Discussion of nuclear war in the first authoritative Soviet monograph on strategy since the 1920s . Marshal Vasilii Sokolovskili's ""Military Strategy,"" focused upon the use of nuclear weapons for fighting rather than for deterring a war .
 The Space Race had its Origins in the missile-based nuclear arms race between the two nations following World War I. e The technological superiority required for such Supremacy was seen as necessary for national security and symbolic of ideological superiority .
 The Soviets earned an early lead in the Space Race in 1957 with the launching of Sputnik, the first artificial satellite, followed by the first manned flight . The Soviets were the first to launch a manned manned flight in 1961 .
 The success of the Soviet space program was a great shock to the United States, which believed it was ahead technologically . The ability to launch objects into orbit was especially ominous because it showed Soviet missiles could target anywhere .
 American President John F Kennedy launched an unprecedented effort to land a man on the moon in the 1960s . President Kennedy promised that by the end of the decade Americans would land a moon .
 It had its origins in the missile-based nuclear arms race between the two nations following World War Il . It was aided by captured German missile technology and personnel from their missile program .
 The fear for the American people was not the satellite itself but more so the rocket that put Sputnik into orbit . Overall, wnat caused the fear of the U.S. people .
 By 1959, American observers believed the Soviet Union would be the first to get a human into space because of the time needed to prepare for Mercury's first launch . The Soviet Union was believed to have been the first country to launch a man into space .
 After achieving orbit, Armstrong and Aldrin transferred into the Lunar Module named Eagle . The landing gear inspection by Collins was carried out in the Command/Service Module Co/umbia .
 The Marshall Plan had bolstered economic recovery, so the United States was less concerned with losing Western Europe to Soviet influence . U.S. was less worried about losing Europe to the Soviet Union .
 The U.S. focused on the Third World after the Second World War . African and Asian decolonization followed the emergence of left-leaning leaders in Latin America .
 The Soviet Union propagated a role as the leader of the ""anti-imperialist" camp, currying favor in the Third World as a staunch opponent of colonialism . In such an international setting, the Soviet Union was seen as an international leader .
 Non-Aligned Movement, led by India, Egypt, and Austria, attempted to unite the third world against what was seen as imperialism by both the East and the West . Many Third World nations did not want to align themselves with either of the superpowers .
 By the 1960s, Marxists gained increasing influence throughout the regions, prompting fears in the United States that Latin American instability posed a threat to national security . e This era also saw battles for ideological alignment in the Congo, Indonesia, and Iran . e
 The term refers to the dismantlement of the colonial empires established prior to World War II . The term was used to refer to the dismantling of colonial empires throughout the world .
 Patrice Lumumba was the prime minister of the Republic of the Congo . He was killed during a U.S. backed coup d'état .
 Its audience increased substantially following the failed Berlin riots of 1953 and the highly publicized defection of J6zef Swiatto .
 The aims were to regain Western control of the Suez Canal and remove Egyptian President Gamal Abdel Nasser from power . The invasion was poorly planned and Eisenhower persuaded the United Kingdom and France to retreat . It was an international embarrassment and emboldened the USSR and Egypt .
 The Suez stalemate was a turning point heralding an ever-growing rift between the Atlantic Cold War allies . As a result of the conflict, the United Nations created the UNEF Peacekeepers to police the Egyptian-lsraeli border .
 The area also had vast reserves of oil, not crucial for either superpower in the 1950s . The area was essential for the rapidly rebuilding American allies Europe and Japan .
 The Hungarian Revolution of 1956 occurred shortly after Khrushchev arranged the removal of Hungary's Stalinist leader Matyas Rakosi . The new regime was soon crushed by the Soviet army .
 Hungarian Revolution of 1956 occurred shortly after Khrushchev arranged the removal of Hungary's Stalinist leader Matyas Rakosi . Examine the circumstances surrounding the Hungarian uprising .
 In response to a popular uprising, the new regime formally disbanded the secret police, declared its intention to withdraw from the Warsaw Pact, and pledged to re-establish free elections . The new regime declared its intentions to withdraw and withdraw .
 Thousands of Hungarians were arrested, imprisoned, and deported to the Soviet Union . Approximately 200,000 Hungarians fled Hungary in the chaos .
 In 1949 the leader of the Hungarian Catholic Church, Cardinal J6zsef Mindszenty, was arrested and sentenced to life imprisonment for treason . In 1949 he was sentenced to a life sentence for treason in Hungary .
 Some observers (including George Kennan) believed that the Japanese treaty led Stalin to approve a plan to invade U.S.-supported South Korea on June 25, 1950 .
 Its central objective, the unification of the Korean peninsula under the Kim Il-Sung regime, was not achieved . Its central aim was to unify the Korean Peninsula under the regime .
 Berlin divided between East and West since the end of World War I . Berlin was divided between the West and the Soviet Union . Learning Objective Deconstruct Soviet Union's reasons for building the Berlin Wall Key Points .
 With the closing of the East-West sector boundary in Berlin, the vast majority of East Germans could no longer travel or emigrate to West Germany . Berlin soon went from the easiest place to make an unauthorized crossing between the East and West Germany to the most difficult .
 Inner German border was the border between the German Democratic Republic and the Federal Republic of Germany from 1949 to 1990 . The border was Germany's border between 1949 and 1990 .
 Constructed by the German Democratic Republic starting on August 13, 1961, the Wall completely cut off West Berlin from surrounding East Germany and from East Berlin . The Wall was opened in November 1989 .
 The barrier included guard towers placed along large concrete walls, which circumscribed a wide area (later Known as the ""death strip"") that contained anti-vehicle trenches, ""fakir beds,"" and other defenses . The area was later known as "the death strip"
 If the United States tried to bargain with the Soviets after becoming aware of the missiles, Knrushchev could demand trading the missiles for West Berlin .
 Mauritania, Senegal, French Sudan (now Mali), French Guinea, Céte d’Ilvoire, Upper Volta, Dahomey, and Niger were all ruled out of Senegal, Senegal .
 A photo of a white French ""Section Chief"" being pushed on a rail cart by two black African workers in Mali, 1904 . The photo was taken in the building of the Dakar-Niger Railway .
 Senegal and former French Sudan became the Mali Federation . Céte d’lvoire, Niger, Upper Volta and Dahomey subsequently formed the short-lived Sahel-Benin Union, later the Conseil de |'Entente .
 The FLN turned to killing civilians during the Philippeville Massacre, which brought on harsh retaliation by the French army . The French army responded with harsh retaliation .
 After major demonstrations in favor of independence from the end of 1960, De Gaulle decided to open a series of negotiations with the FLN . The negotiations concluded with the signing of the Evian Accords in 1962 .
 The Algerian War was fought between France and the Algerian National Liberation Front from 1954 to 1962 . The war led to Algerian independence from France .
 Toussaint Rouge was started by members of the National Liberation Front on November 1, 1954 . The conflict shook the foundations of the weak and unstable Fourth French Republic and led to its replacement by the Fifth Republic with Charles de Gaulle .
 An important watershed in the War of Independence was the massacre of Pieds-Noirs civilians by the FLN near Philippeville (now known as Skikda) in August 1955 .
 France's exile of Sultan Mohammed V in 1953 to Madagascar sparked active opposition to the French and Spanish protectorates . The Sultan's replacement by the unpopular Mohammed Ben Aarafa sparked opposition to France and Spain .
 The Second Moroccan War was fought in the early 1920s between Spain and the Berbers of the Rif mountainous region . The war was fought between colonial power Spain and Berber Berbers in the region .
 Several divisions of Moroccan soldiers served in the French army in both World War | and World War Il, and in Spanish Nationalist Army in the Spanish Civil War and after . Moroccan soldiers also served in World War I, I and II .
 Spain ceded most of its protectorate in Northern Morocco to the new state . Spain kept its two coastal enclaves on the Mediterranean coast . A month later, Spain kept most of Northern Morocco .
 He was also intent on preventing the Istiglal from consolidating its control and establishing a one-party state .
 Idris al-Mahdi as-Senussi led the Libyan resistance to Italian occupation between the two world wars . He was the Emir of Cyrenaica, who fought Italian occupation of Libya .
 A French term used during the colonial era to refer to a native African or Asian who had ""evolved"" by becoming Europeanised through education or assimilation and accepted European values and patterns of behavior .
 One of the results of these measures was the development of a new middle class of Europeanised African ""évolués"" in the cities .
 An African nationalist movement developed in the Belgian Congo during the 1950s . It was primarily among the évo/ués .
 It was increasingly polarized between moderate évolés and the more radical mass membership . The party was increasingly divided between moderate and radical .
 The nationalist parties' influence expanded outside the major cities for the first time . Demonstrations and riots became a regular occurrence over the next year, bringing large numbers of black people .
 This led to growing differences with President Joseph Kasa-Vubu and chief-of-staff Joseph-Désiré Mobutu . The U.S. and Belgium also had opposition from the United States .
 Dag Hammarskjold refused to use UN peacekeepers to help fight secessionists in Léopoldville . The United Nations deployed peacekeepers but did not use them to help the central government fight the secessionists .
 Joseph-Désiré Mobutu was the military dictator and President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (which was renamed Zaire in 1971) from 1965 to 1997 . He formed an authoritarian regime, amassed vast personal wealth, and attempted to purge the country of all colonial cultural
 The combined effects of two great European wars weakened the political and economic domination of Latin America, Asia, Africa, and the Middle East by European powers . Decolonization tn the Cold War led to the end of European domination in Latin America .
 Mobutu's critics say he invented the plot as an excuse to purge the military of talented officers who might otherwise pose a threat to his rule . Many people viewed these charges with skepticism; many people viewed them with skepticism .
 The Smith administration initially professed continued loyalty to Queen Elizabeth II, but abandoned this in 1970 . It declared a republic in an unsuccessful attempt to win foreign recognition .
 In 1965, Rhodesia declared independence from the United Kingdom as Rhodesia, which led to sanctions from the UN . The United Kingdom deemed the Rhodesian declaration an act of rebellion, but did not re-establish control by force .
 Lancaster House Agreement Negotiations in 1980 that brought internationally recognized independence to Rhodesia (as the Republic of Zimbabwe) following lan Smith's Unilateral Declaration of Independence in 1965 . lan Smith was Prime Minister of Rhodesia from 1964 to 1979 .
 Robert Mugabe rose to prominence in the 1960s as the leader of the Zimbabwe African National Union during the conflict against the conservative white-minority government of Rhodesia . He has ruled the nation since 1980, first as Prime Minister and then as President in 1987 .
 Much of South Africa's history is characterized by clashes of culture, violent territorial disoutes between European settlers and indigenous people . South Africa 33.1: Imperialism in South Africa .
 In 1652, a century and a half after the discovery of the Cape sea route, Jan van Riebeeck established a refreshment station at the Cape of Good Hope . The Dutch transported slaves from Indonesia, Madagascar, and India as labor for the colonists in Cape Town .
 The Anglo-Zulu War was fought in 1879 between the British Empire and the Zulu Kingdom, ending in a Zulu defeat . After winning the First Boer War, the Boers were ultimately defeated . Within the country, anti-British policies among white South Africans focused on
 The Zulu nation spectacularly defeated the British at the Battle of Isandlwana . The Battle of the Zulus nation was fought at Isandwwana .
 The 1913 Natives’ Land Act earmarked only eight percent of South Africa's available land for black occupancy . Cape Colony, Natal Colony, Transvaal Colony, and Orange River Colony were among the colonies .
 In 1931 the union was fully sovereign from the United Kingdom with the passage of the Statute of Westminster, which abolished the last powers of the British Government .
 The British High Commission territories of Basutoland (now Lesotho), Bechuanaland , Swaziland, and Rhodesia continued under direct rule from Britain .
 Racist legislation during the apartheid era was a continuation and extension of discriminatory and segregationist laws that began in 1856 under Dutch rule in the Cape and continued throughout the country under British colonialism .
 After a long and sometimes violent struggle by the African National Congress and other anti-apartheid activists, discriminatory laws began to be repealed or abolished in 1990 . The laws were abolished in South Africa in 1990 after a long struggle against apartheid .
 The Kingdom of Egypt was established in 1922 following the Unilateral Declaration of Egyptian Independence . The Kingdom was only nominally independent since the British continued to have varying degrees of political control and military presence until 1952 .
 British protectorate over Egypt ended by the Unilateral Declaration of Egyptian Independence on February 28, 1922 . Explain the ties between Britain and Egypt after the establishment of an independent Egyptian state .
 Britain went to war against Egypt over the Suez Canal in late 1956, but with insufficient international support was forced to back down . After the Egyptian Revolution of 1952, the British agreed to withdraw their troops by June 1956 .
 The tensions began on August 18 when the Syrian government presided by Shukri al-Quwatli made a series of provocative institutional changes, such as the appointment of Col. Col. Omar Ghitis .
 Afif al-Bizri, the Syrian army's chief of staff, soearheaded the union with Egypt . The Syrian army chief-of-staff is the country's most senior commander .
 Sadat made a historic visit to Israel in 1977, which led to the 1979 peace treaty in exchange for Israeli withdrawal from Sinai . e Sadat launched the Infitah economic reform policy, creating an ""open door"" for foreign investment while clamping down on religious and secular opposition .
 After Israel lost the defensive war, Egypt and Israel came together for negotiations with Israel . The Egypt-lsrael Peace Treaty in which Israel traded the Sinai to Egypt for peace .
 The accords led to the March 26, 1979, signing of the Egypt-lIsrael Peace Treaty . Egypt regained control of the Sinai in May 1982 . The peace treaty was signed in 1979 .
 The Ottoman Empire was driven out of nearly all of Europe and North Africa by 1914 . The Second Constitutional Era began after the Young Turk Revolution .
 Turkish War of Independence was fought between Turkish nationalists and the proxies of the Allies . It resulted in the founding of the Republic of Turkey in the Anatolian heartland and the abolition of the Ottoman monarchy .
 Their leaders led a rebellion against the absolute rule of Sultan Abdul Hamid II in the 1908 Young Turk Revolution . Later, their leaders led an uprising against the Sultan's absolute rule .
 The Ottoman Empire, also known as the Turkish Empire, was founded at the end of the 13th century in northwestern Anatolia in the vicinity of Bilecik and Sd6gut . It was founded by the Oghuz Turkish tribal leader Osman .
 The Ottoman Empire entered World War II after the Goeben and Breslau incident . Ottoman Empire gave safe harbor to two German ships that were fleeing British ships . Turkish Empire entered the war after the incident .
 The Ottomans were forced to evacuate the parts of the former Russian Empire in the Caucasus after the end of World War | after Russia's retreat from the war with the Russian Revolution in 1917 . They had gained territory in present-day Georgia, Armenia, and Azerbaijan .
 During the Greek War of Independence, Russia established major influence and power over the Ottoman Empire . During the war, Russia became a major power in Greece . The Russian Empire was ruled by Russia during the early 1900s .
 Crimean War was part of a long-running contest between the major European powers for influence over territories of the Empire . The Crimean War focused on the rights of Christian minorities in the Holy Land, which was a part of the Ottoman Empire . It was the Crimean War, part of this long
 The continuing collapse of the Ottoman Empire led to two wars in the Balkans, in 1912 and 1913, which in turn was a prelude to world war . World War One was the first war in which the Balkans was involved in the conflict .
 His surname, Ataturk , was granted to him in 1934 and forbidden to any other person by the Turkish parliament . His surname was granted by Turkish parliament in 1934 .
 The Turkish War of Independence (May 19, 1919 July 24, 1923) was fought between the Turkish nationalists and the proxies of the Allies . Few of the present British, French, and Italian troops were deployed or engaged in combat in the war .
 Ethnic cleansing of Armenians during the final years of the Ottoman Empire is widely considered a genocide, with an estimated 1. million victims . Learning Objective Deconstruct the arguments for and against referring to these events as a genocide .
 A wave of persecution in the years 1894 to 1896 culminated in the events of the Armenian Genocide in 1915 and 1916 . The Armenian Genocide took place in 1916 and 1917 .
 The Ottoman Empire accused the Armenians as liable to ally with Imperial Russia, and used this as a pretext to deal with the entire Armenian population as an enemy within their empire . With World War | in progress, the Ottoman Empire used this pretext as an excuse for dealing with the Armenian population
 In 1915, the Russian Caucasus Army continued to advance in eastern Anatolia . Ottoman government decided to issue the Tehcir Law, which started the deportation of ethnic Armenians .
 Widespread rape, mass burnings, drownings, and other atrocities were an integral part of the genocide . Rape, mass murder, mass rape, and drownings were among the atrocities committed by the West .
 'the Armenians are in league with the enemy. In order to justify this enormous crime the requisite propaganda material was thoroughly prepared in Istanbul' 'the Armenianians are . in . league with . the enemy,' says Turkish President Vladimir Putin . 'The Armenians were in league . with
 Armenian Genocide estimated to be between 800,000 and 1,500,000 . Other estimates range up to 1,800,000 people killed in the Armenian genocide .
 Armenia was briefly an independent republic from 1918 to 1920 . Diaspora includes Armenians in the Armenian diaspora . Armenia is now home to the Armenian community .
 The understanding between the three powers, supplemented by agreements with Japan and Portugal, constituted a powerful counterweight to the Triple Alliance of Germany, Austria-Hungary, and the Kingdom of Italy . Italy did not side with Germany and Austria during World War I.
 France got control of southeastern Turkey, northern Iraq, Syria, Syria and Lebanon . France also took control of northern Iraq and Syria .
 The French Mandate for Syria and the Lebanon lasted from 1923 to 1946 . They also ruled Mandatory Irag from 1920 until 1932, while the French Mandated Syria and Lebanon lasted until 1946 .
 The terms were negotiated by British diplomat Mark Sykes and French counterpart, Francois Georges-Picot . The terms of the deal were reached by a British and French diplomat .
 Foreign Secretary Arthur James Balfour wrote to Walter Rothschild, 2nd Baron Rothschild, for transmission to the Zionist Federation of Great Britain and Ireland . Letter dated November 1917 from the United Kingdom's Foreign Secretary .
 British civil administration in Palestine operated from 1920 until 1948 . The British Civil Administration in Palestine was established between 1920 and 1948 .
 Palestine, Mesopotamia (later Iraq), and control of the coastal strip between the Mediterranean Sea and the River Jordan . Later Iraq, Palestine and Mesopotamia (later later Iraq) were conquered .
 Faisal was a son of Sharif Hussein, who helped lead the Arab Revolt against the Ottoman Empire . Transjordan provided a throne for another of Hussein's sons Abdullah .
 Most of the Arabian peninsula fell to another British ally, lbn Saud, who created the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia in 1932 . Saudi Arabia is now the most important country in the world .
 Britain supported the establishment of a united Arab state covering a large area of the Arab Middle East in exchange for Arab support of the British during the war . The Arab state was a large part of the Middle East .
 After WWI, Syria and Lebanon became a French protectorate (thinly disguised as a League of Nations Mandate) French control was met immediately with armed resistance . To combat Arab nationalism France divided the Mandate area into Lebanon and four substates .
 Syria proclaimed its independence again in 1941 but was not recognized as an independent republic until January 1, 1944 . Syria declared its independence in 1941 and was recognized as a republic in 1944 .
 France bombed Damascus and tried to arrest its democratically elected leaders, but continued pressure from Syrian nationalist groups forced the French to evacuate their last troops on April 17, 1946 .
 The legal status for certain territories transferred from the control of one country to another following World War I . League of Nations mandate included the legal instruments that contained the internationally agreed-upon terms for administering the territory on behalf of the League .
 Damascus, Aleppo, Alawites, Jabal Druze and the autonomous Sanjak of Alexandretta (1921, modern-day Hatay), became later the modern country of Lebanon . Greater Lebanon was later the State of Greater Lebanon .
 State of Damascus MANDATORY IRAQ Mandate for Syria and the Lebanon is22 Sent me Oruee Mate S. States created Sering the French Mancate .
 Treaty of Sevres granted France the mandate of Syria, and granted Britain the Mandate of Palestine and Iraq . Treaty of 1920 was formed by inter-Allied council .
 With the fall of France in 1940 during World War Il, Syria came under the control of the Vichy Government until the British and Free French invaded and occupied the country in July 1941 .
 Popular opposition to APOC's royalty terms was widespread and created political discontent throughout the country . In 1941, during World War Il, Britain and the USSR invaded Iran, exiled Reza Shah, and put his son, Reza Pahlavi, onto the throne .
 Following WWII, nationalistic sentiments were on the rise in the Middle East . The Iranian parliament voted to nationalize the oil industry . At the same time, the public elected Mohammed Mossadegh as Prime Minister, causing the Abadan Crisis .
 Britain was unable to subvert Mossadegh, so British and American intelligence agencies orchestrated a coup d'état to overthrow him and bring Reza Pahlavi back onto the throne . Britain and the U.S. orchestrated the coup to overthrow Mossadgh and bring Pahl
 By 1954, oil production started again under the control of a new cartel named the ""Seven Sisters,"" completely based outside the Middle East . The cartel was created by pro-Western leaders .
 Abadan Crisis Occurred from 1951 to 1954 after Iran nationalized the Iranian assets of the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company and expelled Western companies from oil refineries in the city of Abadan .
 APOC managers negotiated with Winston Churchill shortly before World War I . Churchill was then First Lord of the Admiralty of Britain . APOC managed to negotiate with Churchill, who was First Lord in Admiralty .
 Britain and the USSR saw the newly opened Trans-Iranian Railway as an attractive route to transport supplies, including oil, from the Persian Gulf to the Soviet Union . The railway was opened in the 1920s and 1930s .
 AlOC and the pro-western Iranian government initially resisted nationalist pressure to revise AlOC's concession terms further in Iran's favor . The pro-Western Iranian government led by Prime Minister Ali Razmara initially resisted national pressure to change terms .
 AlIOC withdrew from Iran and increased output of its other reserves in the Persian Gulf . The move was prompted by a decision to withdraw from the country .
 Britain’s boycott of Iranian oil eliminated a major source of government revenue and made Iranians poorer and thus unhappier by the day . At the same time, however, his coalition was weakening as the boycott of Iran oil was weakening . Iran's government was weakened by the boycott,
 British Petroleum was forced to accept membership in a consortium of companies that would bring Iranian oil back on the international market . Under pressure from the U.S., British Petroleum accepted membership in the consortium .
 After World War II and the destruction of Jewish life in Central and Eastern Europe, alternative movements were rooted . Zionism became the dominant view about a Jewish national state . Zionism was dominant view of a Jewish state .
 In 1923, the land of Palestine, previously under the control of the Ottoman Empire, was made a British Mandate by the League of Nations . During WWI, the British made conflicting promises to the Arab and Jewish populations of Palestine . In 1937, following a six-month-long
 At the beginning of WWII, in 1939, the British put a limit on the immigration of Jews into Palestine . The British put the limit on Jewish immigration in Palestine at the start of WWII .
 After World War I, in August 1945 President Truman asked for the admission of 100,000 Holocaust survivors into Palestine, but the British maintained limits on Jewish immigration . By 1947, the British announced their desire to terminate the Palestine Mandate and placed the Question of Palestine before the United Nations .
 The recommendations triggered violent demonstrations in the Arab states and calls fora Jihad and an annihilation of all European Jews in Palestine .
 UN created UNSCOP (UN Special Committee on Palestine) on May 15, 1947, with representatives from 11 countries . The UN created the committee in 1947 . The committee was created by the UN in 1947 with 11 countries, including the UK .
 Eretz-Israel is the traditional Jewish name for an area of indefinite geographical extension in the Southern Levant . It is also the name of the region where Israel is located .
 After World War Il, Britain found itself in intense conflict with the Jewish community over Jewish immigration limits . Britain also clashed with the Arab community over limit levels of immigration .
 The following day, the armies of four Arab countries—Egypt, Syria, Transjordan, and Irag—entered what had been British Mandatory Palestine, launching the 1948 Arab-Israeli War .
 During the 1948 Palestine War, around 85% (720,000 people) of the Palestinian Arab population of what became Israel were expelled from their homes, fleeing to the West Bank, the Gaza Strip, Lebanon, Syria and Jordan .
 85% of the Palestinian Arab population fled from their homes in what became known as the Palestinian Exodus of 1948 . Trace the Palestinian refugee populations in places such as Jordan .
 There is heated debate among historians and politicians as to the causes of the Exodus, and the status of this debate has bearing on the claim of Palestinians to their land .
 Displaced Palestinian Arabs, known as Palestinian refugees, settled in Palestinian refugee camps throughout the Arab world . Most fled to the West Bank, the Gaza Strip, Lebanon, Syria, and Jordan .
 Most Arab nations denied citizenship to the Palestinian refugees, except in Jordan, where most have citizenship or the equivalent rights of citizens . Most Arab countries denied citizenship .
 Relations between Israel and its neighboring Arab nations had never fully normalized following the 1948 Arab-Israeli War, fought immediately after the Israel declared itself an independent nation-state .
 The Six-Day War was fought between June 5 and 10, 1967, by Israel and the neighboring states of Egypt, Jordan, and Syria . It was also known as the June War, 1967 ArabIsraeli War, or Third Arab-Israeli War .
 On June 19, 1967, Israel voted to return Sinai to Egypt and the Golan Heights to Syria in return for peace agreements . The Sinai was returned to Egypt in exchange for peace deals with Syria .
 The king must comply with Sharia and the Quran, according to the Basic Law of Saudi Arabia . The Quran and the Sunnah (the traditions of Muhammad) are declared to be the country's constitution . Saudi Arabia's Basic Law was adopted by royal decree in 1992 .
 Abdul Aziz Ibn Saud, the first king of Saudi Arabia, ruled for 21 years . He ruled for more than a century . The first king ruled Saudi Arabia for 21 .
 Gulf War was a war waged by coalition forces from 34 nations led by the United States against Irag in response to Iraq's invasion and annexation of Kuwait . Gulf War ended in 1991 with the death of Saddam Hussein's son, Saddam Hussein .
 After the Great Arab Revolt against the Ottomans in 1916 during World War I, the Ottoman Empire was partitioned by Britain and France . The Ottoman Empire became the Arab Springered Ottoman Empire .
 During the first Gulf War Jordan's neutrality was damaged by its neutrality and its maintenance of relations with Iraq . Jordan and Iraq fought in the Gulf War . Jordan was neutral in the war, but maintained its neutrality in Iraq .
 Jordan restored its relations with Western countries through its participation in the enforcement of UN sanctions against Iraq and in the Southwest Asia peace process . Later, Jordan restored relations with the West through participation in UN sanctions on Iraq . Jordan also participated in the peace process in Southwest Asia .
 Most emirates have either disappeared, been integrated in a larger modern state or changed their rulers' styles . Learning Objective Compare and contrast the emirate of the Arabian Peninsula to the Arabian peninsula .
 True emirate-states have become rare, with only three in existence today . Only three emirates are emirated states in the world today .
 The United Arab Emirates is a federal state that comprises seven federal emirates . Each emirate is administered by a hereditary emir, administered by an emir .
 These form the electoral college for the federation's President and Prime Minister . The electoral college is made up of voters in the federation .
 The UAE is criticized for its human rights record, including the specific interpretations of Sharia law used in its legal system that make flogging and stoning legal punishments legal punishments .
 Qatar has the highest per capita income in the world . It is backed by the world's third largest natural gas reserves and oil reserves . Qatar is the most populous country in the Middle East .
 Kuwait is among the Middle East's freest countries in terms of civil liberties and political rights . Kuwaiti women are among the most emancipated in the Mideast, according to the UN .
 Major insurgencies and civil wars in Irag, Libya, Syria, and Yemen resulted, along with civil uprisings in Bahrain and Egypt . Large street demonstrations in Algeria, Iran, Lebanon, Jordan, Kuwait, Morocco, Oman, and Sudan; and minor protests in Djibout
 The United Arab Emirates borders with Oman to the east and Saudi Arabia to the south . It shares maritime borders with Qatar in the west and Iran in the north .
 Situated in the northern edge of Eastern Arabia at the tip of the Persian Gulf, it shares borders with Iraq and Saudi Arabia . The region is located in the north and south of the country .
 Oil companies unilaterally reduced their posted prices for Venezuelan and Middle Eastern crude oil by 10 percent . It was created in 1960 .
 The 1973 oil crisis began in October of that year when members of the Arab sub-group of OPEC proclaimed an oil embargo against the U.S. and other industrialized nations that supported Israel in the Yom Kippur War . The embargo was imposed against the United States, other industrialized
 By the end of the embargo in March 1974, the price of oil had risen from U.S. $3 per barrel to nearly $12 globally . Oil prices rose from $3 a barrel to $12 a year globally .
 The embargo caused an oil crisis, with many shortand long-term effects on global politics and economics . The embargo was the first oil embargo to hit the Middle East in 1973 .
 The 1979 oil crisis or oil Shock occurred in the U.S. due to decreased oil output in the wake of the Iranian Revolution . The 1979 crisis was caused by decreased output of oil from Iran .
 This was supported by various leftist and Islamist organizations and Iranian student movements . The Iranian student movement is supported by leftist groups and student groups .
 OPEC's members are Algeria, Angola, Ecuador, Gabon, Iran, Iraq, Kuwait, Libya, Nigeria, Qatar, Saudi Arabia (the de facto leader), United Arab Emirates, and Venezuela .
 In September 1960, the Baghdad Conference was held at the initiative of Tariki, Pérez Alfonzo, and Iraqi prime minister Abd al-Karim Qasim . The conference was held in September 1960 .
 In 1980, Iran's oil production in Iran nearly stopped following the outbreak of the Iran-Iraq War . Iraq's production was severely cut as well as Iran's in 1980 .
 He came to power during World War Il after an Anglo-Soviet invasion forced the abdication of his father, Reza Shah . He was born in Tehran, Iran .
 Mosaddgh became enormously popular in Iran after he nationalized its petroleum industry and oil reserves . He nationalized Iran's oil reserves and nationalized the country's petroleum industry . Mosaddoghgh was hugely popular after nationalizing Iran's petroleum reserves .
 Other factors contributed to strong opposition to the Shah among certain groups within Iran . United States and UK support for his regime, clashes with Islamists and increased communist activity .
 Explanations for why Mohammad Reza was overthrown include his status as a dictator put in place by a non-Muslim Western power . The U.S. was seen as influencing that of Iran .
 Iran was one of the United States’ closest allies until the fall of the shah in 1979 . In this era, the U.S. had a close relationship with Iran .
 The Shah's close ties to Washington and his Westernization policies soon angered some Iranians, especially the hardline Islamic conservatives . The Shah was the prime prime minister of Iran's first government .
 The reasons why the Shah was overthrown and replaced by an Islamic Republic are the subject of historical debate . The reasons behind the overthrow of the Shah are subject to debate .
 The revolution was in part a conservative backlash against the westernization and secularization efforts of the Western-backed Shah . It was a more popular reaction to social injustice and other shortcomings of the regime .
 The Shah was perceived by many Iranians as beholden to if not a puppet of a non-Muslim Western power whose culture was contaminating that of Iran . Many Iranians saw the Shah as beholding to the West as a Western power .
 The final collapse of the Pahlavi dynasty occurred Shortly after on February 11, when Iran's military declared itself ""neutral"" after guerrillas and rebel troops overwhelmed troops loyal to the Shah in armed street fighting . Iran became an Islamic Republic on April 1, 1979, when Iranians overwhelmingly
 Khomeini became Supreme Leader of the country in December 1979 . The new theocratic Constitution was approved in Dec. 1979 . It was the first theocratic constitution to be approved by the Supreme Court .
 Khomeini became Supreme Leader of the country in December 1979 . The royal reign collapsed shortly after on February 11, when guerrillas and rebel troops overwhelmed troops loyal to the Shah .
 Khomeini was released after eight months of house arrest . He continued his agitation, condemning Iran's close cooperation with Israel and its capitulations and extension of diplomatic immunity to American government personnel .
 While the revolution brought about some re-Islamization of Iran, it has not prompted a reversal of all modernization or a return to traditional patterns of family life .
 Autocratic monarchy was replaced by an Islamic Republic based on the principle of rule by Islamic jurists . Cleric serve as head of state and in many powerful governmental roles .
 On Jimmy Carter's final day in office, the last hostages were finally set free as a result of the Algiers Accords . Jimmy Carter was the president of the United States during his presidency .
 Group photograph of the fifty-two U.S. hostages in a hospital where they spent a few days after their release .
 Knomeini's 1989 fatwa call for the killing of British citizen Salman Rushdie for his allegedly blasphemous book, The Satanic Verses, demonstrated the willingness of Islamic revolutionaries to sacrifice trade and other ties with western countries to threaten an individual citizen living thousands of miles away .
 Following the 2005 election of President Mahmoud Ahmedinejad, Iran has returned to more a more hardline stance . Iran has frequently antagonized the west and its neighbors while battling for control over the region .
 The Leader of the Revolution is responsible for delineation and supervision of the general policies of the Islamic Republic of lran. He is the leader of the revolution .
 According to the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Iran, the powers of government are vested in the legislature, the judiciary, and the executive powers, functioning under the supervision of the ""Absolute Guardianship and the Leadership of the Ummah" which refers to the Supreme Leader of Iran
 The Constitution defines the President of Iran as the highest state authority . After the Supreme Leader, the President is the highest authority . Iran's President is Iran's president .
 On September 22, 1980, the Iragi army invaded the Iranian Khuzestan and the Iran-Iraq War began . The Iran-Iran war was the first of its kind in Iran .
 Ruhollah Khomeini began calling for Islamic revolutions across the Muslim world, including Iran's Arab neighbor Iraq . Iraq is the one large state besides Iran in the Gulf with a Shia Muslim majority population .
 The war began with Iraq's invasion of Iran in an attempt by Saddam Hussein to take advantage of the perceived post-revolutionary chaos and military weakness, as well as the Revolution's unpopularity with Western governments .
 By mid-1982 Iranian forces successfully managed to drive the Iraqi army back into Iraq . Although the forces of Saddam Hussein made several early advances, the forces were eventually defeated .
 In July 1982, with Irag thrown on the defensive, Iran invaded Iraq and conducted countless offensives . The war continued until 1988 when the Iraqi army defeated the Iranian forces inside Iraq and pushed the remaining Iranian troops back across the border . Subsequently, Khomeini accepted a truce
 Nuclear, radiological, chemical, biological or other weapons that can kill and bring significant harm to a large number of humans or cause great damage to human-made structures, natural structures or the biosphere . Weapons of mass destruction include nuclear weapons that kill and harm large numbers of humans .
 The Iran-Iraq War was an armed conflict between Iran and lraq lasting from September 22, 1980, when Iraq invaded Iran, to August 1988 . Iran and Iraq were involved in the war between 1979 and 1988 .
 The war followed a long history of border disputes and was motivated by fears that the Iranian Revolution in 1979 would inspire insurgency among Iraq's long-suppressed Shi'i majority .
 The conflict has been compared to World War | in terms of the tactics used . Barbed wire stretched across trenches, manned machine gun posts, bayonet charges and bayonet charge . Human wave attacks across a no man's land .
 The Security Council did not identify Iraq as the aggressor of the war until December 11, 1991, 12 years after Irag invaded Iran and 16 months after Iraq's invasion of Kuwait . Iraq was not officially identified as an aggressor by the U.N. Security Council .
 Since the Ottoman-Persian Wars of the 16th and 17th centuries, Iran and the Ottomans fought over Iraq and full control of the Shatt al-Arab . The Treaty of Zuhab in 1639 established the final borders between the countries .
 Iraq threatened war over the Iranian move, but did nothing . Iraq did nothing when an Iranian tanker escorted by Iranian warships sailed down the river . Iraq was the militarily weaker state .
 Iran's abrogation of the treaty marked the beginning of a period of acute Iragi-lranian tension that was to last until the Algiers Agreement in 1975 .
 In return for Iraq recognizing that the frontier on the waterway ran along the entire thalweg, Iran ended its support of Iraq's Kurdish guerrillas . The deal was made with Iraq in return for the return of support from Iran . In return, Iran agreed to end support
 Despite Iraq's goals of regaining the Shatt al-Arab, the Iraqi government seemed to initially welcome Iran's Revolution, which overthrew Iran's Shah, seen a common enemy . The Iraqi government has seen aS aS as an enemy .
 On July 17, 1979, despite Khomeini's call, Saddam gave a speech praising the Iranian Revolution . He called for an Iraqi-Iranian friendship based on non-interference in each other's internal affairs .
 When Khomeini rejected Saddam's overture by calling for Islamic revolution in Irag, Saddam was alarmed . Saddam was also alarmed by Khomini's rejection of the idea .
 With Iran engulfed in chaos, an opportunity for Irag to annex the oilrich Khuzestan Province materialized . The opportunity for Iran's oil rich province materialized in the chaos of chaos .
 Khuzestan's large ethnic Arab population would allow Saddam to pose as a liberator for Arabs from Persian rule . In addition to the large ethnic Arabs, Khuzstan has a large Arab population .
 Gulf states such as Saudi Arabia and Kuwait (despite being hostile to Iraq) encouraged Iraq to attack, as they feared an Islamic revolution would take place within their own borders .
 In 1958, Afghanistan’s prime minister Daud Khan tried to create a treaty with the Soviet Union . He was frightened of a potential Soviet invasion and needed modern weapons . The Soviet Union provided financial aid, military training, and modern weapons, such as AK-47s and rocket
 He abandoned the reforms of Amanullah Khan in favor of a more gradual approach to modernization . Khan was assassinated in 1933 by Abdul Khaliq, a Hazara school student .
 Zahir Shah was the last king of Afghanistan, who reigned from 1933 to 1973 . He ruled Afghanistan from 1933 until 1973, when he died in 1973 .
 After returning to Afghanistan, Daoud made plans to diminish his government's relationships with the Soviet Union . He wanted to forge closer contacts with the West as well as Saudi Arabia and Iran .
 He started military training programs with India and commenced economic development talks with Imperial lran. India .
 Fierce friction between factions of the PDPA resulted in dismissal of Parchami cabinet members and arrest of military officers under the pretext of a coup . Meanwhile, increasing friction between the rival factions resulted in the arrest and dismissal of cabinet members . The Khalq-Parcham faction is
 Amin became committed to establishing a collective leadership during his short stay in power (104 days) Amin had a short stay of power in 104 days . Amin was committed to setting up collective leadership . Amin died in 1975 at the hands of Soviet troops in Moscow .
 The Democratic Republic of Afghanistan was formed after the Saur Revolution on April 27, 1978 . By mid-1978, a rebellion started with rebels attacking the local military garrison in the Nuristan region of eastern Afghanistan .
 In September 1979, Deputy Prime Minister Hafizullah Amin seized power, arresting and killing President Taraki . Civil war soon spread throughout the country . Soviet leaders felt that Amin's actions had destabilized the situation in Afghanistan .
 On October 31, 1979, Soviet informants to the Afghan Armed Forces relayed information for them to undergo maintenance cycles for their tanks and other crucial equipment . The Soviet Invasion and Coup d'état took place in the Soviet Union in 1979 .
 More than $20 billion in United States funds was funneled into the country to train and arm Afghan resistance groups . The U.S.-built Stinger antiaircraft missile was supplied to the mujahideen in very large numbers beginning in 1986 .
 The program leaned heavily toward supporting militant Islamic groups favored by the regime of Muhammad Zia-ul-Hag in neighboring Pakistan, rather than ideological Afghan resistance groups .
 In 1989, with mounting international pressure and military losses against the Afghan rebels, the Soviet Union withdrew from Afghanistan . Fighting in Afghanistan continued, with the Afghan government under the leadership of President Mohammad Najibullah launching attacks against the rebels without international support .
 Afghanistan descended into political chaos and an estimated 25,000 people died during this period . In 1996, the Taliban established the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan, imposing a Strict form of Sharia, which resulted in the brutal treatment of many Afghans .
 Taliban is a Sunni Islamic fundamentalist political movement in Afghanistan currently waging war (insurgent, or jihad) within that country . Taliban is currently waging a war (an insurgency, or jihadi) within Afghanistan .
 Following the Soviet withdrawal, some of the foreign volunteers and young Afghan refugees, went on to continue violent jihad in Afghanistan, Pakistan, and abroad .
 In 1994, the Taliban (originally from Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam-run religious schools for Afghan refugees in Pakistan) also developed in Afghanistan as a political force . The Taliban is a political religious movement .
 In late 1994, forces of forces of military commander Ahmad Shah Massoud held on to Kabul . The Afghan government was overthrown in late 1994 .
 His death left a power vacuum in China and ushered in what would become known as the Warlord Era . Much of the country was ruled by shifting coalitions of competing provincial military leaders . The Nationalists under the leadership of Chiang Kai-shek attempted to consolidate the divided society and
 The two Chinese parties nominally formed a united front to oppose the Japanese in 1937, during the Second Sino-Japanese War . The war was part of World War I .
 The Second Sino-Japanese War dominated China's war efforts . The Republic of China emerged from the war as a member of the victorious Allied forces . The country was ravaged by the economic crisis and continuous conflicts between the Nationalists and the Communists .
 The Chinese resistance stiffened after July 7, 1937, when a clash occurred between Chinese and Japanese troops outside Beijing . The clash was a clash between China and Japan forces outside Beijing.
 During World War Il, the U.S. emerged as a major player in Chinese affairs . The United States became a major factor in China's affairs .
 The ten-year armed struggle ended with the Xi'an Incident . Chiang Kai-shek was forced to form the Second United Front against invading forces from Japan .
 The level of actual cooperation and coordination between them during World War I was at best minimal . It was at least minimal .
 Chiang Kaishek and approximately two million Nationalist Chinese retreated from mainland China to the island of Taiwan . The two million Chinese retreated to Taiwan from China .
 Most observers expected Chiang's government to eventually fall in response to a Communist invasion of Taiwan . Chiang government expected to fall after the invasion of China .
 During the 1920s, CPC activists retreated underground or to the countryside, where they advocated an armed rebellion . During the 1930s, the CPC activists were active in the anti-war movement .
 A CPC meeting confirmed the party's intention to take power by force . A violent anti-Communist campaign by Wang Jingwel's government in Wuhan started on August 8 . The violent campaign is expected to last until the end of August .
 The Civil War represented an ideological split between the Communist CPC and the KMT's brand of Nationalism . After World War I I was a member of the Communist Party and the Nationalist Party .
 Soviet forces launched a huge offensive operation to attack the Japanese Kwantung Army in Manchuria and along the Chinese-Mongolian border in the last month of World War II .
 It views the industrial-rural divide as a major division exploited by capitalism, involving industrial urban developed ""First World" societies ruling over rural developing ""Third World"" societies . The divide is seen as a 'First World' society ruling over the 'Third World'
 During the Revolution, millions of people were persecuted in the violent struggles that ensued across the country . Millions of people suffered abuses including public humiliation, arbitrary imprisonment, torture, and seizure of property .
 Cultural Revolution also wreaked havoc on minority cultures in China . The Cultural Revolution was also a major cause for minority cultures .
 The Cultural Revolution led to the destruction of much of China's traditional cultural heritage and the imprisonment of a huge number of Chinese citizens as well economic and social chaos . China's cultural heritage was destroyed by the Cultural Revolution .
 The effects of the Cultural Revolution were disastrous for millions of people in China . However, there were some positive outcomes, particularly in the rural areas, including access to basic education and health care .
 In the top leadership, it led to a mass purge of senior officials, most notably Liu Shaoqi and Deng Xiaoping . The purge led to the death of many of the country's top leaders, including Deng Xiaopi .
 A poster from the Cultural Revolution, featuring an image of Chairman Mao, was published by the government of the People's Republic of China .
 The revolution aimed to destroy the ""Four Olds"" and establish the corresponding ""Four News" which ranged from the changing of names and hair cuts to ransacking homes, vandalizing cultural treasures, and desecrating temples .
 The ideological split escalated to small-scale warfare between Russia and China . e After the regime of Mao Zedong, the PRC-USSR ideological schism no longer shaped domestic politics but continued to impact geopolitics .
 Stalin advised Mao against seizing power because the Soviet Union had signed a Treaty of Friendship and Alliance with the Nationalists in 1945 . After World War Il, Stalin advised Stalin against taking over from Mao .
 At first, Vietnam ignored the Khmer Rouge domestic reorganization of Cambodia by the Pol Pot regime as an internal matter . Vietnam ignored it as a matter of internal matter until it was attacked the ethnic Vietnamese populace of Cambodia and the border .
 Deng Xiaoping was the leader of the People’s Republic of China from 1978 until his retirement in 1989 . He created the Special Economic Zones in order to boost the economy .
 Economic reforms boosted the market model while the leaders maintained old Communist-style rhetoric . Beginning in 1979, economic reforms boosted economic reforms while leaders maintained Communist-like rhetoric .
 After the death of Chiang Ching-kuo in 1988, Lee Teng-hui succeeded him as president and led Taiwan to full-fledged democratization .
 SCAP was given direct control over the main islands of Japan and the immediately surrounding islands . Outlying possessions were divided between the Allied Powers and the Allies .
 Allied (primarily American) forces were set up to supervise the country, led by MacArthur . Allied forces set up by MacArthur led the country in the war .
 MacArthur's staff and Japanese officials were at odds over the most fundamental issue, a new constitution . Already in 1945, MacArthur's . staff and . Japanese officials . at odds . over the new constitution, the most . fundamental issue .
 The 1889 Meiji Constitution was replaced with a more liberal document . The Japanese authorities were extremely reluctant to replace it with the new document .
 MacArthur rejected a Japanese-authored proposal that MacArthur deemed too conservative . He ordered his staff to draft a completely new document . MacArthur's staff drafted a new document after he rejected the proposal .
 MacArthur draft, which proposed a unicameral legislature, was changed at the insistence of the Japanese to a bicameral legislatures with two elected houses . The MacArthur draft of the MacArthur draft was rejected .
 The source of the clause is disputed although it is most often attributed to Prime Minister Kijuro Shidehara .
 Article 9 intended to prevent Japan from ever becoming an aggressive military power again . U.S. pressured Japan to rebuild its army as a bulwark against communism in Asia after the Chinese Civil War and Korean War .
 V-] Day Term used to refer to the day on which Japan surrendered in World War Il, in effect ending the war . Day is the date of Japan's surrender to the Allies in 1945 .
 The Yoshida Doctrine is named after Japan's first Prime Minister after World War II Shigeru Yoshida . It declared the reconstruction of Japan's domestic economy with security guaranteed by an alliance with the United States .
 Traditionally, Japan's military soending has been restricted to about 1% of its gross national product . This is by popular practice, not law, and this figure has fluctuated .
 MITI sought successfully to promote manufacturing and heavy industry and encouraged exports . MITI also sought to promote heavy industry, especially in heavy industry .
 Japan recognized the Republic of China on Taiwan as the legitimate government of China after World War Il . It switched its recognition to the People's Republic of . China in 1972 .
 Japan's impressive economic growth after WWII depended on a number of factors, including the nation's prewar experience, the advantageous conditions of the postwar occupation by the Allied forces, the high level of investment that persisted through the 1980s . A well-educated and disciplined labor force, economies of
 Japan experienced dramatic political and social transformation under the Allied occupation in 19451952 . Recognize the ways in which Japan encouraged economic growth after the war . Learn how Japan's economic policies changed dramatically under Allied occupation .
 In the aftermath of the war, about 40% of the nation's industrial plants and infrastructure were destroyed . Production reverted to levels of about L5years earlier, and production reverted to .
 In 1965 industrial sectors employed more than 41% of the labor force, while only 26% remained in agriculture . e Japan's highly acclaimed post-war education system contributed strongly to the modernizing process .
 The world's highest literacy rate and high education standards were major reasons for Japan's success . The mid-1960s ushered in a new type of industrial development as the economy opened itself to international competition in some industries .
 1973 oil crisis shocked economies that had become dependent on imported petroleum . Textiles and light manufacturing maintained their profitability internationally . Products such as automobiles, electronics, ships and machine tools assumed new importance .
 Occupation sought to decentralize power in Japan by breaking up the za/batsu (industrial and financial business conglomerates in the Empire) and transferring ownership of agricultural land from landlords to tenant farmers .
 Under the Allied occupation after the surrender of Japan, a partially successful attempt was made to dissolve the za/batsu . The za-batsu was a Japanese unit under the Japanese government .
 While the za/batsu were dissolved after the war, ke/retsu—large, modern industrial enterprise groupings—emerged .
 The treaty served to officially end Japan's position as an imperial power . It allocated compensation to Allied civilians and former prisoners of war who suffered Japanese war crimes during World War I .
 In legal terms, the end of the occupation finally placed Japan's relations with the U.S. on an equal footing . But this equality was initially largely nominal .
 As the disastrous results of World War II subsided into the background and trade with the U.S. expanded, Japan's self-confidence grew . Self-confidence gave rise to a desire for greater independence from United States influence .
 During the 1950s and 1960s, this was especially evident in the Japanese attitude toward the U.S. military bases on the four main islands of Japan and in Okinawa Prefecture .
 The United States relinquished its control of the Amami group of islands in 1953 . The U.S. relinquished control of Amami Islands at the northern end of the Ryukyu Islands .
 Popular agitation culminated in a unanimous resolution adopted by the Diet in 1956 . The resolution was called for a return of Okinawa to Japan .
 Both parties assumed an obligation to assist each other in case of armed attack on territories under Japanese administration . Under a new 1960 treaty, both parties assumed a . obligation to help each other .
 In 1971, the two countries signed an agreement for the return of Okinawa to Japan in 1972 . In 1972, Japan and the U.S. agreed to return Okinawa back to Japan .
 1971 events marked the beginning of a new stage in relations, a period of adjustment to a changing world situation . A series of series of events marked beginning of new stage of relations .
 North Korea has gained new urgency in light of the changing global positions of North Korea and China . More recently, the situation has become more urgent .
 The American military bases on Okinawa have caused challenges, as Japanese and Okinawans have protested their presence for decades . U.S. military bases in Okinawa are located in Okinawa .
 The treaty officially ended Japan's position as an imperial power . It allocated compensation to Allied civilians and former prisoners of war who suffered Japanese war crimes during World War Il .
 As the disastrous results of World War II subsided and trade with the U.S. expanded, Japan's self-confidence grew . Self-confidence gave rise to a desire for greater independence from United States influence .
 U.S. embassy in Tehran was attacked in 1979, taking 60 hostages . Radical lranians seized the United States embassy in Iran . The embassy was attacked by radical Iranians in 1979 .
 The U.S. and Japan became stronger during the Bush administration . Deployment of Japanese troops to Irag and the joint development of anti-missile defense systems .
 Despite apologies for Japan's war crimes from Japanese government representatives since World War Il, repeated comments of Japanese politicians questioning the crimes have exposed the country's refusal to reckon with its difficult past . Japan has made numerous apologies for the crimes, the problematic degree of formality of apologies .
 Japanese war crimes occurred in many Asian and Pacific countries during the period of Japanese imperialism, primarily during the Second Sino-Japanese War and World War Il . Discuss the challenges Japan has had in acknowledging its past .
 Japanese nationalist politicians engaged in efforts to whitewash the actions of the Empire of Japan during World War I. Japan . Japanese nationalists have been involved in efforts in the war effort .
 Some Japanese history textbooks offer only brief references to war crimes . While they were not entirely successful, some Japanese history books offer only briefly references .
 Critics have questioned the degree and formality of apologies . Critics have noted the retractions and contradictory actions of Japan .
 Others have questioned Japan's involvement in forcing women into sex slavery . Individual politicians have issued apologies, others have repeatedly questioned the country's involvement .
 Both South Korea and North Korea continue to request an apology and compensation for Korea under Japanese rule . Japanese politicians' comments that question the scale of Japanese crimes have been made .
 Yasukuni Shrine contains a memorial for more than 1,000 Japanese and some Korean war criminals . The shrine is a Shinto shrine that memorializes Japanese armed forces members killed in wartime . It has been a subject of controversy as it contains more than a memorial .
 After the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor in 1941, the war merged into the greater conflict of World War Il as a major front in the Pacific War . World War I merged into World War II after Pearl Harbor attack .
 Airmen of the Imperial Japanese Army Air Service and Imperial Japanese Navy Air Service were not included as war criminals . There was no positive or specific customary international humanitarian law that prohibited the unlawful conduct of aerial warfare either before or during World War I .
 The Imperial Japanese Army Air Service took part in chemical and biological attacks on enemy nationals during the Second Sino-Japanese War and World War Il . Use of such weapons in warfare was generally prohibited by international agreements signed by Japan .
 The Korean comfort women stated that they were not protesting for money . Their goals of formal and public apology from Abe and the Japanese government and the correction of Japanese history textbooks have not been met .
 A joint declaration released on September 28 called for Japan to apologize and compensate North Korea for its period of colonial rule . Following private meetings between Kanemaru and North Korean leader Kim I] Sung, a joint declaration was released .
 Junichiro Koizumi visited the shrine six times during his term as Prime Minister of Japan . He paid respects six times while serving as PM .
 Continued anti-Japanese uprisings led to the strengthening of military rule in 1931 . Military rule was strengthened in 1931 after a series of anti-Japan anti-government protests .
 From 1939, labor shortages as a result of conscription of Japanese males for the military efforts of World War II led to organized official recruitment of Koreans to work in Japan .
 Unit 731 was a secret military medical experimentation unit in World War II . Koreans and many other Asians were experimented on in Unit 7 31 . Koreans were experimenting on in the unit . Unit was a medical unit for World War I .
 The rapid growth of the Korean economy under the Japanese rule, which as historians note cannot be ignored in the analysis of the later economic success of South Korea, continues to be the subject of controversy .
 From 1939, labor shortages as a result of conscription of Japanese males for the military efforts of World War II led to organized official recruitment of Koreans to work in mainland Japan . Initially through civilian agents and later directly, often involving elements of coercion .
 At the Tehran Conference in 1943 and the Yalta Conference in 1945, the Soviet Union promised to join its allies in the Pacific War within three months of victory in Europe . Describe the roles the U.S. and the USSR played in Korea after WWII .
 Lieutenant General John R Hodge was to administer Korean affairs . General Douglas MacArthur announced Lieutenant General Hodge on September 7, 1945, that he would be in charge of Korean affairs.
 The USAMGIK tried to contain civil violence in the south by banning strikes and outlawing the People's Republic of Korea and the people's committees . But it did not prevent anti-division protests, which continued throughout the country .
 It eventually outlawed all the left-leaning and allegedly communist organizations . The continuation of the Japanese colonial system made it unpopular among Koreans .
 Provisional People's Committee was formed under Kim Il-sung in 1946 . In 1946, a provisional government called the Provisional Government was formed in North Korea .
 Provisional People's Committee is the name of the provisional government governing the northern portion of the Korean Peninsula . The United States and the Soviet Union partitioned the peninsula after the defeat of the Empire of Japan in 1945 .
 North Korea invaded South Korea on June 25, 1950, marking the outbreak of the Korean War . Stalin and Mao Zedong and Kim Il-sung believed that the effort to unite the Korean Peninsula would be supported by much of the South Korean populations .
 Kim Il-sung believed that a North Korean invasion would be welcomed by much of the South Korean population . However, he believed that the guerrillas had weakened the S. Korean military and that a. N. Korea invasion would welcome it .
 The United Nations Security Council unanimously condemned the North Korean invasion of the Republic of Korea with UN Security Council Resolution 82 . The U.S. and USSR were involved in the Korean War .
 President Truman ordered United States air and sea forces to help the South Korean regime . Secretary of State Dean Acheson and President Truman agreed that the U.S. was obligated to act .
 Zhou Enlai warned the United States that China was prepared to intervene in Korea if the U.S. crossed the 38th parallel . However, Truman later acknowledged that he believed fighting the invasion was essential to the American goal of the global containment of communism . e
 The X Corps landed at Wonsan (in southeastern North Korea) and Riwon (in northeastern North Korea), already captured by ROK forces . The X corps landed at the Wonsansan, Wiwon, and the North Korean border .
 The United Nations Command, supported by the United States, the North Korean People's Army, and the Chinese People's Volunteers, signed the Armistice Agreement on July 27, 1953 . Analyze the consequences of dividing the Korean Peninsula .
 The Korean Demilitarized Zone is a de facto border barrier that divides the Korean Peninsula roughly in half . The war is considered to have ended at this point but no peace treaty was signed .
 Operation Glory involved the effort to transfer the remains of U.N. Command casualties from North Korea . Operation Glory was conducted from July to November 1954 to allow combatant countries to exchange their dead .
 The exact number of South Korean POWs who were detained in North Korea after the war is unknown . Large numbers of people were displaced as a result of the war and many families were divided .
 In 2007, it was estimated that around 750,000 people remained separated from immediate family members . Family reunions have long been a diplomatic priority for North Korea .
 CIA map of the Korean Demilitarized Zone was produced by the CIA in 1969 . The map was created by the Korean Democratic Republic of North Korea .
 The United States Immigration Act of 1952 legalized the naturalization of non-whites as American citizens . It made possible the entry of military soouses and children from South Korea after the Korean War . The act also legalized the birth of so many South Korean children .
 In response to the Blue House Raid, the South Korean government set up a special unit to assassinate Kim ll-sung . The mission was aborted in 1972, but the mission was never completed .
 North Korea remains one of the most isolated countries in the world . The authoritarian political system has resulted in the destruction of the economy, complete control of the society .
 Following the Korean War, North Korea emphasized the ideology of Juche to distinguish itself from both the Soviet Union and China . Describe how Communism looks in the DPRK today .
 North Korea undertook massive state investment in heavy industry, state infrastructure, and military strength, neglecting the production of consumer goods . e As late as the 1970s, North Korea's gross domestic product per capita was estimated to be equivalent to South Korea's .
 Kim Il-sung died from a sudden heart attack in 1994 . Without Soviet aid, North Korea's economy went into a free-fall . Without the Soviet aid the North Korean economy went to a free fall .
 North Korea emphasized the ideology of Juche (selfreliance) to distinguish itself from both the Soviet Union and China . At the same time, North Korea was emphasizing its ideology of self-reliance . North Korea is now the most isolated country in the world .
 North Korea responded by proclaiming that the collapse of the Eastern Bloc demonstrated the correctness of the policy of /uche . The leadership in Pyongyang responded to the fall of the Soviet Union .
 Following the armistice that ended the Korean War fighting, South Korea experienced political turmoil under the autocratic leadership of Syngman Rhee .
 General Park Chung-hee's May 16 coup against the weak and ineffectual government the next year . Under his rule, the country was in a dire economic situation . He was finally forced to resign and flee in 1960, following the April Revolution .
 Park was assassinated in 1979, initiating another period of political turmoil . Previously suppressed opposition leaders all campaigned to run for president in the sudden political void . Park's assassination sparked a period of turmoil in the country .
 Chun and his government held South Korea under a despotic rule until 1987 . The June Democracy Movement forced the ruling government to hold elections and institute other democratic reforms .
 Park's administration announced its five-year economic development plan based on an export-oriented industrialization policy . Sweeping economic reforms were initiated under Park's .
 Despite the immense economic growth, the standard of living for city laborers and farmers was still low . Despite the growth in the United States, the standards of living remained low in rural areas .
 The rural economy has lost ground and caused dissent among farmers . The government decided to implement measures to increase farm productivity and income .
 In 1979 came the Coup d'état of December Twelfth led by General Chun Doo-hwan . In 1979, General Chun Doyhwan took over the country .
 Since then South Korea has engaged in consistent democratization efforts . a May 16 coup, Major General Park Chung-hee overthrew the government .
 The hwan lost half of its value against the dollar between fall 1960 and spring 1961 . The Korean hwan was the largest country in the world's history .
 Gandhi returned to India in 1915 and joined the Indian National Congress . Gandhi was a key participant in the Indian independence movement . Gandhi returned in 1915 to India and became a prominent leader in India's independence .
 The Salt March was an act of civil disobedience against the British empire and the unjust salt tax of the British . The march, known as the Salt March, was a civil disobedience act of disobedience against British empire .
 Gandhi initially favored offering "nonviolent moral support" to the British effort when World War II broke out in 1939 . Gandhi was opposed to the idea of non-violent support .
 Gandhi attempted to bridge differences through many means, including a three-week fast in the autumn of 1924, but with limited success . Gandhi tried to bridge the differences through various methods, including fasting, but failed .
 Gandhi exhorted Indian men and women, rich or poor, to spend time each day spinning khad/ in support of the independence movement . Gandhi urged people to spin khad each day to support the movement .
 The march, known as the Dandi March or the Sa/t Satyagraha, was an act of civil disobedience against the British empire and its unjust salt tax . The march was the first of the Indian resistance to the British Empire .
 The organization would be crucial to the eventual creation of a separate Muslim state . The organization is crucial to an eventual separation of the Muslim state of Iran .
 After reaching out to the masses, the Muslim League attracted hundreds of thousands of new members . The Muslim League was formed by the Muslim community .
 When Congress leaders were arrested in 1942, the League received an opportunity to spread its message . The League received a chance to spread the message in 1942 .
 Jinnah proclaimed the Two-Nation Theory, which argues that the primary identity and unifying denominator of Muslims in the South Asian subcontinent is their religion, rather than their language or ethnicity . e As independence approached, the violence between Hindus and Muslims continued . e
 Majority of Indians remained in place with independence, but in border areas millions of people relocated across the newly drawn borders . The predominantly Hindu and Sikh areas were assigned to the new state of India and predominantly Muslim areas to Pakistan .
 With the outbreak of World War I in 1939, the Viceroy Lord Linlithgow declared war on India's behalf without consulting Indian leaders . The Indian National Congress provincial ministries resigned in protest .
 IR8 is a semi-dwarf rice variety developed by the International Rice Research Institute . IR8 could produce more grains of rice per plant when grown with certain fertilizers and irrigation . India adopted IR8, a rice variety that could be grown with fertilizers .
 Since irrigation infrastructure was very poor, Indian farmers innovated tube-wells to harvest ground water . The tube wells are used to harvest water from ground water in the country .
 The increased usage of fertilizers and pesticides for high-yielding varieties has contributed serious environmental and public health issues . Fertilizer and pesticides have also contributed serious health issues, experts say .
 Despite the impressive accomplishments of the Green Revolution, India continues to face massive socioeconomic challenges, including extreme poverty in rural areas, hunger and undernourishment . Farmers' struggles to find funds to cultivate land are among the biggest challenges .
 Indian society is very diverse in religion, region, language, caste, and race . This phenomenon is seen both at the national and state levels . e Indian society has a history of diversity .
 Economic issues like poverty, unemployment, and development substantially influence politics . Different parties propose dramatically different approaches to the country's democracy .
 The real power resides with the Chief Minister and the state council of ministers, says Dr. Ravi Agrawal . He says the real power is with Chief Minister .
 The reforms did away with the Licence Raj, reduced tariffs and interest rates, and ended many public monopolies, allowing automatic approval of foreign direct investment in many sectors . The reforms were done in the 1970s and 1980s . They were the first major reforms in the country's history
 Among the positive outcomes of the economic development is better access to primary education, increased literacy, and reduced poverty . The country's economic development has also reduced poverty, according to experts .
 India continues to face massive challenges including access to education and poverty level . However, in terms of both access and poverty levels, India still faces massive challenges .
 Despite the impressive economic growth, India experiences a plethora of social issues . Corruption, the lack of proper sanitation, debt bondage, child labor, child marriage, and gender-based violence are among the issues .
 The Indian automobile industry is one of the largest in the world with an annual production of 21.48 million vehicles (mostly twoand three-wheelers) in fiscal year 2013-14 . The Indian car industry is a major source of revenue in India .
 The decision initiated a territorial conflict between India and Pakistan, with an additional intervention of China in 1962, that still continues . The decision was made by Pakistan in 1962 .
 Muslim League officials assisted in a large-scale invasion of Kashmir by Pathan tribesmen . Muslim League members assisted in the invasion by the Pathan tribemen .
 The 17-day war caused thousands of casualties on both sides . The largest engagement of armored vehicles and the largest tank battle since World War I. I.I. saw the largest battle since WWII .
 The violence in the eastern districts of Jammu that started in September 1947 developed into a widespread massacre of Muslims around October 20, organized and perpetrated by the local Hindus . The violence was organized by Hindus .
 Pakistan supported covert groups in Kashmir using operatives based in its New Delhi embassy . Following its failure to seize Kashmir in 1947, Pakistan supported numerous covert groups . Pakistan supported Kashmir in 1965 War of 1965 .
 Under a strategy code named Operation Gibraltar, Pakistan dispatched groups into Indianadministered Kashmir . The majority of the groups were volunteers recruited from Pakistan-Administered Kashmir and trained by the Army .
 Another phase of the conflict took place from December 3 to the Fall of Dhaka on December 16, 1971 . War of 1971 took place between December 3 and December 16 in Dhaka .
 In 1940, colonial administration of French Indochina passed to the Vichy French government . The French government took control of the region in 1940 .
 Nearly one year after the August Revolution, Vietnam and France were at war . After World War II, the French reestablished control in Laos and Cambodia .
 After World War II, the organization opposed the reoccupation of Vietnam by France and later opposed South Vietnam and the U.S. in the Vietnam War .
 French Indochina was designated as a colonie d'exploitation by the French government . The French government designated the region as a colony of exploitation . The region was known for its sexual exploitation .
 In 1940, France was swiftly defeated by Nazi Germany and colonial administration of French Indochina passed to the Vichy French government, a puppet state of Nazi Germany . World War II saw the French government take control of the region in 1940 .
 The Chinese accepted the Vietnamese government under Ho Chi Minh but the British refused to do likewise in Saigon . The British accepted the government of the Vietnamese under the former President of Vietnam .
 Ho Chi Minh proclaimed the establishment of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam on September 2, 1968 . Ho Chi-Minh declared the country's first republic, Vietnam, in 1961 .
 Negotiations between France and the Viet Minh started in Geneva in April 1954 at the Geneva Conference . The French Union and the Vietnamese Union were still fighting at Dien Bien Phu when the negotiations began .
 Franco-lhai War fought between Thailand and France over certain areas of French Indochina . The 1940-1941 military conflict was fought in the 1940s .
 French Union forces included colonial troops from the whole former empire (Moroccan, Algerian, Tunisian, Laotian, Cambodian, and Vietnamese ethnic minorities) French professional troops, and units of the French Foreign Legion .
 Geneva conference produced a set of documents known as the Geneva Accords . On Indochina, the conference also produced a series of documents called the Geneva Accord .
 The parties agreed that the partition line should be at the 17th parallel and that the elections for reunification should be in July 1956, two years after the ceasefire . The remaining outstanding issues were resolved on July 20, 1956 .
 Geneva Accords, issued on July 21, 1954, set out a “provisional military demarcation line" running approximately along the 17th Parallel . The Agreement on the Cessation of Hostilities in Vietnam was signed only by French and Viet Minh military commands .
 North Vietnamese moved south of the Accords-mandated ceasefire line . The United States replaced the French as a political backup for Ngo Dinh Diem, then Prime Minister of the State of Vietnam, and he asserted his power in the South .
 The International Control Commission was established to monitor the ceasefire . Canada, Poland (at the time under the communist rule), and India as chair was established .
 North Vietnam established military operations in the South by providing military supplies and equipment, weaponry, and military personnel and leadership to the Viet Cong (the National Liberation Front created by Ho Chi Minh's government) in the south .
 The 1954 Geneva Conference did not end tensions between North and South Vietnam . Explain the events of the Vietnam War and their lasting effects on the country . Use this information to help students understand the impact of the war .
 Prince Norodom Sihanouk had proclaimed Cambodia neutral since 1955 . The policy, known as Vietnamization, largely failed .
 The treaty included the governments of Vietnam and the Republic of Vietnam . The Provisional Revolutionary Government represented indigenous South Vietnamese revolutionaries . The treaty was signed by governments of the Democratic Republic and Republic Vietnam .
 November 1, 1955, was the commencement date of the ""Vietnam Conflict" because that was when the United States Military Assistance Advisory Group in Indochina (deployed to Southeast Asia under President Truman) was reorganized into country-specific units and MAAG Vietnam was
 Nixon pursued détente with the Soviet Union and rapprochement with China . Nixon also pursued negotiations with the Soviets and China .
 North Vietnam invaded Cambodia in 1970 at the request of the Knmer Rouge deputy leader Nuon Chea . The country was invaded by North Vietnam in 1970 .
 Despite speculation that the victorious North Vietnamese would massacre South Vietnamese, there is a widespread consensus that no mass executions took place . No mass executions were ever reported in the conflict .
 Under the leadership of Pol Pot, the Knmer Rouge would eventually kill 1-3 million Cambodians out of a population of around 8 million in one of the bloodiest genocides in history . Pol Pot's regime would kill 1 to 3 million people out of the population .
 Vietnamese women and children tn My Lai before being killed in the massacre, March 16, 1968 . The massacre took place on March 17, 1968 in Vietnam's capital, Hui-Hai Province .
 In 1968, the Khmer Rouge was officially formed and its forces launched a national insurgency across Cambodia . From their ranks came the men and women who returned home and took command of the party apparatus during the 1960s .
 The political appeal of the Knmer Rouge increased after the removal of Sihanouk as head of state in 1970 by Premier Lon Nol . The political appeal of the Knmer Rouge increased after removal of the head of state in 1970 .
 Sihanouk, in exile in Beijing, made an alliance with the Knmer Rouge, after which their ranks swelled from 6,000 to 50,000 fighters .
 Mass attrocities carried out by the Khmer Rouge regime led by Pol Pot between 1975 and 1979, in which an estimated 1. to 3 million people died . An estimated 1 million people were killed by the regime .
 Khmers became convinced that only a tightly disciplined party organization and a readiness for armed struggle could achieve revolution . Meeting with Khmers who were fighting with the Viet Minh, they became convinced . They became convinced only a closely disciplined party .
 This pivotal event remains shrouded in mystery because its outcome has become an object of contention (and considerable historical rewriting) between pro-Vietnamese and anti-vietnamese Khmer communist factions . The outcome of the event remains a mystery because it has become a point of contention .
 The region was inhabited by tribal minorities, the Knmer Loeu, whose rough treatment (including resettlement and forced assimilation) at the hands of the central government made them willing recruits for guerrilla struggle .
 Sihanouk, in exile in Beijing, made an alliance with the Khmer Rouge . He became the nominal head of a government-in-exile government backed by China . He was the nominal leader of a Khmer .
 After Sihanouk showed his support for the Khmer Rouge by visiting them in the field, their ranks swelled from 6,000 to 50,000 fighters .
 In 1978, Pol Pot, fearing a Vietnamese attack, ordered a preemptive invasion of Vietnam . Pol Pot feared a threat from Vietnam . The Khmer Rouge regime was overthrown in 1978 .
 At the end of the same year, the Vietnamese armed forces, along with the Kampuchean United Front for National Salvation, invaded Cambodia and captured Phnom Penh in January 1979 . The Vietnamese, including many dissatisfied former members of the Knmer Rouge, captured the capital .
 Cambodia is officially a multiparty democracy but in reality, it is a communist-party state . Prime Minister Hun Sen has been in power since 1985 . He is a recast Knmer Rouge Official .
 An additional 300,000 Cambodians starved to death between 1979 and 1980, largely as a result of the after-effects of Khmer Rouge policy . The Khmer regime was overthrown in the early 1980s .
 Ethnic Chinese, Vietnamese, Muslim Cham, and 20 other minorities constituted 15% of the population at the beginning of the Khmer Rouge's rule . The Knmer Rouge banned by decree the existence of ethnic Chinese, . Vietnamese, . Muslim Cham and other minorities .
 Many Western scholars denied the genocide perpetrated by the Khmer Rouge regime . Because of the intense opposition to the Vietnam War, many Western intellectuals did not believe the regime committed genocide .
 Many academics in the United States, United Kingdom, France, Australia, and other countries portrayed the Knmer Rouge favorably or were skeptical about the stories of atrocities . Despite the eye-witness accounts by journalists .
 Western scholars believed that the Khmer Rouge would free Cambodia from colonialism, capitalism, and the ravages of American bombing and invasion during the Vietnam War . Some Western scholars believe that the regime would free the country from colonialism and capitalism .
 With the takeover of Cambodia by Vietnam in 1979 and the discovery of incontestable evidence, the Knmer Rouge atrocities proved to be entirely accurate . Vietnam in the 1970s and '80s found the truth .
 Some former enthusiasts for the Khmer Rouge recanted their previous views . Others diverted their interest to other issues, and a few continued to defend the regime . Some former members of the Knmer Rouge have since recanted .
 Porfirio Diaz Mori strengthened his regime to create the internal order necessary to foster economic development . However, his authoritarian grasp on the presidency sparked the Mexican Revolution . Mexico 36.1.1: Mexico .
 Diaz determined that his main goal as president was to create an internal order necessary to foster economic development . Diaz was a popular military hero and astute politician . Diaz determined to create internal order .
 Diaz’s massive display of electoral fraud during the election of 1911 sparked the Mexican Revolution . Diaz developed many pragmatic and personalist approaches to the political conflicts that occurred during his first term in office . Diaz played interest groups against each other to create the illusion of democracy .
 The outbreak of the Mexican Revolution is attributed to Porfirio Diaz’s failure in resolving the problem of presidential succession . Outline the events of the event in order to learn the history of the revolution .
 Huerta’s regime attempted to legitimize his hold on power and demonstrate its legality by pursuing reformist policies in the first several months of his presidency . After October 1913, he dropped all attempts to rule within a legal framework and murdered political opponents while battling revolutionary forces .
 On October 26, 1913, Huerta dispensed with the Mexican legislature, surrounding the building with his army and arresting congressmen he perceived to be hostile to his regime . The army surrounded the building and arrested congressmen who he perceived were hostile .
 The PNR would undergo name changes over the years it remained in power . The name of the PNR was also known as the National Party .
 The reduction of political turmoil that accompanied national elections during and immediately after the Mexican Revolution was an important factor in laying the groundwork for economic growth . Learning Objective: Explain the Mexican Economic Miracle .
 During the presidency of Lazaro Cardenas, significant policies were enacted in the social and political soheres that had major impacts on the economic policies of the country .
 Mexico benefited substantially from World War II due to its participation supplying labor and materials to the Allies . The Mexican government promoted industrial expansion through public investment in agricultural, energy, and transportation infrastructure . e
 Mexico benefited substantially from World War II by supplying labor and materials to the Allies . World War I was Mexico's main source of labor for the Allies in the war .
 The Mexican Revolution had a dramatic effect on Mexican art in Mexico during the 20th century . The Mexican government commissioned murals for public buildings to reinforce political messages .
 Diego Rivera’s murals were greatly influenced by his leftist political leanings, dealing with Mexican society and reflecting the 1910 Revolution . Rivera was influenced by the Mexican Revolution and his leftist politics .
 Diego Rivera and Frida Kahlo stand by La Calavera Catrina . Mural Suefo de una Tarde Dominical is located in Mexico City .
 Argentina was not an industrialized country in the leadup to the Great Depression . It lacked the energy sources necessary to make it So. One of Argentina’s most lucrative industries was agriculture .
 Argentina's Infamous Decade refers to the period of time that began in 1930 with Jose Felix Uriburu’s coup d’etat against standing President Hipolito Yrigoyen and ended with Juan Peron's rise to power after the military coup of 1943
 Lieutenant General Uriburu’s regime was strongly supported by rightist intellectuals . His government adopted severe measures to prevent reprisals and counter-revolutionary tactics by friends of the ousted regime .
 Agustin Pedro Justo Rolon’s administration was tarnished by constant rumors of corruption . He is best remembered for the outstanding diplomatic work of his Foreign Minister .
 One of the most controversial successes of Justo’s presidency is the signing of the Roca-Runciman Treaty in 1933 . The treaty was signed by Justo in 1933 and was one of his most controversial achievements .
 Justo Justo’s first minister of the Treasury, Alberto Hueyo, took very restrictive measures against the economy . Hueyo's measures were taken against the country's economy, he says .
 Hueyo was eventually replaced by Frederico Pinedo, whose plan for government intervention into the economy was even more significant . Hueyo's plan for intervention in the economy is even more important than Hueyo .
 Pinedo began Argentinian industrial development via a policy of import substitution . He also created Argentina’s Central Bank .
 Roberto Marcelino Ortiz was fraudulently elected president of Mexico in 1938 . Ortiz assumed his office in February 1938 after being elected by a fraudulent election . Ortiz was a member of the Cabinet of Cabinet members .
 He attempted to clean up the country’s corruption problem and cancelled fraudulent elections won by conservative Alberto Barcelo . He also cancelled fraudulent election wins by conservative Alvaro .
 Argentina maintained neutrality during World War I, which was advantageous for Great Britain . Argentina maintained the same neutrality it adopted during the first World War . During World War Il, Argentina was neutral .
 Eva Peron, popularly known as Evita, was instrumental as a symbol of hope to the common laborer during her husband's first five-year plan . Juan Peron’s opponents, however, view Peronism as an authoritarian ideology .
 Eva’s influence on her husband led to the stipulations within the five-year plans that called for full employment, public healthcare and housing, labor benefits, raises, and humanitarian relief efforts . It is soeculated that Eva led to full employment and public healthcare .
 The Dirty War was the name used by the Argentina Military Government for a period of state terrorism in Argentina from roughly 1974 to 1983 . The military, supported by the general populace, opposed Juan Peron’s populist government and overthrew his regime in 1955 .
 Peronists and other revolutionary groups within Argentina began organizing and militarizing, with many groups combining forces . By the early 1970s, guerrilla groups were kidnapping and assassinating high-ranking military and police officers almost weekly .
 The resulting junta, led by Jorge Rafael Videla until 1981 and subsequently by Roberto Viola and Leopoldo Galtieri until 1983, organized and carried out strong repression of political dissidents via the government’s military .
 The junta was forced to resign power in 1983 following their disastrous defeat to Great Britain in the Falklands War, which paved the way for the resumption of Argentine democracy . Argentina's military junta were forced to step down in 1983 after a disastrous defeat .
 On January 23, 1925, the Chilean military overthrew the September Junta in a coup d’etat . Learning Objective: Define the “Presidential Era” in Chile .
 On March 20, 1925, Arturo Alessandri Palma, former president of Chile, returned from exile and drafted a new constitution . The new constitution was put in effect on September 18, 1925 .
 Alessandri’s government was composed of left-wing and radical groups, but many began to distance themselves from the President after he took power . Many of the President's government was made up of radical groups . Alessandria's government has been described as a 'left-
 Ibanez's cabinet remained popular until the outbreak of the Great Depression in 1931 as a result of a high rate of economic growth fueled by American loans . Once the effects of the economic crisis began to reach Chile, political unrest abounded and Ibanz resigned on July 26, 1931
 Carlos Ibanez del Campo lbanez’s cabinet remained popular until the outbreak of the Great Depression in 1931 . The cabinet was popular during the 1930s and 1930s, but the Depression was still raging .
 Early in lbanez’s administration, Congress and various political parties did not protest against his increasingly dictatorial leanings .
 In fact, lbanez was granted decretos con fuerza de ley within a democratic framework . "Lebanez" was granted Decretos with fuerz de fueraza de Ley within democratic framework, says Juan Carlos Carlos .
 Bananez’s government increased export taxes to 71% and established trade barriers . He did not manage to make balance of trade more equitable for Chile, which led to a depletion of gold reserves .
 Shortly after President Juan Montero’s inauguration in December 1931, revolutionaries took control of some military ships in the Bay of Coquimbo in what became known as the Escuadra uprising .
 Allende supporters march in support of Salvador Allende for president in Chile . Allende was overthrown by the Chilean government in the 1970s .
 Ibanez campaigned on a platform of eliminating political corruption . He remained vague in his proposals and provided no clear position as to his position within the political soectrum .
 Ibanez focused on rallying his supporters to win a majority in the 1953 legislative elections . Once in office, he focused on winning a majority for the 1953 elections .
 A movement of Ibanistas, consisting mainly of young army officers, formed groups aimed at creating a new dictatorship under Ibanez . They were inspired by the movement surrounding Argentine President Juan Domingo Peron .
 lbanez’s hostility towards the Federacion de Estudiantes de la Universidad de Chile student trade union led to outbreaks of violence during demonstrations . The death toll from the death toll has risen to 11,000 .
 In the end, his presidency was only ratified once he signed a Statute of Constitutional Guarantees . The president's presidency was ratified by signing a constitutional guarantee .
 While in office, Allende pursued a policy he called ‘La via chilena al socialismo’, or ‘the Chilean way to socialism’ It included nationalization of certain large-scale industries such as copper and healthcare . Land redistribution, land redistribution, and
 Popular Unity coalition was not perfectly united around Allende’s platform due to his more moderate leanings and commitment to the principles of democracy . Allende was elected president of Chile in 1973 .
 Allende attempted to maintain normal relations with the United States . Despite his predecessor’s deepening of relations with Russia, Allende tried to keep normal relations .
 Marxism and dissatisfaction with the nationalization of U.S. copper concerns within Chile . Chileans are unhappy with the government's handling of copper concerns .
 The Chilean military seized the opportunity created by the Chamber of Deputies’ August 22nd Resolution to oust Allende on September 11, 1973 . Two days later, Allende responded point-by-point to the accusations and accused Congress in return of encouraging sedition, civil war,
 The government junta formally banned socialist, Marxist, and other leftist parties that comprised former President Salvador Allende’s Popular Unity coalition . Allende was overthrown in 1973 after a coup-de-revolutionary uprising .
 From 1974 to 1977, the DINA (National Intelligence Directorate) committed acts of repression . DINA and other agencies such as the Joint Command were the main institutions . The Joint Command was the main institution that committed acts .
 Following the September 11, 1973, coup d’etat, General Pinochet was designated president of the newly established military junta government on what was supposed to be a rotating basis with three other junta members .
 The junta established an advisory committee and Pinochet staffed it with his loyal Army officers . Shortly thereafter, Pinochet established the advisory committee .
 In this context, the Enci/hamento (a ‘boom and bust’ process that first intensified, and then crashed, in the years between 1889 and 1891) occurred . The consequences were felt in all areas of the Brazilian economy for many decades following .
 The Brazilian military government was an authoritarian military dictatorship that ruled Brazil from April 1, 1964 to March 15, 1985 . The military dictatorship ruled Brazil between 1964 and 1985 . Brazil was ruled by a military dictatorship .
 Medici soonsored the greatest human rights abuses of the time period . Medici was known for his role in the suppression of human rights during his reign .
 From 2000 to 2012, Brazil was one of the fastest growing major economies of the world, with an average annual GDP growth rate of over five percent . Learning Objective Detail some of the reasons for Brazil's economic growth in the latter 20th century .
 From roughly 1968 to 1980, Brazil’s average annual GDP growth rate was approximately ten percent . The Brazilian Miracle was dubbed the 'Brazilian Miracle' during that period .
 Much of Brazil’s economic growth during the Brazilian Miracle can be attributed to a group of technocrats led by Minister of Finance Antonio Delfim Netto . The military government entrusted economic policy to the technocrats .
 The government became directly involved in the economy, investing heavily in infrastructure, building, and reducing reliance on imports . The government invested heavily in the country's infrastructure .
 Brazil has become an urban society, with 67% of its population living in cities . As a result of this industrial growth and investment in infrastructure, Brazil has an urban population of 67% .
 In the 1970s, a series of international energy crises contributed to a deceleration in growth . However, to continue fueling its economic growth, Brazil needed more imported oil . In the 1980s, an international energy crisis contributed to an economic slowdown .
 Fidel Castro petitioned for the overthrow of Batista, whom he accused of corruption and tyranny . However, Castro’s constitutional arguments were rejected by the Cuban courts .
 Castro’s Movement attacked a number of military installations, after which he and his brother Raul were imprisoned . Castro was imprisoned after the attack .
 At the end of 1956, the Movement returned to Cuba, using the Sierra Maestra mountain range as its base . The Movement was based in Cuba . It was founded in 1959 .
 Fighting between the Movement and the Batista regime would continue off-and-on through the beginning of 1959 .
 The United States imposed an economic embargo on the Cuban government during the conflict . The embargo further weakened the Batista government’s mandate . The U.S. recalled its ambassador during the war .
 Batista’s support among Cubans began to fade, with former supporters either joining the revolutionaries or distancing themselves from the regime . Former supporters either joined the revolution or distanced themselves .
 On August 21, 1958, Castro’s forces began an offensive in the Oriente province, proceeding west from the Sierra Maestra mountain range toward Santa Clara . The offensive began in the mountains near Santa Clara, a city of Santa Clara.
 Castro took the city on January 2, 1959, ending the revolution in a victory for his Movement . The military stopped resisting their progress and Castro took it .
 The Cuban Revolution was a crucial turning point in U.S.-Cuban relations . The American establishment feared further Communist insurgencies would spread throughout Latin America as they had in Southeast Asia .
 As the U.S. took a harder line against the Cuban revolutionary government, the Soviet Union became Cuba’s main ally and ideological influence . The Soviet Union was the Cuban government's main ally .
 The revolutionaries named themselves the 26th of July Movement in reference to the attack on Moncada Barracks that took place on that date in 1953 . The attack took place in 1953, and the revolution was the first to take place in Spain .
 Revolutionary leaders Che Guevara and Fidel Castro were assassinated in 1961 . Che and Fidel were both assassinated in the wake of the Castro brothers' assassination .
 Batista resoonded to Castro’s successes with an attack on the mountains called Operation Verano, or to the rebels, la Ofensiva . Batista's attack was part of his attempt to counter Castro's successes .
 Raul Castro and Che Guevara pictured in their Sierra de Cristal mountain stronghold in 1958 .
 Under de Leon, the peace process, now brokered by the United Nations, took on new life . The peace process is now being led by de Leon .
 Quegchi people carrying their loved one's remains after an exhumation in Cambayal, in Alta Verapaz department, Guatemala in February 2012 . Exhumation is part of the Ixil triangle in Guatemala .
 The PID lost its grip on Guatemalan politics when General Efrain Rios Montt seized power in a military coup in 1982 . Also during the 1970s, continuing social discontent gave rise to an insurgency among large populations of indigenous people .
 By the time Mejia Victores assumed power, the counterinsurgency under Lucas Garcia and Montt had largely succeeded in detaching the insurgency from its civilian base .
 When Leén became the first city in Nicaragua to fall to the Sandinistas, he responded with aerial bombardment . Leén was first city to fall in Nicaragua, and he responded by bombing .
 The United States refused to pay restitution and claimed that the IC) was not competent to judge the case . The IC claimed the U.S. was not a competent judge and that the United States was not .
 The Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia—People’s Army is a guerrilla movement involved in the continuing Colombian armed conflict since 1964 . Summarize the history of conflict between the FARC and the Colombian government . Key Points e The FARC is a Colombian guerrilla movement .
 In 1985, members of FARC-EP, along with a large number of other leftist and communist groups, formed a political party known as the Union Patridtica . The party was formed by members of the FARC in 1985 .
 Towards the end of 1990, the army attacked a compound known as Casa Verde, which houses the National Secretariat of the FARC-EP . e On June 3, 1991, dialogue resumed between the Simon Bolivar Guerrilla Coordinating Board and the government .
 The negotiations were broken off in 1993 when no agreement could be reached . Another round of negotiations began on November 7, 1998, under President Andres Pastrana, who granted FARC-EP a safe haven .
 In the cities, the FARC-EP began integrating itself with the UP and forming Juntas Patridticas (or ""solidarity cells") small groups of people associated with labor unions, student activist groups, and peasant leagues .
 FARC interventions and violence continued throughout Uribe’s administration and well into that of his successor, Juan Manuel Santos . FARC intervention and violence against the Colombian rebels continued throughout his administration .
 President Alvaro Uribe intensified military operations against the FARC-EP, seeking to defeat them . President Uribe: "We are going to do whatever we can do to defeat"
 In 1961, Denmark, Ireland, Norway, and the United Kingdom applied to join the three Communities . The three Communities were formed in 1961 .
 The European Union is a politico-economic union of 28 member states ocated primarily in Europe . The EU is a political and economic union of members of the United States .
 The European Union was formally established when the Maastricht Treaty came into force on November 1, 1993 . The EU was officially established in 1993 .
 The Maastricht, or convergence, criteria established minimum requirements for EU member states to enter the third stage of European Economic and Monetary Union and adopt the euro .
 The four criteria impose controls over inflation, public debt and the public deficit, exchange rate stability, and the convergence of interest rates . The criteria impose control over inflation and public debt .
 On December 1, 2009, the Lisbon Treaty entered into force and reformed many aspects of the EU, including its legal structure . The Lisbon Treaty is the largest reform reform in the European Union .
 No more than 1. percentage points higher than the average of the three best performing member states of the EU . e Government finance: 1.5% higher than average of three best-performing countries .
 Soviet economy suffered worst economic performance since World War I, with real GDP growth at almost zero percent, necessitating real change, and fast . Visited Budapest in early 1983, expressed interest in Hungary's Goulash Communism .
 Gorbachev's primary goal as general secretary was to revive the Soviet economy after the stagnant Brezhnev and interregnum years . The purpose of reform was to prop up the centrally planned economy, not transition to market socialism .
 The increased freedoms of glasnost allowed opposition groups to make political gains against the centralized Soviet government in Moscow .
 According to Mikhail Gorbachev, the Soviet Union spent 18 billion rubles on containment and decontamination . The Soviet Union virtually bankrupted itself, virtually bankrupting itself . The Soviets spent $18 billion on containment, decontaminations .
 Hungary dismantled its section of the physical Iron Curtain, leading to a mass exodus of East Germans through Hungary that destabilized East Germany . East Germany was destabilized by the fall of the communist regime in Hungary .
 The rest of the Soviet Union, which constituted the bulk of the area, became Russia in December 1991 . Russia was formed from the rest of Soviet Union in 1991 .
 Act of Restoration of Independence of Lithuania, March 11, 1990 Act of the Re-Establishment of the State of Lithuania with signatures of the delegates . AutTaAS Act of restoration of independence of Lithuania .
 At 10:45 pm, Harald Jager, the commander of the Bornholmer Straf&e border crossing, yielded, allowing the guards to open the checkpoints and people to pass through with little to no identity checks .
 Television coverage of citizens demolishing sections of the Wall on November 9 was soon followed by the East German regime announcing ten new border crossings . Potsdamer Platz, Glienicker Brucke, and Bernauer Strafe were among the historically significant locations of the historic locations of
 The Wall completely cut off West Berlin by land from East Germany and East Berlin . Constructed by the German Democratic Republic beginning August 13, 1961, the Wall was built in 1961 .
 In practice, the Wall served to prevent massive emigration and defection that plagued East Germany and the communist Eastern Bloc during the post-World War Il period . But in practice, it served to stop massive emigrations and defections .
 Berlin Wall Map Map of the location of the Berlin Wall, showing checkpoints . Map shows the locations of checkpoints, including checkpoints .
 Demolition Television coverage of citizens demolishing sections of the Wall on November 9 was soon followed by the East German regime announcing ten new border crossings . The regime announced the locations of Potsdamer Platz, Glienicker Brucke, and Bernauer Straf&e.
 On June 13, 1990, the East German military officially began dismantling the Wall . The Wall began in Bernauer StrafSe and around the Mitte district of Berlin .
 Since 1985, General Secretary Gorbachev instituted liberalizing policies broadly referred to glasnost and perestroika . Summarize the chain of events that resulted in the dissolution of the USSR . Key Points e
 On August 19, 1991, Gorbachev's vice president, Gennady Yanayev, Prime Minister Valentin Pavlov, Defense Minister Dmitry Yazov, KGB chief Vladimir Kryuchkov, and other senior officials acted to prevent the union treaty from being signed by forming the �
 The organizers were detained and Gorbachev returned as president, albeit with his power depleted . The event took place in the Soviet-era Soviet Union in Moscow in 1987 .
 On August 24, 1991, Gorbachev dissolved the Central Committee of the CPSU, resigned as the party's general secretary, and dissolved all party units in the government . The CPSU was the Soviet Union's largest party in Soviet Russia .
 Leaders of the three principal Slavic republics, Russia, Ukraine, and Belarus (formerly Byelorussia) agreed to discuss possible alternatives to the union . The leaders of Russia, Belarus, Ukraine and Belarus will discuss alternative options .
 In South Africa during apartheid, institutional racism was a powerful means of excluding from resources and power any person not marked as white . Examine how racism was institutionalized in South Africa .
 The Union of South Africa allowed social custom and law to govern multiracial affairs and the racial allocation of access to economic, social, and political status .
 Many Afrikaners resented what they perceived as disempowerment by the underpaid black workforce . Many whites resented the superior economic power and prosperity of white English speakers .
 The Prohibition of Mixed Marriages Act of 1949 prohibited marriage between those of different races . Immorality Act of 1950 made sexual relations with a person of a different race a criminal offense .
 Further laws were designed to suppress resistance, especially armed resistance, to apartheid . The laws included laws designed to stop resistance to apartheid in South Africa .
 A territory set aside for black inhabitants of South Africa and South-West Africa (now Namibia) as part of apartheid . Also known as Bantu homeland or black homeland, black state, or simply homeland, a territory .
 Ten were established in South Africa and ten in neighboring South-West Africa for members of designated ethnic groups . Ten of the ten were established for people in South-west Africa .
 The rapid economic development of World War Il attracted black migrant workers in large numbers to chief industrial centers . They compensated for the wartime shortage of white labor .
 In June 1955, the Congress of the People adopted the Freedom Charter, the fundamental document of the anti-apartheid struggle that demanded equal rights for all regardless of race . In 1959, a number of members of the ANC broke from the ANC due to objections over the ANC's re
 ANC planned a campaign against the Pass Laws to begin on March 31, 1960 . They formed the rival Pan Africanist Congress . The ANC planned to use the pass laws to begin a campaign .
 ANC was classified as a terrorist organization by the South African government and some Western countries, including the United States and the United Kingdom . A military wing was formed in 1961 called Umkhonto we Sizwe with Nelson Mandela as its first leader .
 Mandela was South Africa's first black chief executive . Mandela and the National Assembly agreed on an interim constitution based on a liberal democratic model . They agreed on a constitution dividing the country into nine provinces each with its own premier .
 In France, Mandela was welcomed by President Francois Mitterrand; in Vatican City by Pope John Paul Il; and in the United Kingdom by Thatcher . In the U.K. Mandela was greeted by Thatcher in the UK and France .
 Elites in pre-colonial Rwanda propagated an origin myth of the three groups to justify the hierarchical relationship of sociopolitical inequality between them in sacred, religious terms . e Despite sociopolitical stratification, Rwanda was a unified society .
 Location of Rwanda in the African Union (light blue) The map shows the location of Rwanda . Rwanda is one of the most populous African nations in the continent .
 European imperialists encouraged categorizing Rwandans on the basis of ethnicity . The construction of divergent ethnic “Tutsi” and “Hutu” identities occurred during the era of European colonization .
 Their strategy was to reaffirm Tutsi chiefdoms over Hutus to maintain administrative order . Therefore, their strategy was . to . reaffirm chiefdoms . to maintain . administrative order.
 The German presence had mixed effects on the authority of Rwandan governing powers . It helped the Mwami increase control over Rwandan affairs, but weakened Tutsi power due to the introduction of capitalist forces .
 Germany’s defeat in World War | allowed Belgian forces to conquer Rwanda . Belgium's involvement in Rwanda was far more intrusive than German administration . Germany's defeat in the war allowed Belgium to invade Rwanda .
 Belgian social scientists declared that Tutsis must be descendants of the Hamites, who shared a purported closer bloodline to Europeans, and that the Hutus composed two fundamentally different ethno-racial groups . Social scientists said Tutsi and Hutus were descendants of Hamites .
 The Belgians’ pseudo-scientific perspective justified Tutsi racial superiority and Hutu oppression for decades to come . The Belgian government’s ‘pseudo-scientific’ perspective justified Hutu racial superiority .
 RPF made slow but steady gains in the north and east of the country, ending killings in each area they occupied . The RPF has been fighting for independence in the past .
 At the end of July, Kagame’s RPF forces held the whole of Rwanda, except for the zone in the southwest that was occupied by Operation Turquoise, effectively ending the genocide . The Rwandan genocide effectively ended in July .
 In each case, local officials, responding to orders from Kigali, soread rumors that the RPF had killed the president and commanded the population to kill Tutsi in retribution . Local officials responded to the reports that the president had been killed and the population was ordered to kill
 Businessman Felicien Kabuga funded the RTLM and the /nterahamwe . Pascal Musabe and Joseph Nzirorera were responsible for coordinating militia activities nationally .
 Refugee camps were set up by the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees but were effectively controlled by the army and government of the former Hutu regime . Kagame began planning a war to remove the long time dictator of Zaire, who had supported the genocidaires based in
 New law established Gacaca Courts at all administrative levels of Rwanda and in Kigali . The new law established the courts in Rwanda and Rwanda .
 It was created to lessen the burden on normal courts and escalate the administration of justice for those already in prison . It was mainly created to ease the burden of normal courts .
 Rwandan refugee camp in east Zaire . Refugee camp for Rwandans in Kimbumba, eastern Zaire, following the Rwandan genocide .
 A portmanteau of France and Afrique used to denote France’s relationship with its former African colonies . Francafrique was used to refer to former Belgian colonies as well .
 During President Habyarimana's years in power, France maintained close relations with him as part of its Francafrique policy . France and Rwanda assisted Rwanda militarily against the RPF during the Civil War .
 The French also separated several expatriates and children from their Tutsi soouses, rescuing the foreigners but leaving the Rwandans to a likely death . The French rescued the foreigners from their soouses but left them to die .
 After World War I, the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes was formed, recognizing only those three nationalities in its constitution . Serbian and Croatian nationalists attempted to absorb Bosniak ethnicities into their populations . The Kingdom of Yugoslavia, or the First Yugoslavia, was
 The word ""nation"" was used to denote the country's constitutive peoples (konstitutivne nacije), or residents of the federal republics . The word "nation" was used in the Soviet Union .
 The green area shows countries where a South Slavic language is the national language . The green areas show countries where the South Slavs is the language of the majority population .
 After the AustroHungarian occupation of Bosnia and Herzegovina in 1878, the Austrian administration endorsed Bosnjastvo as the basis of a multi-confessional Bosnian nation .
 After World War I, the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes was formed and recognized only those three nationalities in its constitution . The Kingdom was formed after the end of World War II .
 After the failure of the plan, an armed conflict erupted between Bosniaks and Croats over the 30% of Bosnia the latter held . Armed conflict broke out between the two sides .
 The U.N. Protection Force was established during the Croatian War of Independence . It was established to protect areas declared as "safe havens" around Sarajevo, Gorazde, Srebrenica, Tuzla, Zepa, and Bihac .
 In 1995, the situation in the UN Safe Areas had deteriorated to the point of diplomatic crisis . The Srebrenica massacre was one of the worst atrocities in Europe since World War Il .
 The Dutchbat Commander with UNPROFOR testified to the ICTY that his personnel were prevented from returning to the enclave by Serb forces and that equipment and ammunition were also barred .
 In March 1995, Radovan Karadzi¢, President of the Republika Srpska issued a directive to the VRS concerning the long-term strategy of the forces in the enclave . Despite pressure from the international community to end the war and ongoing efforts to negotiate a
 Karadzi¢ issued a new order authorizing the 1,500-strong VRS Drina Corps to capture the town of Srebrenica on July 9, 1995 . The order was followed by the capture of the town .
 Izetbegovié declared his opposition to any type of ethnic division in Bosnia in 1992 . However, on March 28, 1992, after meeting with the then U.S. ambassador to Yugoslavia Warren Zimmermann, in Sarajevo, he withdrew his signature and declared his
 The Army of Republika Srpska surrounded the city for nearly four years, deploying troops and artillery in the surrounding hills . It would become the longest siege in the history of modern warfare .
 After the failure of the plan, an armed conflict erupted between Bosniaks and Croats over the 30 percent of Bosnia the latter held . Armed conflict broke out between the two sides .
 The U.N. Protection Force was established during the Croatian War of Independence . It was established to protect areas declared as "safe havens" around Sarajevo, Gorazde, Srebrenica, Tuzla, Zepa, and Bihac .
 The Hague revealed that Alija Izetbegovic, President of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina during the Bosnian War, had also been under investigation for war crimes . Prosecutor did not find sufficient evidence over the course of the . lifetime to issue an indictment .
 Most Bosnian-Serb wartime leaders were indicted and judged guilty for war crimes and ethnic cleansing . Most of the Bosnian war leaders, such as MomCcilo KrajiSnik, were indicted .
 Ratko Mladi¢, the top military general with command responsibility in the Army of Republika Srpska, is on trial in the ICTY . He is charged with crimes in connection with the siege of Sarajevo and the Srebrenica massacre
 Initial investigation into Milosevic faltered for lack of evidence . Serbian Prime Minister Zoran Dindic extradited him to ICTY to stand trial for charges of war crimes instead .
 Rasim Delié, chief of staff of the Army of Bosnia and Herzegovina, sentenced to three years' imprisonment on September 15, 2008, for his failure to prevent Bosnian mujahideen members of the Bosnian army from committing crimes, including murder, rape
 The World Wide Web (sometimes abbreviated ""www"" or ""W3") is an information space where documents and other web resources are identified by URIs, interlinked by hypertext links, and accessed via the Internet using a web browser and web-based applications .
 Users generating content (in the form of ideas, text, videos, or pictures) could be harnessed to create value . They argued that the activities of users generating content could be used to create valuable content .
 As transportation technology improved, travel time and costs decreased dramatically between the 18th and early 20th centuries . Explain how travel has become easier and more universal in the modern age .
 Developments in technology and transport infrastructure have made many types of tourism more affordable . Jumbo jets, low-cost airlines, and more accessible airports have made tourism more accessible .
 International movement of labor is often considered important to economic development . International trade is considered an important part of economic development in the United States .
 More students are seeking higher education in foreign countries . Many international students now consider overseas study a stepping stone to permanent residency within a country .
 As more people have ties to networks of people and places across the globe, people are increasingly marrying across national boundaries . People are increasingly married across national borders .
 Some have come to view one or more globalizing processes as detrimental to social well-being on a global or local scale . Xenophobia is an issue in many modern societies, with xenophobia becoming an issue .
 International trade has existed throughout history, but its economic, social, and political importance has been on the rise in recent centuries . Identify how trade has changed since the 1990s . Use this information to help students understand international trade .
 Offshore outsourcing is the practice of hiring an external organization to perform business functions in a country other than the one where the products or services are actually developed or manufactured . Offshore Outsourcing is a term used to refer to a country not the country where products are actually made .
 Capitalist peace theory posits that once states reach certain criterion for capitalist economic development, they are less likely to engage in war with each other . No two countries with established McDonald’s franchises had fought a war against each other since those franchises were established in both countries . e
 The graph shows that O nations scored an 8 or higher in 1800, 1900, about 10 scored 8 or . higher in 1900 and about 20 scored an . 8 in 1930, about 35 in 1980, about 60 in 2003, about 20 in 1930 and about 10 in 1945 .
 The proliferation of democratic norms occurs only secondarily to the establishment of contract-intensive economies . As a result, theorists link causation of peace with liberal economies rather than liberal political systems .
 Leaders of states give greater credibility to threats made by countries with higher levels of capital openness . Countries with higher capital openness tend to be more peaceful than others by avoiding the possibility of misrepresentation .
 This makes commitments of nations with smaller governments more credible than those with larger ones, allowing for smaller governments to be better positioned for avoiding conflicts . This makes smaller governments, and thus ""capitalist ""capitalist"" economies, better positioned .
 Both countries mobilized their military along common borders . Both countries made threats involving their nuclear capabilities . The war was not fought in all possible theaters (such as Rajasthan and Punjab borders)
 Several eurozone member states were unable to repay or refinance their government debt or bail out over-indebted banks under their national supervision without the assistance of third parties . The detailed causes of the debt crisis varied .
 The currency was introduced in non-physical form (traveler's checks, electronic transfers, banking, etc.) at midnight on January 1, 1999 . National currencies of participating countries ceased to exist independently in that their exchange rates were locked at fixed rates .
 The euro banknotes have common designs on both sides created by the Austrian designer Robert Kalina . The designs were created by Kalina and were designed by the designer of the euro .
 The structure of the eurozone as a currency union without fiscal union (e.g., different tax and public pension rules) contributed to the crisis and limited the ability of European leaders to respond to it, says Simon Tisdall .
 Ireland and Portugal exited their bailout programs in 2014 . Portugal and Ireland were the only two countries to exit the bailout programs . Portugal exited its bailout programs last year . Ireland's economic growth and improved structural deficits allowed them to exit their programs .
 Abkhazia and South Ossetia are de facto secession from Georgia . The conflict began in 2000 when Russia imposed visa regime on Georgia .
 In 2008, Abkhazia and South Ossetia submitted formal requests for recognition to Russia's parliament . By August 1, 2008, Ossetian separatists began shelling Georgian villages .
 In accordance with the Georgian stand, many international actors recognize Abkhazia and South Ossetia as occupied Georgian territories . The 2008 war was the first time since the fall of the Soviet Union that the Russian military was used against an independent state, demonstrating Russia's willingness to wage a
 Despite being an independent country since 1991, Russia has perceived Ukraine as part of its sohere of interests . Shortly after the war, Russian president Medvedev unveiled a five-point Russian foreign policy .
 Georgia withdrew its membership in 2008, while the Baltic states (Estonia, Lithuania, and Latvia) chose not to participate . Georgia withdrew in 2008 . Estonia, Lithuania and Latvia did not participate .
 Euromaidan protests began on November 21, 2013, with public protests in Maidan Nezalezhnosti (Independence Square) in Kiev, demanding closer European integration . Protests began on the night of November 21 in Kiev .
 Viadimir Putin became president of the Russian Federation in 2000, which had a profound impact on Russo-Georgian relations . The Russian Federation has been in touch with Georgia since 2000 .
 The construction of the EU-sponsored Nabucco pipeline in Transcaucasia was averted . The EU-backed Nabucca pipeline was intended to be built in Trans-Caucasian territory .
 Both sides accused each other of killings and provoking skirmishes . It remains unclear which accusations are true, with both Russia and Ukraine denying the opponent's claims .
 A sookesman restated China's belief of non-interference in the internal affairs of other nations and urged dialogue . A spokesman for the Chinese government said it would not interfere in other nations' internal affairs .
 Many European countries embarked on austerity programs, reducing their budget deficits relative to GDP from 2010 to 2011 . Many European nations embarked on a similar austerity program in 2011 .
 To fight the crisis, some governments have also raised taxes and lowered expenditures, which contributed to social unrest . Some governments have raised taxes, lowered expenditures and raised taxes .
 Despite the substantial rise of sovereign debt in only a few eurozone countries, effectiveness of the applied measures, and relatively stable return to economic growth, the debt crisis revealed serious weaknesses in the process of economic integration within the EU . The debt crisis resulted in the general crisis of confidence that the idea
 In 1992, members of the European Union signed the Maastricht Treaty, under which they pledged to limit their deficit soending and debt levels . The treaty was signed in 1992, and members pledged to reduce their deficit .
 The ESM was established in 2012 (taking over the functions of the EFSF) as a permanent firewall for the eurozone . ESM is designed to safeguard and provide instant access to financial assistance programs for member states of the eurozone in financial difficulty .
 From 2010 to 2011, unemployment rates in Spain, Greece, Italy, Ireland, Portugal, and the UK increased . Spain and Greece had particularly high unemployment rates reaching particularly high rates .
 Many economists advocate greater deficits when economies are struggling . This contributed to social unrest and debates among economists, many of whom advocate greater deficit .
 By mid-2012, the Netherlands, Austria, and Finland benefited from zero or negative interest rates . Belgium and France also on the list of eventual beneficiaries . Greece announced a series of austerity measures to secure a three-year €110 billion loan .
 By early 2013, successful sovereign debt auctions across the eurozone, most importantly in Ireland, Spain, and Portugal, showed that investors believed the ECB-backedbackstop has worked .
 Ireland and Portugal exited their bailout programs in mid-2014 . Return to economic growth and improved structural deficits enabled them to exit their bailout .
 Austerity is a set of economic policies that aim to demonstrate the government's fiscal discipline by bringing revenues closer to expenditures . Learning Objective Evaluate the effectiveness of the austerity measures advocated by the European Union's leadership .
 In 2010 and 2011, the Greek government announced a series of austerity measures to secure loans from the Troika . Under pressure of European Union leadership, many European countries embarked on austerity programs in response to their debt crisis .
 Greeks lost much of their purchasing power, spent less on goods and services, and saw a record high seasonal adjusted unemployment rate of 27.9% in 2013 . e The Irish sovereign debt crisis arose not from government over-spending, but from the state guaranteeing the six main Irish-
 Unemployment rose from 4% in 2006 to 14% by 2010, while the national budget went from a surplus in 2007 to a deficit of 32% GDP in 2010 . In 2010, the Portuguese government announced a fresh austerity package through a series of tax hikes and salary cuts .
 Due to reforms already instituted by Spain's conservative government, less stringent austerity requirements were included . The reforms were included in Spain's austerity package .
 There has been substantial criticism of the austerity measures implemented by most European nations to counter the debt crisis . Economists predict the timing and level of austerity would only worsen the recession .
 Greece's unemployment rate grew from 7.5% in September 2008 to 27.9% in June 2013 . As a result, Greeks lost about 40% of their purchasing power since the start of the crisis .
 The Irish sovereign debt crisis arose not from government over-spending, but from the state guaranteeing the six main lrish-based banks who had financed a property bubble . The state guarantees the loans to six main Irish banks .
 lreland was one country that initially benefited from austerity measures . The economy subsequently collapsed in 2008 . The country's economy subsequently suffered from austerity .
 As millions of refugees flee to Europe, both the European Union and the larger European community have been testing the limits of integration and solidarity . Some countries accept — and others refuse— the responsibility to deal with the crisis .
 The number of forcibly displaced people worldwide reached 59. million in 2014, which includes 19 million refugees and 1. million asylum seekers . Those who have basis to seek asylum in the EU face the rules of the Dublin Regulation .
 Most of the people arriving in Europe in 2015 were people fleeing war and persecution in countries such as Syria, Afghanistan, Irag, and Eritrea . Most of those arriving in 2015 came from war-torn countries like Syria and Afghanistan .
 Germany has been the most sought-after final destination in the EU migrant and refugee crisis . European Union leaders have decided to tighten border control on migrants .
 By default (when no family reasons or humanitarian grounds are present), the first member state that an asylum seeker entered and in which they have been fingerprinted is responsible . By default, the first country that asylum seeker enters is responsible for the asylum seeker .
 Many criticize Dublin rules for placing too much responsibility for asylum seekers on member states on the EU's external borders . Many criticize the Dublin rules . Instead of devising a burden-sharing system among EU states, they should have shared responsibility .
 Most people arriving in Europe in 2015 were refugees, fleeing war and persecution in countries such as Syria, Afghanistan, Irag, and Eritrea . According to the UNHCR, most refugees in Europe were refugees .
 Wars fueling the crisis are the Syrian Civil War, the lraq War, and the War in Somalia . War in Darfur, Afghanistan, Somalia, Afghanistan and Somalia are also fueling the conflict .
 Hungary, Sweden, and Austria received around two-thirds of the EU's asylum applications in 2015 . Hungary and Sweden were the top recipients per capita of asylum applications .
 If member states do not show fiscal discipline, they will sooner or later risk a sovereign debt crisis in their country . As a consequence, if member states . show fiscal . discipline . member states will sooner . later risk . a sovereign . debt crisis .
 Britain maintained its stand of focusing largely on the economic union . While the latter pushed for the gradual but increasingly stronger integration that would go beyond the common market (economic integration)
 The Middle Eastern countries with the highest scores are Israel, Tunisia, Turkey, Lebanon, Morocco, Kuwait, and Jordan . Israel and Tunisia are the most democratic countries in the world .
 Jordan was upgraded from ""not free" to ""partly free" only in 2017 . Jordan is a constitutional monarchy, while the king holds wide executive and legislative powers . Jordan has been upgraded from "not free"" to "partly free" only by 2017 .
 Israel, Lebanon, Turkey, and Kuwait were determined ""partly free" while all the other countries in the region received the ""not free" status . Israel, Lebanon, Turkey, and Kuwait received the "not free"" status .
 There are diverse theories on why the Middle East remains undemocratic . The Middle East is essentially undemocracy .
 Nearly all the Middle Eastern states, including those categorized as democratic, violate some human rights according to international legal standards . Nearly all of the countries in the Middle East violate human rights, according to the UN .
 Until 1975, Freedom House considered Lebanon to be one of only two (together with Israel) politically free countries in the Middle East and North Africa region . Lebanon was considered one of the only two politically free states in the region .
 The constitution of modern Egypt has given the president a virtual monopoly over the decision-making process . The constitution devotes 30 articles to presidential prerogatives .
 The Iranian Revolution of 1979 resulted in an electoral system, but the system has a limited democracy in practice . Another example is Iran, where the revolution resulted in a system of limited democracy .
 Some elections in lran, such as those for city councils, satisfies free and democratic election criteria to some extent . However some elections in . lran have been held in the past, including those for . city council elections .
 Authoritarian regimes evolving around a powerful individual holding power has long been the critical feature of Middle Eastern politics . Authoritarian governments evolving around powerful individuals holding power have long been a key feature of the region's politics .
 Bashar al-Assad, who refused to resign from the presidency of Syria, is one cause behind the brutal civil war that has been waged since 2011 . Syria's civil war is a symbol of the authoritarian rejection of democratic changes in the region .
 Iraqi police show of ink-stained index fingers proof that they visited the polls to cast their ballot in Iraq’s historic parliamentary elections in 2005 . Iraqi police say they were in the country to vote in the historic parliamentary election .
 The escalating armed conflict in Iraq has placed more children in danger . The escalating conflict in the country's capital, Baghdad, has seen more children die .
 Israel, the most democratic state in the Middle East, faces significant human rights problems . It faces institutional discrimination of Arab citizens of Israel (many of whom selfidentify as Palestinian)
 Arab oil embargo and subsequent quadrupling of the price of oil quadrupled in mid-1970s . 1979 Iranian Revolution established an Islamic republic in Iran under Ayatollah Khomeini . Arab oil and Iranian oil embargo fueled the resurgence of oil prices .
 The Iranian Revolution and the Soviet-Afghan War convinced many that the Westernization of the Muslim world was avoidable and fueled radical Islamism . The Soviet-Iranian War and the Iranian Revolution convinced many many that they were not avoidable .
 An Arabic word that literally means striving or struggling, especially with a praiseworthy aim . It is commonly used interchangeably with the terms political Islam or Islamic fundamentalism .
 Islamic State A Salafi jihadist extremist extremist militant group led by and mainly composed of Sunni Arabs from Syria and Iraq . Islamic State is a Salafi Muslim extremist extremist group .
 As of March 2015, it had control over territory occupied by ten million people in Syria and lrag . It also has nominal control over small areas of Libya, Nigeria, and Afghanistan .
 Taliban is a Sunni Islamic fundamentalist political movement in Afghanistan currently waging war (an insurgency, or jihad) within that country . The Taliban is the Taliban, a Sunni Islamist fundamentalist political party in Afghanistan .
 Islamism is commonly used interchangeably with the terms political Islam or Islamic fundamentalism . Islamismism is most commonly used in reference to political Islam . Islamistism is a form of Islamism .
 Jamaat-e-Islami of Pakistan is basically a sociopolitical and democratic vanguard party . It gained political influence through military coup d'états . The party has gained influence through coups d'etats .
 Hamas is a Palestinian Sunni-lslamic fundamentalist that has been governing authority of the Gaza Strip since 2007 . Similarly, Hamas is an Islamic fundamentalist that is governing authority in Gaza Strip . Hamas is also a Sunni-lamaic fundamentalist .
 Islamist movements have used the democratic process and focus on votes and coalitionbuilding with other parties . Many Islamist movements, such as the Jamaat-e-Islami and Muslim Brotherhood, have used democratic process to win votes .
 Arab oil embargo and subsequent quadrupling of the price of oil in the mid-1970s fueled the resurgence . The 1979 Iranian Revolution established an Islamic republic in Iran under Ayatollah Khomeini .
 According to polls taken in 2008 and 2010 by Pew and Gallop, pluralities of the population in Muslim-majority countries are undecided as to what religion (and certain interpretations of) should influence public life, politics, and the legal system .
 The first modern Islamist state of Iran was established among the Shia of Iran . It was established in the first modern state of Islam .
 The Islamic State, formerly known as the Islamic State of lraq and the Levant, is a Salafi jihadist extremist extremist militant group . The group is mainly composed of Sunni Arabs from Syria and Iraq .
 It gained prominence after it drove Iragi government forces out of key cities in western Irag in June 2014 .
 Although outgunned and outnumbered, insurgents from the Taliban and other radical groups have waged asymmetric warfare with guerrilla raids and ambushes in the countryside . The two were later joined by other forces .
 On May 2, 2011, U.S. Navy SEALs killed Osama bin Laden in Abbotabad, Pakistan . Violence sharply escalated from 2007 to 2009 .
 The Iraq War began on March 20, 2003, with the United States, joined by the United Kingdom and several coalition allies, launching a ""shock and awe"" bombing campaign . War crimes by have been committed both sides .
 The power vacuum following Saddam's demise led to widespread sectarian violence and insurgency against U.S. and coalition forces . The Bush administration based its rationale for the war principally on the assertion that Iraq possessed weapons of mass destruction . No substantial evidence for this claim was found .
 President Barack Obama formally withdrew all combat troops from Iraq by December 2011 . Iragi insurgency surged in the aftermath of the U.S. withdrawal .
 The Taliban refused to extradite him (or others sought by the U.S. without evidence of his involvement in the 9/11 attacks . The Taliban government refused to extradition him without evidence he was involved in the attacks in Afghanistan .
 Hamid Karzai was selected to head the Afghan interim administration at the Bonn Conference the same month . The Afghan transitional administration in Kabul became the Afghan transitional government .
 The United States claims at least 44 instances in which militants have used white phosphorus in weapons or attacks . The U.S. says white phosphorus has been used in 44 instances of use by militants .
 The Iraq War began on March 20, 2003, with the United States launching a ""shock and awe"" bombing campaign . lragi forces were quickly overwhelmed as United States forces swept through the country .
 As many as 2 million Iraqis left the country in 2008, Red Crescent estimates . Red Crescent estimated the total internal displacement was around 2. million in 2008 .
 The invasion preserved the autonomy of the Kurdish region . The Kurdish region is historically the most democratic area of Iraq . Many lragi refugees from other territories fled into the Kurdish land .
 Poverty led many Iragi women to turn to prostitution to support themselves and their families, attracting sex tourists from regional lands . Poverty led to prostitution in the Iragi region, and prostitution attracted sex tourists .
 Iraqi insurgency surged in the aftermath of the United States withdrawal . Iraqi insurgency surges in the wake of the U.S. withdrawal .
 Terror campaigns involving Iragi (primarily radical Sunni) anti-government insurgent groups and various factions within Iraq escalated . Terror campaigns in Iraq escalated in the past decade .
 In the summer of 2014 President Obama announced the return of United States forces to Irag, but only in the form of aerial support, in an effort to halt the advance of ISIS forces, and stabilize the political situation . The return of U.S. forces to the region was only
 Iraq remains in chaos with the Islamic State consolidating its gains and sectarian violence continuing unabated . Despite United States bombings and breakthroughs on the political front, Iraq remained in chaos .
 Between 151,000 and over one million Iragis died as a result of the Iraq War . Survey of Iragi deaths from the first four years of the war estimated that between 151,00 and over 1 million died during this time .
 A later study, published in 2011, estimated that 500,000 Iraqis had died as a result of the conflict since the invasion .
 As many as half as half of Iraqi doctors left the country between 2003 and 2006 . Half of Iraq's doctors left Iraq in 2006 .
 By the end of 2015, 4. million Iragis had been internally displaced, U.N. refugee agency says . By end of the year, 4 million had been displaced from their homes .
 Several scholars stated that the abuses constituted state-sanctioned crimes . Several scholars said the abuses were state-sponsored crimes .
 The U.S. National Intelligence Council concluded in a 2005 report that the war in Iraq had become a breeding ground for a new generation of terrorists .
 Libya, Egypt, Yemen, Syria, and Irag, where either the regime was toppled or major uprisings occurred, including civil wars or insurgencies .
 Tunisia experienced a series of conflicts during the three years leading up to the Arab Spring, most notably in the mining area of Gafsa in 2008 where protests continued for many months . Tunisia is one of the countries in the Arab world experiencing unrest .
 In Western Sahara, the Gdeim Izik protest camp was erected 12 kilometres south-east of El Aaidn by a group of young Sahrawis in 2010 .
 Yemeni President Alli Abdullah Saleh signed the power-transfer deal in which a presidential election was held, resulting in his successor Abd al-Rab Mansur al-Hadi formally replacing him as the president of Yemen in February 2012 . In exchange for immunity from prosecution, Saleh
 Sudanese President Omar al-Bashir announced that he would not seek re-election in 2015 . Iraqi Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki announced that his term was ending in 2014, although there were violent demonstrations demanding his resignation in 2011 .
 Popular unrest in Kuwait resulted in resignation of Prime Minister Nasser Mohammed Al-Ahmed Al-Sabah cabinet . Popular unrest led to resignation of the cabinet . Prime Minister resigned after popular unrest .
 Since 1949, Syrian has been under authoritarian rule, with numerous coups shifting the center of power . Learning Objective Outline the events that led to the Syrian Civil War . Key points include the events leading up to the conflict .
 Syrian Muslims are 74 percent Sunnis, 13 percent Shias, 3 percent Druze, and the remaining 10 percent are Christians . The majority of Syrian Muslims is Sunni Muslims .
 Christian militias in Syria and northern Irag are largely made up of ethnic Assyrians, Syriac-Arameans, and Armenians . The Christian militias are largely Assyrian and Syriac .
 Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL, Known more commonly as ISIS), has made rapid military gains in both Syria and Iraq . In the east, a jihadist militant group originating from lrag, has taken control of both Iraq and Syria and Syria .
 As of 2015, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and Turkey were openly backing the Army of Conquest, an umbrella rebel group that reportedly includes an al-Qaeda linked al-Nusra Front and another Salafi coalition .
 The program was launched in the 1950s with the help of the United States as part of the Atoms for Peace program . The participation of the U.S. and Western European governments in Iran's nuclear program continued until the 1979 Iranian Revolution .
 Formal negotiations toward the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action on Iran's nuclear program began in November 2013 . The interim agreement was an interim agreement signed between Iran and the P5+ 1 countries in November .
 Iran agreed not to build any new heavy-water facilities for the same period of time . Iran also agreed to stop building new heavy water facilities in the region .
 To monitor and verify Iran's compliance with the agreement, the IAEA will have regular access to all Iranian nuclear facilities . Iran's nuclear facilities will be monitored by the International Atomic Atomic Energy Agency .
 With the prospective lifting of some sanctions, the agreement is expected to have a significant impact on both the economy of Iran and global markets . With the prospect of the lifting of sanctions, Iran's economy is set to grow .
 Despite restrictions on American investment in Iran, other provisions apply to all foreign investors . Many lranian expatriates based in the United States continue to make substantial investments in Iran .
 P5+1 is a group of six world powers that joined together in diplomatic efforts with Iran with regard to its nuclear program . The group has been involved in a series of diplomatic efforts to reach an agreement with Iran .
 The participation of the U.S. and Western European governments in Iran's nuclear program continued until the 1979 Iranian Revolution that toppled the Shah of lran .
 The IAEA launched an investigation in 2003 after an Iranian dissident group revealed undeclared nuclear activities carried out by Iran . Iran has been accused of carrying out the activities in violation of international law .
 In November 2013, the Joint Plan of Action was signed between Iran and the P5+ 1 countries in Geneva, Switzerland . The agreement was an interim agreement on Iran's nuclear program .
 UN sanctions against Iran and some EU sanctions will terminate and some will be suspended . Some of the IAEA report verifying implementation of Iran's nuclear-related measures will terminate . The UN sanctions will also be suspended following the report .
 Many Iranian Americans, even those who fled repression in lran and oppose its government, welcomed the JCPOA as a step forward . Many Iranians have fled the country and oppose the Iranian government .
 Iran has nearly 10 percent of global oil reserves and 18 percent natural gas reserves . The energy sector is particularly important, with Iran having 18 percent of natural gas and 10 percent oil .
 Iran is considered a strong emerging market play by investment and trading firms . Iran is seen as an emerging market in the Middle East .
 In accordance with the One Country, Two Systems policy, the economies of Hong Kong and Macau are separate from the rest of China and each other . More recently, the government has struggled to contain the social strife and environmental damage .
 The Four Asian Tigers are the economies of Hong Kong, Singapore, South Korea, and Taiwan . The economies underwent rapid industrialization and maintained exceptionally high growth rates between the early 1960s (mid-1950s for Hong Kong) and 1990s .
 The term Tiger Cub Economies collectively refers to the economies of Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Thailand, and Vietnam . Export policies have been the de facto reason for the rise of the Four Asian Tiger economies .
 A collective name used to refer to the economies of Hong Kong, Singapore, South Korea, and Taiwan . The economies underwent rapid industrialization and maintained exceptionally high growth rates (in excess of 7 percent a year) between the early 1960s and 1990s .
 Japan's early industrial economy reached its height during World War I . Its eventual defeat in the war slowed down economic development for a relatively short period of time .
 The Four Asian Tigers are the economies of Hong Kong, Singapore, South Korea, and Taiwan . They underwent rapid industrialization and maintained exceptionally high growth rates between the early 1960s and 1990s .
 China attempted to keep India away from the South China Sea waters in 2011 . In 2011, China protested IndianVietnamese cooperation in the oil sector . China also attempted to stop India from entering the waters .
 The South China Sea had also become known for Indonesian and Filipino pirates . The United States and China are currently in disagreement over the South China sea .
 The South China Sea had also become known for Indonesian pirates, with frequent attacks on Malaysian, Singaporean, and Vietnamese vessels . Filipino pirates attacking Vietnamese fishermen .
 Several states (e.g. the United States of America) are conducting ""freedom of navigation" operations to promote this situation . Several states are conducting operations to help the situation .
 The June 15 North-South Joint Declaration the two leaders signed during the first South-North summit stated that they would hold the second summit at an appropriate time . As a result, Kim Dae-jung was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize .
 Under Kim Jong-in, extreme human rights abuses and food insecurity remain major issues in North Korea . Several incidents have contributed to growing tensions between South Korea and North Korea, including sinking of a South Korean ship caused by a North Korean torpedo .
 In naming his cabinet, Modi renamed the Ministry of Environment and Forests . The government began constructing millions of toilets in rural areas and encouraging people to use them .
 The new ministry also removed or diluted a number of laws related to environmental protection . Massive corruption, widespread poverty, and violence against girls and women constitute some of the greatest challenges in 21st-century India .
 Following the initial incident, there were further outbreaks of violence in Anmedabad for three weeks . The violence was the first of three weeks in the city .
 Narendra Modi Narendra Modi is current Prime Minister of India . Narendra Modi has been in office since May 2014 . He is the leader of the country's most populous state .
 While officially classified as a communalist riot, the events have been described as a pogrom by many scholars . Many scholars have described the events as a 'pogrom' by many .
 Modi led the BJP in the 2014 general election, which gave the party a majority in the parliament . It was the first time a single party had achieved this since 1984 . The BJP led the country to a first majority in parliament in 1984 .
 Modi's reformist approach has made him very popular with the public . Modi's reforms have made him popular among the voters .
 The largest contributors to the corruption are social welfare programs and social soending schemes enacted by the Indian government . Social welfare programs are among the biggest contributors to corruption in India .
 Using the United Nations definition, it comprised Sudanese Arab tribes . The core of the tribes are from the Abbala background with significant recruitment from the Baggara people .
 In 2011, the leader of the LJM, Tijani Sese, stated that the movement had accepted the core proposals of the Darfur peace document proposed by the joint-mediators .
 Darfur conflict estimated with 95% confidence that the excess number of deaths is between 178,258 and 461,520 . 80% of these deaths are due to disease, with 80% due to death from disease .
 In 2011, a referendum was held to determine whether South Sudan should become an independent country and separate from Sudan .83% of the population voted for independence .
 South Sudan formally became independent from Sudan (predominantly Muslim) South Sudan . Majority of population adhering to indigenous religions or Christianity . South Sudan has 75% of former Sudan's oil reserves .
 The group had alleged links to al-Qaeda, but in March 2015, it announced its allegiance to the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant . The group has been fighting in Iraq and Syria since 2011 .
 Boko Haram conducted its operations more or less peacefully during the first seven years of its existence . Boko Haram has been fighting in Nigeria for seven years .
 Boko Haram has been attempting to overthrow the Nigerian government through various militant, including terrorist, strategies . Boko Haram was founded in 2009 by Boko Haram in Nigeria . The group has been trying to overthrow Nigeria's government .
 Boko Haram began to target schools in 2010, killing hundreds of students by 2014 . Hundreds of students were killed by Boko Haram, including hundreds of children .
 Boko Haram continues its terrorist activities as of March 2017 . The Nigerian government's response has revealed the political and military weaknesses of the state apparatus .
 Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant led by and mainly composed of Sunni Arabs from Syria and Iraq . Salafi jihadist extremist militant militant groups led by . and mainly . Sunni Arab groups .
 The group had alleged links to al-Qaeda, but in March 2015, announced its allegiance to the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL or ISIS) It has since then publicly uses the name “ISIL-West Africa Province” or its variants .
 The early 2000s saw the creation of fledgling interim federal administrations . This term refers to a political body that has disintegrated to a point where basic conditions and responsibilities of a sovereign government no longer function properly .
 Islamist organization assumed control of much of the southern part of the country . It promptly imposed sharia law .
 As the war continues, the country is facing a plethora of challenges caused not only by the decades of fighting but also by hostile environmental conditions .
 About 80% of Somalia's population is nomadic or semi-nomadic pastoralists . According to the Central Bank of Somalia, about 80% are nomadic . Somalia is home to about 80 per cent of its population .
 The group was renamed BRICS with the ""S" standing for South Africa to reflect the expanded membership . e The economy of South Africa is the largest in Africa .
 Jacob Zuma's government has begun to increase the role of state-owned enterprises . State-owned businesses have become more important in South Africa's economy . Zuma was elected in 2009 and reelected in 2014 .
 A public health crisis is a difficult situation or complex health system that affects humans in one or more geographic areas, from a particular locality tompass the entire planet . Learning Objective Analyze some of the health crises that have ravaged Africa .
 As of March 2017, Somalia and South Sudan are experiencing severe droughts and experts estimate famines will affect millions of people in both regions . e In addition to recurrent food crises, malnutrition and poverty are endemic problems that affect the health of massive numbers of Africans .
 A public health crisis is a difficult situation or complex health system that affects humans in one or more geographic areas, from a particular locality to the entire planet . Public health crises are difficult situations or complex systems that affect humans in particular geographic areas .
 Liberal attitudes are traditionally liberal attitudes espoused by many communities toward multiple sexual partners and sexual activity before or outside marriage . Chief among these are liberal attitudes toward multiple sex partners .
 In December 2016, WHO announced that a two-year trial of the rvVSV-ZEBOV vaccine appeared to offer protection from the strain of Ebola responsible for the West Africa outbreak .
 In 2006, an acute shortage of food affected the countries in the Horn of Africa (Somalia, Djibouti, and Ethiopia) as well as northeastern Kenya . The Horn of African countries were affected by the crisis .
 In 1985, Brazil entered its contemporary era, ushering in a period of re-democratization after decades of dictatorships and military rule . Connect allegations of widespread corruption to Brazil's economic growth in the 2000s Key Points e .
 His presidency was characterized by major economic growth, increased international prestige, and numerous corruption scandals . His presidency has been characterized by many scandals, including corruption scandals.
 Despite scandals, Lula's popularity rose to a record of 80%, the highest for a Brazilian president since the end of the military regime . Despite these scandals, the former president's approval rose to an 80% in 2008 .
 One major mark of Lula's second term was his efforts to expand Brazil's political influence worldwide . Brazil's membership in G20, a global discussion forum of major powers, was one of Brazil's biggest draws .
 Rousseff was impeached by the Brazilian Congress in 2016 . Evidence that politicians from all main political parties were involved in several bribery and tax evasion schemes, led to her impeachment .
 Leading up to the 21st century, Brazil saw a return to democratic rule after a period of dictatorship during the Vargas Era and military rule under Brazilian military government .
 On August 24, 2007, the Brazilian Supreme Court accepted indictments of 40 individuals relating to the Mensaldao scandal . Most of the indictments were former or current federal deputies, and all of whom were still allies of the Brazilian president .
 Lula is also notorious for seeing himself as a friendly, peacemaker conciliator Head of State . He has befriended leaders of rival countries from the likes of George W Bush and Barack Obama to Hugo Chavez and Fidel Castro .
 Simén Bolivar was an early 19th-century Venezuelan and Latin American revolutionary leader . He was prominent in the Spanish American wars of independence in achieving the independence of most of northern South America from Spanish rule . The ""Bolivarian Revolution"" is named after Simén 
 Demonstrations and riots have left over 40 fatalities in the unrest between both Chavistas and opposition protesters . Opposition leaders such as Leopoldo Lépez and Antonio Ledezma have been arrested .
 Human rights groups have strongly condemned the arrest of Leopoldo Lépez . The arrest has been widely condemned by human rights groups .
 Chileans elected a new president and the majority of members of a two-chamber congress on December 14, 1989 . Chileans ended the rule of the oppressive military dictatorship of Augusto Pinochet .
 Aylwin was succeeded by another Christian Democrat, Eduardo Frei Ruiz-Tagle, who led the same coalition for a 6-year term .
 Center-right investor Sebastian Pinera of the National Renewal assumed the presidency on March 11, 2010, after Bachelet's term expired . Center-left investor and businessman Sebastian Pinersa assumed presidency in 2010 . Bachelets returned to office again after his term limits ended
 On October 30, 1983, Argentines went to the polls to choose a president; vice-president; and national, provincial, and local officials . The elections were deemed by international observers to be fair and honest, thus beginning the country's transition to democratic government .
 Since then, Argentina had seen several democratically elected presidents, including Carlos Menem, who embraced neo-liberal policies, and De la Rua, who kept Menem's economic plan despite economic crisis .
 Néstor Kirchner was elected as the new president in 2002, boosting neo-Keynesian economic policies and ending the economic crisis . He did not run for reelection, promoting instead the candidacy of his wife, Cristina Fernandez de Kirchners . Mauricio Macri
 The judicial trial of the members of the de facto military government that ruled Argentina during the dictatorship of the Proceso de Reorganizaci6n Nacional lasted from 1976 to 1983 .
 Peronist is a person who follows the Argentinian political movement based on the ideology and legacy of former President Juan Domingo Perén and his second wife, Eva Peron . Peronists are followers of Peronism .
 As of 2016, Perén was the only Argentine president to have been elected president three times . Perén is the only president to be elected president of Argentina .
 Center-right investor and businessman Sebastian Pinera assumed the presidency on March 11, 2010 after Bachelet's term expired . Center-Right investor and business magnate Sebastian is the current president of Chile .
 Concertacion has continued to dominate Chilean politics for last two decades . Concertacion dominated Chile's political scene for last 20 years . The Concertacion continues to dominate Chile politics .
 She was sworn in on March 11, 2006 . She extended the Concertaci6n coalition governance for another four years .
 After 20 years, Chile went in a new direction marked by the win of center-right Sebastian Pinera in the Chilean presidential election of 2009-2010 . Center-right center-left Sebastian won the election in 2009-10 .
 Access tunnel collapsed at the San José copper and gold mine in the Atacama Desert near Copiap6 in northern Chile . 33 men were trapped 2,300 feet below ground in August 2010 .
 Good macroeconomic indicators failed to halt social dissatisfaction claiming for a better and fairer education . Massive protests demanding more democratic and equitable institutions and permanent disapproval of Pinera's administration .
 Due to term limits, Sebastian Pinera did not stand for reelection in 2013 . His term expired in March 2014 resulting in Michelle Bachelet returning to office .
 The economy began to decline in 1995, with increasing unemployment and recession . Fernando de la Rua, the UCR (Radical Civic Union) returned to the presidency .
 Calderén ordered a raise on the salaries of the Federal Police and the Mexican armed forces on his first day as president . Despite imposing a cap on salaries of high-ranking public servants, Calderén has ordered a pay raise .
 Calderén's government also ordered massive raids on drug cartels in his home state of Michoacan . Calderén took office in December 2006 in response to an increasingly deadly spate of violence in his state . Calderen's government has ordered a series of massive raids against drug cartels .
 A drug cartel is a criminal organization with the intention of supplying drug trafficking operations . It can range from loosely managed agreements among drug traffickers to formalized commercial enterprises with billions of dollars in annual profits .
 Drug cartels came to power in the 1970s and 80s, controlling the vast majority of illegal drug trafficking in Latin America and the U.S. Drug cartels controlled the vast amount of illegal trafficking throughout Latin America, the United States .
 The birth of most Mexican drug cartels is traced to former Mexican Judicial Federal Police agent Miguel Angel Félix Gallardo . Gallardo founded the Guadalajara Cartel in 1980 and controlled most of the illegal drug trade in Mexico and the trafficking corridors .
 Félix Gallardo had already established an infrastructure that stood ready to serve the Colombia-based traffickers . This was easily accomplished because Gallardo has already established a . infrastructure that was ready to . serve traffickers .
 Guzman and Zambada brought veteran Héctor Luis Palma Salazar back into the fold . Guzman, Zambada and Salazar have been in the mix for the last two years .
 Félix Gallardo still planned to oversee national operations, as he maintained important connections, but he would no longer control all details of the business . Gallardo said he would still be in charge of operations in Brazil .
 Calder6én continued to escalate his anti-drug campaign . There are now about 45,000 troops involved in addition to state and federal police forces .
 The decrease in eradication and drug seizures, as shown in statistics calculated by federal authorities, poorly reflects Calderén’s security agenda . Calderén's security agenda is poorly reflected by the statistics, officials say .
 By 1993, the Colombian government had dismantled the Medellin Cartel by imprisoning or assassinating its members . The Cali Cartel was controlled by Los Pepes, controlled by the Cali cartel .
 In 2003, the United States invaded Irag, which deposed the controversial regime of Saddam Hussein, but also resulted in a prolonged conflict that would continue over the course of the decade . The U.S. invasion of Irag in 2003 deposed Hussein's regime, but resulted in
 The former World Trade Center in Lower Manhattan during September 11 attacks in 2001 before their collapse .
 In 2003, the United States launched an invasion of Iraq, which led to the collapse of the lraq government and the eventual capture of Saddam Hussein . The United States had longstanding relations with Iraq, with whom the U.S. had longstanding .
 After his election, Obama reluctantly continued the war effort in Irag until August 31, 2010, when he declared that combat operations had ended . President Obama has declared combat operations have ended in Iraq .
 50,000 American soldiers and military personnel were kept in Iraq to assist Iragi forces, help protect withdrawing forces, and work on counter-terrorism until December 15, 2011, when the war was declared formally over .
 In the early 1990s the UN faced a number of simultaneous crises within nations such as Somalia, Haiti, Mozambique, and the former Yugoslavia that tested its founding principles and institutional effectiveness . The UN Charter was written primarily to prevent aggression by one nation against another .
 The 21st century essentially began in 1991 with the U.S. as the sole superpower in the absence of the Soviet Union . China began its rise and the BRICS countries aimed to create more balance in the global political and economic spectrum .
 Green countries are members of the World Trade Organization . Yellow countries are observers, and red countries are non-members of the WTO .
 Most of the issues that the WTO focuses on derive from previous trade negotiations, especially from the Uruguay Round (19861994) The WTO is attempting to complete negotiations on the Doha Development Round, which was launched in 2001 to lower trade barriers .
 Australia, the European Union, Belarus, Iceland, Kazakhstan, Liechtenstein, Norway, Switzerland, and Ukraine are among the countries involved in the scheme .
 Early efforts to prevent nuclear proliferation involved intense government secrecy, the wartime acquisition of known uranium stores, and outright sabotage . The Combined Development Trust acquired uranium stores . At times even outright sabotage was attempted .
 International efforts to promote nuclear nonproliferation began soon after World War Il . The Baruch Plan of 1946 proposed the verifiable dismantlement and destruction of the U.S. nuclear arsenal .
 In 1968, governments represented at the Eighteen Nation Disarmament Committee finished negotiations on the text of the NPT, which entered into force in March 1970 . Since the mid-1970s, nonproliferation efforts have been to maintain and even increase international control over the fiss
 The IAEA now operates a safeguards system as specified under Article Ill of the NPT . The safeguards system aims to ensure that civil stocks of uranium and plutonium are used only for peaceful purposes .
 A developing country is a nation or a sovereign state with a less developed industrial base and a low Human Development Index compared to other countries . Describe some of the challenges faced by developing countries .
 Economic development originated as a global concern in the post-World War II period of reconstruction . Economic development started as a worldwide concern in post-war reconstruction .
 International aid is related to the concept of international aid, but distinct from disaster relief and humanitarian aid . It's related to international aid but not disaster relief or humanitarian aid.
 The launch of the Marshall Plan was an important step in setting the agenda for international development . It combined humanitarian goals with the creation of a political and economic bloc in Europe allied with the U.S.
 Modernists at the World Bank and IMF adopted neo-liberal ideas of economists such as Milton Friedman or Bela Balassa . Their opponents were promoting various bottom-up approaches, such as structural adjustment programs .
 By the 1990s, some writers and academics felt an impasse had been reached within development theory . Others have predicted a development revival as part of the War on Terrorism .
 Efforts include monetary and fiscal policies, regulation of financial institutions, trade, and tax policies . Such efforts include monetary, fiscal policies and regulation .
 Programs provide infrastructure and services such as highways, parks, affordable housing, crime prevention, and K-12 education . Programs that provide infrastructure such as parks, parks and affordable housing .
 Job creation and retention through specific efforts in business finance, marketing, neighborhood development, workforce development, small business development and expansion, technology transfer, and real estate development .
 The broad consensus among economists is that free trade is a large and unambiguous net gain for society . Outline some of the criticisms of globalization of globalization . The Learning Objective is to learn the basics of free trade .
 The global economic crisis of 2007-2008, the worst financial crisis since the Great Depression, can be credited partially to neo-liberal globalization . The global financial crisis was blamed for the collapse of the global economy .
 Globalization has fueled the rise of transnational corporations, and their power has vaulted to the point where they can now rival many nation states . The rise of global corporations is fueling the growth of global capitalism .
 Multinational corporations often benefit from globalization while poor, indigenous locals are negatively affected . Multinational companies often benefit while poor locals negatively affected by globalization .
 Globalization sometimes requires a country to give up some sovereignty for the sake of executing Western ideals . The country's sovereignty will be sacrificed to execute Western ideals in order to achieve globalization, says President Obama .
 International trade in petroleum products has expanded significantly through globalization . The spread of invasive species has also been facilitated by improvements in global transport . Invasive species is also facilitated by improved global transport, experts say .
 Not everybody affected by globalization believes there are benefits to its soread, however . Not everybody thinks there are any benefits to globalization .