 This man stopped a nuclear war in 1962 and changed the course of history .
 It's safe to say that many of us are alive today because of one man’s logical and calm thinking during this time . Let's face it, a level head is best in all situations .
 In a sensitive time, this unlikely hero stopped the possible destruction of nations . In fact, I speak of no American at all . Push .push; .
 During the early stages of the Vietnam War, tensions were heightened . His name was Vasili Arkhipov and probably most of you have never heard of him before . He was a member of the Soviet Union in the early 1960s .
 An integral part of this war was dealing with the Cuban missile crisis . The U.S. military responded to the threat of a nuclear missile attack .
 In 1962, President Kennedy blocked all access, by sea, to Cuba . President Kennedy did this in 1962, in the climax of the Cuban missile crisis . Kennedy blocked access by sea to Cuba in 1962 .
 Russian crew sent by sea to Cuba was ordered to stop in the Caribbean Sea . And so, additional conflict arose. The Russian crew was sent to Cuba by sea .
 Russia's first sub, Valentin Savitsky, was spotted by Americans in the U.S. Navy in the early 1950s .
 Russian submarines were so deep they couldn't hear any U.S. media and couldn't move forward because United States Navy had completely cut them off from their destination . He was instructed to sink below the surface with the other submarines to avoid being seen .
 For all they knew, the war between Russia and the U.S. had begun . Americans drop depth charges from left to right .
 Americans had no idea the nuclear tactical devices were on board the Russian submarines and weren’t aware that Savitsky was growing more nervous by the minute-ready to launch the weapons .
 He had readied the missile, and the second in command had the approval to launch, he says . He says he was ready to launch the missile . The missile was launched by the second command officer .
 Savitsky felt he had a perfect reason to retaliate against what he thought was warfare . For days, there was no contact with the Soviet Union for days .
 There were 11 U.S. Naval ships nearby and they were targets for a nuke comparable to the bomb of Hiroshima . Savitsky didn't do it .
 Vasili Alexandrovich Arkhipov, flotilla commander, is responsible for three Russian subs and Savitsky’s equal .
 Arkhipov convinced Savitsky that depth charges were intended to make the submarine surface . He did not support launching the missiles against the U.S. According to Russian reporter Alexander Mozgovoi .
 The Russians, according to Arkhipov, were not in danger . It's not known, for certain, what he said, but he apparently had a level head .
 The Russian submarine rose to the surface, greeted by a United States destroyer . The U.S. destroyer was the first Russian submarine to surface in the world .
 The conditions of the submarine, as stated above, were horrific . The Russians, at that point, turned back to the Soviet Union .
 Anatoly Andreev, a crew member, kept a journal on these conditions: For the last four days, they didn’t even let us come up to the periscope depth . My head is bursting from the stuffy air, he writes in the journal . Anat
 Those who are free from their shifts, are sitting immobile, staring at one spot .
 Arkhipov talked Savitsky down from his decision and was rewarded for his actions, back in his homeland . It seems that he was able to get his actions back on track .
 Arkhipov was a Soviet hero, and an unsung hero to other nations as well . He was a hero to the Soviet Union, and a hero of the Soviet republic .
 As a survivor of childhood trauma and multiple types of abuse, she is an advocate for mental health awareness . She is also an advocate of mental health .
 Learning Mind does not provide medical, psychological, or any other type of professional advice, diagnosis, or treatment . Learning Mind is not providing medical or psychological advice or diagnosis .