 Sorensen, collaborating with Robert Kennedy, wrote the letter to Chairman Khrushchev that brought a peaceful end to the Crisis . The letter was written by Robert Kennedy to end the crisis .
 The language of the letter is of particular interest, as Sorensen used a technique where he used the points laid out in Khrushchev’s letter and interpreted them as supporting JFK's premise . The language used in the letter of the late leader was that of Sore
 This method of communication, and subsequent diplomatic exchanges, amicably ended the Crisis . This method was used in the aftermath of the crisis .
 We began by researching independent sources about Sorenson and the Crisis . We then broadened our knowledge to include multiple perspectives . We began with independent sources .
 We learned the Soviet opinion by examining letters sent during the Crisis and conferences held in the years that followed . We learned . from letters sent to the Soviet Union during the crisis .
 Ted Sorenson's papers are archived at the JFK Library but only some have been digitized . Only some of his papers are digitized and some of them have been archived .
 Due to COVID-19 the Library is closed, so we were disappointed because our research was limited to the online materials . We were disappointed that we were only able to look at the online material .
 The biggest struggle we faced was that we weren't able to follow the same process we have used for the last four years . The biggest challenge we faced in creating our performance was to create our performance . We weren’t able to do the same things we have done in the last
 "Not being able to work in the same room and go through our script whenever we needed" "Stifled our creativity," said the actor and director .
 We didn't realize how much of an impact that process had on our project’s development . We didn’t realize how important the process had to be involved in the development of the project .
 In creating our set, we chose a fairly simple set-up that would allow us to maintain social distancing .
 We chose historically appropriate costumes, keeping in mind the need for a quick costume change between Evelyn Lincoln and the interviewer . We chose historical appropriate costumes for the interview .
 Sorensen’s intelligence and ability to communicate diplomatically are the reasons why the Crisis ended without the firing of missiles .
 The letter sent to Khrushchev set a precedent for ending nuclear and other conflicts between the U.S. and the USSR . The world could’ve faced catastrophe if not for him, the world could've faced catastrophe .
 The immediate reprieve from the threat of nuclear destruction set the stage for long-term precedents in international communication between the superpowers .
 No party involved in the Crisis wanted to start a nuclear war, but each refused to betray the values his country represented .
 Negotiators' ability to come to a solution without violence is what sets them apart from other negotiations, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The threat of nuclear war was never as tangible as during the Crisis, due to the precedent set by Sorensen with his letter in 1962 . While the Cold War remained for nearly another thirty years, the threat of a nuclear war never became more tangible .
 The Letter that Saved the World was written by Acosta, Tomás Diez. Diez . Diez: Acosta, Diez wrote the letter that saved the world .
 The Cuban perspective on the Crisis, including the cause and reason for its resolution, is an account of the Cuban perspective . As the title states, it is a look at the crisis in Cuba and its resolution .
 This helped us to understand what the Cubans in the military thought about the crisis, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "This helped us understand the Cuban military's thinking"
 It was interesting to see how Acosta's perspective and opinions were very similar to Castro’s . Acosta still felt some of the fear that gripped the citizens .
 Reading the book expanded our understanding of the Crisis, which helped us both solidify and modify our script to best represent all sides . Reading this book expanded the understanding of what happened to the Crisis .
 Understanding why Castro and Khrushchev did what they did, and why the Crisis went the way it did was very important to us, especially in getting the full picture of the Crisis . Understanding why the crisis happened and why it happened was important to understand why .
 Castro was defiant and tried to put conditions on Khrushchev's statement of peace . Castro's reaction to the removal of the missile was defiant, says the film .
 This helped us to understand not only the American people's understanding of what was happening, but also what Castro was thinking as his defense got taken away from him, says CNN's John Sutter .
 "We wanted to make sure that we portrayed her accurately in our performance," said the director of the film .
 "We were able to make sure that our performance concept was historically accurate, at least theoretically. By looking at what Lincoln did, we could make sure we were historically accurate," director says .
 This allowed us to look at a large range of primary sources regarding the Crisis, which was invaluable to our research . We looked at a wide range of sources, which were invaluable to us, including the Crisis .
 They discussed the Bay of Pigs and JFK’s reaction to it, like the changes he made in his administration and how he went about his administration following it . They also discussed how JFK reacted to it and how his administration changed .
 Gómez was a Lieutenant colonel in FAR, meaning he has first-hand knowledge of much of what Cuba was going through and their actions during the Crisis . He has first hand knowledge of the Cuban crisis .
 This book focuses much more on the broader details of the Crisis, while still giving an in-depth Cuban account . This book is much more than a book about the Cuban crisis .
 This book was also very helpful for us, as it gave us more information on the build-up to the Crisis from the Cuba perspective . This book also gave us information about the build up to the crisis in Cuba .
 Using this information, we were able to clarify our discussion of the Cuban perspective in the third scene in our performance, we could use this information to help us understand our discussion .
 We got a fairly good idea of how Sorensen wrote and therefore talked by reading his book and letters . We wanted to make sure that we represented him accurately in terms of word choice and cadence .
 This gave us an idea of what other people were saying, and what stood out to Lincoln . Lincoln's interview with Lincoln led us to some of the most memorable moments .
 This helped us gather more information on the perspective of the people in the White House .
 Eisenhower agreed that an invasion of Cuba was not a move that the U.S. should make . He discussed what they would do and what they wouldn't do .
 Hearing JFK and Eisenhower discuss this matter helped us to understand how strongly JFK was against military action . It was one of the first things JFK said after he finished explaining the situation .
 This gave us a glimpse of what Lincoln was responsible for as a presidential secretary, as well as what Sorensen did . This gives us a look at Lincoln's role in the administration .
 This helped build our understanding of how it worked in the White House and how Lincoln and Sorensen would’ve interacted, says CNN.com .
 This article gave us an insight into how people in the American public viewed what was happening, as well as the major points in JFK’s original demands to Khrushchev . This article also gave us a look at JFK's original demands .
 This also provided us with an example of communication between the U.S. people, albeit from the American people, says CNN.com.com .
 This book really helped us to understand what ExComm (the U.S. government group tasked with dealing with the Crisis) did and how to deal with it . This book helped us understand the conflicts that came from within on how to handle it .
 It also helped to understand the feeling of the Americans as they tried to deal with the crisis, it also helped them cope with it .
 This helped develop our understanding of the Cuban perspective, specifically Castro’s, following the Crisis . It helped develop an understanding of Castro's perspective following the crisis .
 The correspondence between Khrushev and Castro both informed and solidified our understanding of each other . Understanding perspectives is something we tried very hard to do in this project .
 This gave us an idea of the amount of reporters that JFK had to talk to in general, but also how important it was to the American people to understand what was happening . This gives us a look at JFK's time in the White House .
 "Being able to be in the White House, talking to the president, was one of the best ways to get answers," she says . "It was clear that people were scared and wanted answers, and being able to talk with the president was the best way to get them," she
 It also showed us what her desk looked like, including the technology of the 60’s that she had on her desk .
 This helped us create her desk for our performance that was historically accurate . The desk was created to be historically accurate for the first time . This helped create a desk for the performance .
 It allowed us to understand how the citizens were receiving information about the Crisis, which would influence their perspectives, we said . We asked people to share their views on the crisis with us .
 This also gave an example of how patriotic the Cubans were and how they blamed the United States for the Crisis, as they painted JFK as the sole perpetrator of the Crisis .
 Ted Sorensen’s opinion: This speech is one of the three most important speeches that JFK gave . Being able to watch it being given was extremely helpful in understanding what the American public knew as the Crisis happened .
 This gave us a first-hand look into the Crisis and the reflections of McNamara, who was part of ExComm . ExComm is a team of ex-Comm staff members who worked in the White House .
 McNamara talks about his experience on ExComm, with Kennedy, and what he took away from the experience . McNamara: "ExComm" was a great learning opportunity for him and Kennedy .
 This gave us another perspective into the Crisis from the American side, as well as another perspective of reflection from years later .
 This article shows that JFK’s actions were heavily supported throughout the US, but specifically in this county . This article was written by John Kennedy, who was assassinated in 1968 .
 This provided us an insight into the perspective of some of the American people on JFK's actions and how he handled the crisis .
 Sorensen remembered his time with JFK and in the White House . It gave us a good example of what he remembered from that time .
 This helped us to understand the long-term relationship between the U.S. and USSR, as well as between JFK and Khrushchev, says author .
 We play the audio from this video in our performance as an example of JFK’s communication with the American people . We play it as a part of the performance as part of our performance .
 This article gave us more insight into the Cuban perspective of the Crisis . The Cubans blamed Castro for his exclusion from the decisions . Castro was excluded from the Cuban government .
 This was the first conference that the Cubans were invited to, as the first one held earlier only included the Americans and former Soviets . The first conference was held earlier this year in Cuba .
 This helped us to understand not only the Cuban perspective but also the questions that were leftover from the Crisis, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "This helped us understand the questions we need to answer in the Cuban crisis"
 This helped us to understand the opinions of the participants from the Crisis and what they thought about it after time had passed . This helps us understand what they think about the Crisis .
 This book also gave us insight to Ted’s personality, through anecdotes but also through the writing of the book . Ted gave us an insight into his personality through anecdotes and the writing . This book gave us a glimpse into Ted's personality .
 "We really got to see how intelligent and experienced he was by just reading how he wrote," says author. "I'm not surprised by how intelligent he was," he says .
 Sorensen used Lincoln's writing as inspiration in much of Kennedy’s speeches . This article gave us another example of Sorennsen's abilities as a writer and intelligence .
 "All of these combined helped us to further understand how the American people felt about everything that happened in the Crisis," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 This was a very clear source of the perspective of the U.S. people, the author says . "This continued to add to our overall understanding of the Crisis," he says .
 This article describes the impact he had and the respect he garnered from people like former President Obama . This article includes the impact and respect he had received from former President Barack Obama .
 This showed how much of an impact he had and how he’s still remembered for his service to this day . This showed us how much he had to do to be able to do so .
 NATO missiles were placed in Turkey, the Bay of Pigs, and so on . We were able to learn more about the events leading up to the Crisis . This article included a small timeline which included when the NATO missile was placed .
 Using newspaper articles within this article helped give us more information into the American perspective and what the American people knew about the crisis . Using the newspaper articles in this article we can find out more about the Crisis in America .
 The Cuban government is trying to change the way the U.S. and Cuba view each other . Cuban President Camilo Castro Castro was killed in 2009 . Castro's government says it is investigating the death of Castro Castro .
 It also gave us an insight into what Khrushchev was thinking and what information he received . It gave us a glimpse into what he was thinking .
 We also learned more about the kind of pressure JFK was under and the extent of the discourse from the opposing sides within the U.S. government .
 This conference included Cubans; including Castro; former USSR members, and Americans, like Sorensen and McNamara . This conference was held in Cuba .
 This was very helpful for us because it allowed us to see the reflections and opinions of the people involved in the crisis . This was the first time we had been able to see how people were affected by the crisis in Syria .
 "Just from the obituary, you can see that people had a lot of respect for him and he was a very intelligent man," he said . "He was very intelligent and very intelligent," he added .
 This helped us to understand what JFK was doing during the Crisis and gave us more of an insight into what he was doing . It helped us understand JFK's actions in the 1960s and 1970s .
 JFK continued with his regular meetings and appearances when the Crisis first began . This timeline shows some of the forgein officials JFK talked to during the Crisis .
 This information helped us put into perspective how dangerous the situation actually was, which also showed how important Sorensen’s letter was and how important it was that it worked . This information showed how dangerous it was to send the letter to the White House .
 It was made out like JFK’s toughness is what ended it, when actually it was his commitment to peace . It also included some information about how the handling of the Crisis was presented to the public .
 This really helped us understand the gravity of the situation and how skewed much of the history and records of the Crisis are. We are happy to see how skewed the history of the crisis has been. We hope to see more people understand the depth of this crisis.
 We used this article to help us look at the information we received, specifically the opinions and memories of people involved in the crisis on the American side .
 May 12, 2021, is the 50th anniversary of the U.S. State Department's decision to pull troops from Cuba .
 Khrushchev’s son, Sergei, discusses responsibility that fell to him after Cuba joined the Soviet bloc . He says the responsibility fell to the former Soviet leader after his country joined the bloc .
 The point of the missiles, from Khrushchev’s perspective, were to send a message to the US, he says . The missiles were to 'send a message' to the U.S., he adds .
 The article was helpful in confirming our analysis and broadening our understanding of the Crisis as a whole . We are happy to clarify our analysis of the crisis in Iraq and Syria .
 Sorensen provided the connection between the two topics we had been researching . While it was also a good introduction to the author, it provided a good start to the book itself .
 It also included a picture taken by U.S. patrol planes over Cuba of the weapons .
 The fact that U.S. surveillance planes took pictures of missile sites is stated in almost all tellings of the Crisis, but we never considered the taking and analyzing of the photos . The photos were taken by the United States surveillance planes .
 This video helped us understand how they figured out what they were looking at in the photos as well as the technological feats that occurred in order to take the photos from that height .
 Kennedy was the one that ordered the planes to take the surveillance photos . This allowed us to gain an insight into the actions of Kennedy leading up to the Crisis . Kennedy was one of the planes that took the photos .
 Office of the United States Historian, U.S. Department of State Archive . The U.N. Historian is the author of the book, "America's First Lady"
 The exceptions, such as the Vietnam War, did not incite the world-ending threats that the Missile Crisis had . The exception to the Vietnam war, such a Vietnam War did not .
 This worksheet will help judges understand your performance’s background, costumes, and props . Submitted with your process paper and annotated bibliography .
 This worksheet includes information relevant to your project . Use this worksheet to help students understand today's featured news stories .
 The letter sent to Khrushchev, written by Sorensen, set a precedent for ending nuclear and other conflicts between the U.S. and the USSR . The world could’ve faced catastrophe if not for him, the world could've faced catastrophe .
 Ted Sorensen's letter to President Kennedy to discuss letter he has written to Khrushchev . Lincoln was assassinated in November 1963 . Lincoln's assassination was the first assassination since the assassination of President Kennedy .
 The story transitions to November 1962 as Sorensen and Lincoln reflect on the immediate aftermath of the Crisis . The story is presented by Lincoln and Sorennsen as Lincoln .
 Ted Sorensen John Margelony is a special counsel, speechwriter, and confidant of JFK . Evelyn Lincoln is the personal secretary to JFK .
 3 pages provide photos and descriptions of your performance costumes . Use this page to help students understand your performance costume .
 This costume was specifically chosen to be more modern and to make it clear that this was no longer the same person . The costume was chosen to make the costume more modern . This costume has been chosen to show that this is not the same as this person .
 3 pages provide photos and descriptions of your key performance props . Use these photos to help students understand the props and props they need .
 The mail is there because JFK really loved to read and respond to the mail, Lincoln said in an interview with Lincoln, she said . Lincoln said JFK loved reading the mail .
 Sorensen stated that he wrote many things on a yellow legal pad, including the letter, so we wrote the letter actually sent to Khrushchev onto the legal pad . The letter was written on the yellow pad, which is a yellow pad .