 Intelligence community has confirmed a total of 15 SA-2 SAM sites . The intelligence community has now identified and confirmed the sites of the SAM .
 In the Oriente Province, the identified sites form a triangular pattern around the new military airfield at Holguin . The identified sites are located in the region around the airport .
 At the present time, there are no MIG-type aircraft stationed at this field . No MIG aircraft are stationed there .
 The MIGs are believed to be assigned to the operational control of the Commander, Eastern Army . They are stationed at the airfield at Camaguey, in the Central Army area .
 When Holguin becomes operational, these aircraft will probably be moved to that location . The aircraft are likely to be moved into Holguins' new base .
 In the Central Army area, 4 SA-2 sites form a rectangular pattern around the military airfield near Santa Clara . In the . Central Army . area, four SA . sites form an area around the airfield .
 This airfield has had MIGs for several months and is also the field upon which the first MIG 21 was identified . The airfield was also the site of the first flight of MIG21 .
 There are 3 and possibly 4 SA-2 sites forming a liner pattern to provide defense for the military airfield at San Antonia de los Banos and coincidentally for the defense of the Havana-Mariel complex .
 San Antonio de los Banos is the headquarters for the Cuban revolutionary Air Force . It is the assembly point for all MIGs, except the MIG-21, which have previously been received in Cuba .
 Further west in the Pinar del Rio Province a triangular pattern of 3 SA-2 sites cannot be connected with any significant military installation . Further west, in the South American Province of Colombia, a triangular shape of 3 sites can't be connected to any major military installations .
 Only known installation within this triangle are 2 underground facilities whose use and purpose are unknown . The only known installation in the triangle is a pair of underground facilities .
 The only other military installation in this particular area is the military air base at San Julian near the western tip of Cuba .
 1 of the 3 SA-2 sites is located at or very near this military airfield, a most unlikely spot for the defense of this particular air base . However, the most unlikely place to be used is the airfield at or near the site .
 This triangular pattern is on the far western tip of Cuba, Cuba .
 There are no known military installations in this rough and sparsely populated area . No known military facilities in the area .
 All Cubans have been evacuated from this restricted area, reports from refugees arriving in Miami . According to reports, all Cubans are now under control .
 Information concerning the deployment of Soviet military personnel and ""technicians" recently arriving in Cuba is derived from unevaluated refugee sources . An attempt has been made to plot all reported locations to determine whether there is any correlation between the location of Soviet personnel and missiles or missile activity .
 The greatest concentration of Soviet personnel, activity and camps is in the western end of the Island of Cuba . So far, the pattern indicates that there is a definite correlation .
 This would indicate a greater interest on the part of the Soviets in Pinar del Rio than in the other provinces . The Soviets are believed to be interested in the area, according to reports .
 A single unevaluated report states that the Soviet ""SS-4 Shyster"" missile may have been delivered to Cuba on or about 1 1 September .
 The SS-4 missile is nicknamed ""Sandal,"" while the ""Shyster"" carriers a designation of SS-3 . The ""Shryster" refers to the SS4 missile and the SS3 missile .
 This confusion was caused by the interrogators of the source using a recognition manual which designated the SS-4 as the Shyster . This confusion caused by interrogators using the . recognition manual .
 The description of missiles reportedly observed by the source could have applied equally to either the Shyster or the Sandal . However, the description of the missiles could have been equally accurate .
 Both missiles have essentially the same outward appearance except that the Sandal is about 5 feet longer . The Sandal missile is about five feet longer than the other one .
 In all other respects, including the missile carrier, the two appear identical . The two appear to have the same features of the two .
 The source of this report stated that on 12 September he had personally seen some 20 missiles in the vicinity of Campo Libertad, a small airfield on the western edge of Havana . The source said he personally . saw some 20 such missiles in . the area .
 The report is still unconfirmed and there are no other reports concerning the presence of either SS-3 or SS-4 missiles . By using the approximate center of the restricted area referred to above as a point of origin and with a radius of 1100 nm, the accepted range of the SS
 The Panama Canal, the Panama Canal and the oil fields in Maricaibo, Venezuela are all featured . All of the capitals of the Central American nations are Central American countries .
 The presence of operational SS-4 missiles in this location would give the Soviets a great military asset . It would be a great asset for the Soviets .
 Policy Toward Non-Bloc Ships in Cuban Trade A Recommended Action . 1. Action on Cuba's non-bloc ships in Cuba was recommended .
 The President should close all U.S. ports to all ships carrying arms to Cuba if any ship under the flag of that country hereafter carries arms . Any ship under that country's flag to Cuba will carry arms .
 The President should direct that no government cargo shall be carried on a foreign flag ship if any ship of the same owners is used hereafter in Bloc-Cuba Trade .
 President should direct that no U.S. flag ship and no . United States owned ship shall carry goods to or from Cuba .
 The President should close all U.S. ports to any ship on a continuous voyage to or from Cuba . Alternative I The President would close all United States ports to all ships .
 The President should close all U.S. ports to any ship that on the same continuous voyage carried or carries to Cuba items on the COCOM list . Alternative II The President would close all United States ports to ships carrying items on that list .
 The President should close all U.S. ports to any ship that on the same continuous voyage carried or carries to Cuba items on the positive list under Regulation T-l. Alternative III The President would close all United States ports .
 The President should close all U.S. ports to any ship that on the same continuous voyage was used or being used in Bloc-Cuba trade . Alternative IV: All ports should be closed to ships that were used in the same voyage . Alternative: All ships that are used
 The President should instruct the Secretary of State to explore every avenue to obtain cooperation from other countries in restricting the use of their ships in Bloc-Cuba trade, he says .
 The President has all the necessary legal authority to carry out the recommendations without new legislation . B Legal Authority: President has legal authority in order to implement the recommendations .
 A small supplemental appropriation might have to be included in the budget to pay for shipping in U.S. bottoms .
 The President has adequate legal powers to adopt more restrictive policies than those recommended above . C Action Not Recommended: The President should adopt a more restrictive policy . C action Not Recommended .
 There has been some talk, for example, of closing U.S. ports to ships of any country which permits its ships to go to Cuba . There has also been talk of closing United States ports to any country allowing ships to pass through Cuba .
 Others have mentioned the possibility of closing territorial waters of the United States to such ships, or denying them use of the Panama Canal . The U.S. could also close territorial waters or deny the ships access to Panama Canal waters .
 These proposals are not recommended . Print from an unsigned copy of this article .
 The President has approved the memorandum we/2/ discussed at the meeting this morning,/3/ including Alternative IV, under point 5 . The President also approved the President's approval of Alternative IV .
 A group will be formed to do what is necessary to put these recommendations into effect . A group of experts will work together to put the recommendations in place .
 The meeting lasted 15 minutes and no other participants were listed .
 A memorandum for the record prepared by Captain William D Houser, USN, based upon a debriefing provided by Gilpatric following the meeting indicates that several other concerned officals also participated in the meeting .
 George Ball discussed the President's decision on the afternoon of October 2 with Stevenson . FRC 65 A 3501, Cuba, 1962, 000.1-092 .
 Ball noted that the measures relating to trade with Cuba were ""more for American public opinion"" than for any practical effect they were expected to have on the availability of shipping to the Soviet Bloc . Ball noted the measures were more for public opinion than for practical effect on shipping to Cuba .
 The move would raise the cost to the Soviet Union of shipping arms and other supplies to Cuba . Nonetheless, the President felt strongly that we had to do something along this line .
 President Richard Nixon met with Joint Chiefs of Staff on October 1, 1962, on Cuba . He asked about contingencies under which military action against Cuba may be necessary .
 Soviet action against Western rights in Berlin calling for a Western response including a blockade of Communist or other shipping en route to Cuba . Soviet action called for a response including among other actions .
 Evidence that the Castro regime has permitted the positioning of offensive weapon systems on Cuban soil or in Cuban harbors . Evidence of the presence of bloc offensive weapons systems in Cuba .
 An attack against the Guantanamo base, or against U.S. planes or vessels outside Cuban territorial air space or waters . An attack on Guantanamo base or against United States planes .
 A substantial popular uprising in Cuba, the leaders of which request assistance in recovering Cuban independence from the Castro Soviet puppet regime . The leaders of the leaders request assistance .
 A decision by the President that affairs in Cuba have reached a point inconsistent with continuing U.S. national security . A decision to take Cuba out of Cuba is "consistent with continuing United States national security," says President Obama .
 The preparatory actions should now and progressively be undertaken to improve U.S. readiness to execute these plans . The United States should be prepared to execute the plans, says President Obama .
 The consequences of the actions on the availability of forces and on our logistics posture to deal with threats in other areas,e.e.i. The consequences on the actions will be based on the strength of the forces, i.E. military personnel .
 Inasmuch as the second objective is the more difficult objective, it may be required if the first is to be permanently achieved . Attention should be focused upon a capability to assure the second . The first objective is to assure that the first objective has been achieved .
 I have asked ISA to initiate discussion with State as to the political actions which should precede or accompany the various military actions being planned. I have also asked for discussion with state as to what should be political .
 Ball noted in his letter to Mahon that, in the wake of the Cuban missile crisis, members of the committee had questioned the accuracy of the statements he had made with respect to the flow of Soviet military equipment and missiles to Cuba .
 He provided Mahon with a copy of the October 2 memorandum from Hilsman in order to demonstrate that his testimony was based upon the information available to him at the time .
 Ball testified before the Committee on Export Control . Ball's testimony is ibid. A copy of the testimony before the committee on export control can be found in ibid .
 85 shiploads of various military items, supplies, and personnel have arrived . Since July, the volume of Soviet military shipments to Cuba suddenly increased very substantially .
 In part the Soviet shipments have consisted of types of weapons previously delivered to the Cuban armed forces . More tanks, self-propelled guns and other ground force equipment have been delivered .
 The major tonnage has been devoted to supplying SA-2 surface-to-air missiles together with all of the related gear and equipment necessary for their installation and operation . The South Atlantic missile system is the largest in the world .
 Cuba is now estimated to have 60 older type MIG jet aircraft plus at least one advanced jet interceptor recently received and probably several more in process of assembly . Cuba has 60 older types of MIG aircraft, plus one advanced interceptor and several more likely to be built .
 Sixteen ""Komar"" class guided-missile patrol boats which carry two short range missiles (11-17 miles) were included in the new shipments .
 4,500 Soviet military specialists have arrived including construction men and technicians . About 4,000 Soviet military experts have arrived in Russia .
 If the SAM sites are to be operated solely by Cuban personnel six months to a year of training will be required .
 There is a considerable amount of other new equipment which has not been identified . It is believed to include a large quantity of electronic gear .
 The Foreign Ministers of the Latin American Republics met at the Department of State on October 2 and 3, 1962, at the invitation of Secretary of State Rusk . They discussed matters of mutual concern with a particular emphasis on Cuba .
 The invitation was extended on September 5 through the Latin American ambassadors in Washington, D.C. The invitation has been extended to September 5 .
 Secretary Rusk opened the first session of the Foreign Ministers meeting at 10:30m. on October 2 with a discussion of the threat posed to the Americas by communism . The threat, he stated, was rapidly expanding with each shipload of modern weaponry that the Soviet Union sent to
 Rusk outlined the magnitude of the arms build-up taking place in Cuba . Rusk repeated the warnings President Kennedy had issued against the development of Cuba as a Soviet military base .
 There are no indications that the Soviet Union intended to violate those guidelines, he said . He noted that there were to date no indications it intended to .
 Soviet penetration of the hemisphere posed serious problems, he said . He invited the Foreign Ministers to consider and address the issue .
 President Kennedy hosted a luncheon at the White House for the Foreign Ministers following the opening session . The luncheon was held in honor of the foreign ministers .
 Foreign Ministers met again on the afternoon of October 2 and twice on October 3 . The Foreign Ministers meet again on October 2 .
 The tenor of the remarks by the other Foreign Ministers reflected general agreement with Rusk's emphasis on the need for hemispheric solidarity to face the perceived threat .
 The OAS concluded that the Soviet Union's intervention in Cuba threatened the unity and democratic institutions of the Americas . In the final communique issued at the conclusion of the meetings on October 3, the Foreign Ministers reiterated the conclusion .
 Presidential Interest in SA-2 Missile System and Contingency Planning for Cuba . 1.2 missile system . 2.3 missile system. 3.5 missile systems. 2.2 missiles. 5.5 missiles. 2 missile systems for Cuba. 5 missile systems .
 In your memorandum of 21 September 1962,/1/ you noted an apparent lack of unanimity between General LeMay and Admiral Anderson with respect to aircraft losses that might occur in attacking an SA-2 site . In your memo of 21 September 1962, you noted a lack
 You further requested assurance as to the currency of contingency planning for Cuba . You also requested assurance that the currency is being prepared for Cuba.
 Adm. Anderson agrees with General LeMay's point that no losses would be suffered from the SA-2 missile . The attacking aircraft would fly below the effective minimum altitude of the missile .
 General LeMay shares Admiral Anderson's estimate that attacking aircraft might suffer some loss to antiaircraft artillery defenses of the SA-2 site . LeMay also shares his estimate of some losses .
 National Intelligence Estimate/2/ credits the SA-2 missile system with a minimum effective altitude of 3000 feet due to inherent radar limitations . The SA-1 missile system can be tracked to a maximum altitude of 3,000 feet .
 If antiaircraft artillery is employed in direct support of the missile site, losses may be expected . The site may also be targeted by anti-aircraft artillery .
 World War II and Korean experience, updated to reflect current antiaircraft artillery capabilities against modern aircraft, indicates that low level attack forces would incur some combat losses . However, numbers cannot be predicted .
 There are currently no known antiaircraft artillery defenses of SA-2 sites in Cuba . There are no known anti-aircraft artillery defenses in the country .
 Attack plans can be amended to take antiaircraft weapons under fire during the attack if reconnaissance shows such defenses and if analysis shows such fire suppression necessary . Attack plans must be amended if reconnaissance and analysis show such defenses necessary .
 Korean experience proved that such fire suppression was unnecessary when surprise could be achieved . North Korea has shown that such suppression is unnecessary when it can be achieved.
 In my opinion and that of the Joint Chiefs, it is not necessary to build a model of an SA-2 site for training purposes . The Joint Chiefs' decision to build the model is a matter of concern, he says .
 Aircraft revetment of the type found at Santa Clara and Camaguey is a more difficult target than the SA-2 site .
 The Air Force has found it desirable to reproduce that type aircraft revetment to aid in the selection of weapons, method of delivery and to assist in training crews . Therefore, the Air Force found it .
 The target was completed at Nellis AFB, Nevada, on 30 September 1962, at an approximate cost of $28,000 . The target completed at the base in September 1962 at the time .
 Initial tests indicate that the GAM 83, 20 mm cannon, and napalm is the most effective weapons mix against aircraft in such revetments . Initial tests have shown that the combination is effective .
 The Navy plans to attack SA-2 targets at low level using 4 divisions of A-4D's (4 aircraft per division) armed with 250#, 500#, and 2000# low drag bombs and napalm .
 The Air Force plans primary use of napalm and 20 mm cannon delivered at low level .
 Both have made detailed target studies; target folders are in the hands of crews; and crews are familiar with their assigned targets . Both teams have detailed target maps and target folders in their hands .
 As new missile sites are located, they are picked up in the target and attack plans within a few hours of receipt of photographs . New missile sites can be located within hours of receiving photographs .
 Clifton, the President's military aide, sent a memorandum to Secretary McNamara in which he indicated that the President had ""read with interest"" McNamara's October 4 memorandum dealing with the SA-2 missile system in Cuba . Cliften sent the memorandum to secretary McNamara
 A memorandum for the record of this meeting, by Thomas A Parrott, is ibid., Walter Elder Recop. Recop . A memorandum for the record was written in response to the meeting of Walter Elder .
 MEMORANDUM OF MONGOOSE MEETING HELD ONTHURSDAY, OCTOBER 4, 1962 . Chaired by the Attorney General .
 The Attorney General is dissatisfied with lack of action in the sabotage field, went on to stress that nothing was moving forward . One effort attempted had failed, one effort attempted to failed, said the General .
 General Lansdale reviewed operations, pointing out that no sabotage had been attempted and gave general impression that things were all right . Lansdale: "No sabotage was attempted"
 McCone then stated that phase one was principally intelligence gathering, organizing and training, that no sabotage was authorized . One operation against a powerhouse had been contemplated but was discouraged by group, that he said .
 In effect it seemed to be the consensus that phase two as approved on September 6, was now outmoded, that more dynamic action was indicated, that hesitancy about overflights must be reconsidered . A very considerable amount of attribution and noise must be expected, and that a
 With respect to overflights, the NRO and Colonel Steakley were instructed to prepare and present to the Special Group next Tuesday/ 1/ at a special meeting alternate recommendations for overflights .
 Use of U-2s on complete sweeps may include the use of firefly drones . Use of 101s or other reconnaissance planes on low level, intermediate level, and high level missions . Other possible reconnaissance operations may also be possible .
 McCone reviewed the earlier meeting with General Lansdale, and pointed out to the group that this meeting clarified Lansdale's authority over the entire Mongoose operation .
 X John A McCone/3/ /3/Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature . X John McCone: "X John A. McCone"
 McCone reviewed details of the Donovan negotiations, discussions with the President, Attorney General, Eisenhower, the decisions not to approach Congressional leadership, and the final report from Donovan .
 McCone stated there was a feeling in CIA and Defense that the ""activist policy" which founded the Mongoose operation was gone . McCone said the amount of noise had led to this conclusion .
 The U.S. Intelligence Community could not report with assurance the development of offensive capabilities in Cuba, officials say . U-2 flights had placed the United States in a position where it could not .
 McCone stated he felt it most probable that Soviet-Castro operations would end up with an established offensive capability in Cuba including MRBMs . McCone said it was most likely that Soviet forces in Cuba would have a capability in the country .
 McCone stated he thought he thought this a probability rather than a mere possibility . McCone said he thought it was a probability that this was a possibility . He also said he did not believe it would be impossible to believe this would happen .
 Bundy took issue stating that he felt the Soviets would not go that far, that he was satisfied that no offensive capability would be installed in Cuba because of its world-wide effects . Bundy said he was relaxed over the fact that the Intelligence Community cannot produce hard information on this subject .
 McCone said that Bundy's viewpoint was reflected by many in the Intelligence Community, perhaps a majority, but he just did not agree . He said he did not think the United States could afford to take such a risk .
 He felt none of them would bring Castro down nor would enhance U.S. position of world leadership . It was obvious that he was not in sympathy with a more active role .
 Bundy seemed inclined to support the Track Two idea and also inclined to play down the more active Lansdale operation . Bundy seemed to be less interested in the idea of Track Two . Bundy seems to be more interested in playing down Lansdale .
 Bundy had not talked to Lansdale but obviously had received some of the ""static"" that is being passed around in Washington . Bundy had no idea if Lansdale had any of the "static" that was passed around by Lansdale . Bundy said he had not been able to talk to
 McCone in reporting on the discussions at Thursday's 5412 meeting repeated the views of the President and expressed by the Attorney General .
 Bundy's views were that we should either make a judgment that we would have to go in militarily or learn to live with Castro, and his Cuba . Bundy's view was that either we should go military or adjust our policies accordingly . Bundy: "We should either learn to learn to
 McCone said he felt defense was just phase one, phase two would be followed by various offensive capabilities . McCone then elaborated on his views of the evolution of the Soviet-Castro military capability .
 McCone stated that the establishment of a very expensive defensive mechanism could not be the ultimate objective of the Soviets or Castro . The objective was to establish an offensive base or to insert sufficient Soviet specialists and military leaders to take Cuba away from Castro and establish it as a true Soviet controlled satellite .
 McCone stated that he felt there were only two courses open-one was to take military action at the appropriate time or pursue an effort to split Castro off from the Communists . For this reason he, McCone, had vigorously supported the Donovan mission as it is the only link that we
 The Communists captured all elements of the Government and economy and forced Toure to expel the Ambassador and try to rectify the situation . Note in this connection it might be well to study the evolution of the Toure experience in Guinea when the Communists moved in .
 Bundy read the memorandum covering these discussions 74/ Bundy stated that Adenauer did not express the concern of the U.S. policy reflected by Eisenhower and reported in the memorandum . Bundy said Adenauer didn't express the concerns of the United States policy reflected in the memo .
 Bundy rejected the idea of regular NSC meetings stating that every President has to organize his Government as he desires . Bundy said that the Eisenhower pattern was not necessarily adaptable to the Kennedy type of administration . Bundy: "Every President must organize his government as he wishes"
 McCone said he intended to request occasional NSC meetings to review specific estimates or other intelligence situations . The next one would be a report and discussion of the estimate of Soviet air defense capabilities .
 Bundy rejected the idea the several Special Groups 5412, CIA, Mongoose, and North Vietnam together together feeling it was better to keep them separated . Bundy: "It was better than keeping them separated."
 It was agreed that we would have a further discussion over the weekend . It is agreed that it would be agreed that the matter should be discussed over the next weekend .
 It is requested that you present the following proposal to the Special Group for policy approval . The proposal would be presented to the special group for approval .
 Policy approval is requested to permit the sabotage of Cuban-owned vessels wherever and whenever secure access to them can be attained, normally this will be in non-Bloc ports . Policy approval would be requested to allow this to happen .
 Attacks against Cuban-owned ships must be considered essentially as attacks against targets of opportunity . Attacks against the Cuban- owned ships will be considered as attacks on target of opportunity in most cases there will be little advance information prior to the arrival of the ship in a non-Bloc port .
 It is necessary to submit the request for policy approval in a somewhat more general form than usual to permit us to take advantage of targets of opportunity as they occur . The request is needed to be considered in a more general way than usual .
 In most cases we will not have sufficient advance notice of the arrival of the ship or have sufficient access to the ship to permit the preparation and submission of detailed individual approval requests in advance .
 In every case where time and circumstance permit, specific proposals will be submitted to the Special Group .
 Any case involving unusual operational or security risks will be submitted in advance for approval . Special Group approval will be requested by the U.S. government .
 Later we will submit requests for policy approval of actions against other ships supplying Cuba . We will also submit requests to approve actions against ships supplying the Cuban nation .
 William K Harvey/1/ /1/Printed from a copy that indicates that Harvey signed the original . Harvey signed a copy of the original of the book .
 President Kennedy met with the members of the Special Group on October 9, 1962, to consider recommendations for a proposed U-2 reconnaissance flight over Cuba .
 The purpose of the flight was to obtain hard evidence concerning the development of suspected MRBM sites near recently established SA-2 emplacements . The mission was to find out if there were development of concomitant ballistic missile sites . The flight was part of a mission to find hard evidence
 The President approved the recommendation for a U-2 flight, to be piloted by a Strategic Air Command pilot, or a military pilot attached to the Central Intelligence Agency . The president approved the proposal for the flight .
 The recommendation for supporting low-level reconnaissance flights was deferred pending a review by the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Secretary of State, and the United States Intelligence Board concerning the necessity for such flights .
 The U-2 flight was expected to take only 12 minutes of flying time over Cuba at approximately 74,000 feet .
 SA-2 antiaircraft emplacements have not yet reached operational stage . It had been nearly 2 months since the first installation of the first .
 President made the judgment that we should proceed with the negotiations, recognizing there would be some political consequences and criticisms, but he was willing to accept this as a fact .
 A minimum number of experts be informed within CIA circles, the CIA director says . A minimum of experts must also be informed, he says .
 USIB members instructed to restrict the information to their personal offices . Chiefs of Staff, the Chairman, the Service Secretaries and the Secretary of Defense will be informed .
 The President mentioned that ""we'll have to do something drastic about Cuba"" and I am anxiously looking forward to the JCS operational plan which is to be presented to me next week .
 McCone effected the above instructions by calling Mr Cline, who was unavailable, and then Mr Sheldon . Mr Sheldon agreed to prepare a procedure for review on Thursday morning .
 McCone called the Attorney General and advised him of his talk with the Cannon Committee . McCone then called the attorney general to inform him of the talk .
 McCone reported that negotiations were in progress . McCone also reported objections stated by several members of Congress .
 Eisenhower advised that the negotiations be pursued, indicating his support of it . Eisenhower said that if the negotiations were satisfactorily concluded, complaints and objections would, in his words, disappear .
 McCone told General Eisenhower there were some defendable evidences of shipments of twin-engined light jet bombers . McCone said General Eisenhower was impressed by the evidence .
 On Thursday/2/ morning McCone reported by telephone to Mr Kennedy, reviewing the Eisenhower discussion and stating that he, McCone, was concerned over Donovan's safety in view of the rash of publicity .
 McCone recalled that he had told the President and the AG that he would take all, or his full share, responsibility . McCone said he wished the AG to bear this in mind as the position taken in this respect still stood .
 John A McCone/3/ /3/Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature . John A. McCone: "I was a good man, not a bad man"
 CINCLANT and CINCSTRIKE will hold a meeting at 1300 hours today to develop their responses to the SecDef request .
 Pending completion of the requirement given us by the SecDef, a general picture of each of our military contingency plans for Cuba is tabulated below as a basis for your initial discussions with State. State.
 It may be better to delay discussions with State until we have completed our part of the requirement and have submitted it to the SecDef and the JCS on Monday, 15 October .
 Blockade Plan-employs 24 to 36 destroyers, a carrier task force, etc. which can marshal significant strength to blockade Cuba, both air and maritime . Blockade plan employs 24 destroyers and a carrier force, which can be marshaled with significant strength .
 In the event of any execution of this plan steps would be taken to alert all forces allocated to the other assault plans . The plan would be carried out in a bid to protect the country's sovereignty .
 Fast Reaction Assault Plan employs both air-borne and amphibious assault with about 32,000 troops in initial phase, with balance of assault forces arriving in increments as they become available . The plan is based on the U.S. Fast Reaction Plan .
 Full-Scale Deliberate Assault Plan-employs simultaneous airborne and amphibious assault . Around 49,000 troops engaged on D-Day, building to about 60,000 by D+5 days, and again to 80,000 in D+16 days .
 Prints from a copy that bears this typed signature . Unger/2/ Major General, USA /2/Prints from the copy .
 "Authentic Cuban leadership with a considerable range of freedom to implement ideas and to assume risk" " Authentic Cuban leader" with a "considerable range" of freedom, he said .
 A link-up with the scattered and sporadic groups and operations now going forward of their own momentum in Cuba . i.e. "e.i. Cuba" i.a. "i.a link to the scattered, sporadic groups"
 A plan of operation which aims at the overthrow of Castro primarily from within rather than by invasion from without . "Plan of operation" aims at overthrowing Castro from within .
 A long enough time horizon to build the operation carefully and soundly. A long . time horizon . to build an operation carefully . soundly .
 United States bureaucratic domination; lack of a Cuban political and organizational base; and a plan of operation that hinged on a type of overt invasion by a fixed date . Plan of operation hinging on an overt invasion of Cuba by a date rather than a patient build-up .
 It would be easy to argue that such a movement could not be generated against a Communist control system, or that Cuban refugees lack the capacity to play their part in such an enterprise with skill and minimal security .
 Cuba is not located in Eastern Europe, but it's not Eastern Europe . Some Cubans have learned something from last year's failure, too, too .
 "The underlying philosophy is one which we felt for some time merited exploration," says author . The underlying philosophy of the project is one that we felt was needed to explore .
 There is attached as you have requested, a paper describing the more important policy considerations bearing on this course of action . There is also a paper on the issue of policy considerations .
 Also attached /2/ is the ARA memorandum, previously forwarded to you, describing some of the political thinking which leads us to the conclusion that we should experiment with this course of action .
 A program of ""giving the Cubans their heads" in an effort to effect the downfall of the Castro regime from within involves embarking upon uncharted waters as far as the U.S. concerned .
 Grandiose U.S. plans based upon a substantially unified exile community would be unrealistic . The United States plans based on a substantially uniting exile community are unrealistic .
 Nearly all Cuban exile leaders believe only overt U.S. military action can remove the Castro regime . The Castro regime has been in the grip of Cuba since 1961 .
 While we could probably force a semblance of unity based upon the ""downfall from within"" thesis, despite the sharp political rivalry among the exile leaders, our purposes would not be served . Despite sharp political . rivalry among . the . leaders, despite . sharp political rival among the . exile
 Most of the waking hours of these exiles would be devoted to devising ways of involving the United States militarily, rather than building the internal base of opposition we seek . While ""accepting" our thesis, most of the . waking hours would be . devoted to . devising
 We could find ourselves in an untenable position from the international, and, perhaps, domestic, standpoint . We could thereby lose initiative and control over the situation, says David Cameron .
 "We could cooperate with all anti-Castro-Batista exile groups which we have reason to believe have following inside Cuba," he said . The government could work with one such group on an experimental basis .
 By cooperating with all such groups we run the serious risk of accentuating rivalries among the exile leaders which would be inevitably reflected within Cuba . The Cuban government has been criticised for its lack of transparency .
 Rather than achieving a broad base of political opposition within Cuba, we may only be instrumental in fomenting splinter groups . Rather than achieve a broad . base of . opposition within . Cuba, Cuba, may only . only be foment splinter . groups .
 In attempting to administer such a program, the U.S. would probably find itself in the midst of the crossfire of exile politics, very likely satisfying no one in Cuba .
 Working with one group, on an experimental basis, would provide us with experience which could guide our future thinking and prevent problems of unmanageable proportions .
 If there was no progress in Cuba, we could not be certain that the thesis was impractical or the selection of the group erroneous. Even then, if we saw no progress, we couldn't be certain . We could not see no progress or if the selection was erroneous .
 JURE was formed in September 1962 by Manolo Ray and based in Puerto Rico . Of all the exile groups the only one has publicly adopted the thesis of ""downfall from within""
 Ray was former Minister of Public Works under Castro, broke with Castro and formed an important underground movement . Ray formed an underground movement which has since been badly smashed by Castro .
 The political program of JURE is one with which the U.S. can live with, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: JURE's political program is one that the United States can live in .
 The other feasible possibility is the CRC with which we have had a long standing relationship with . The CRC is a long-standing partner in the U.S. and has a long history of working together .
 The CRC is not a very effective organization for what we have in mind. Miro and some of the organizations that form an integral part of the Council, the Council says .
 Its background is associated with the Bay of Pigs and its outlook is essentially one of military action . It is the first time the U.S. has taken part in a major military action in Cuba .
 A new organization which, as such, has no past relationship with the U.S. 2. A new organisation which, in fact, has . no past . relationship with . The United States 2.2.2 .
 Political ideology which may be attuned to the desires of the Cuban people . Political ideology may be at odds with Cuban people's wishes .
 Ray Ray is experienced in underground activities and an independent thinker . Ray is an experienced underground activist and independent thinker. Ray is known for his underground activities .
 If we embark upon unchartartered waters, we must be prepared for increased noise level and press inquiry . We must also be prepared to expect increased noise levels and press inquiries .
 We must be prepared for a comparatively high rate of loss, failures and cries of anguish from JURE for assistance we may not be able to give it . JURE is not able to provide assistance to the people who need it, it says .
 "It is essential that we recognize this and not be permitted to be stampeded into regrettable public postures or actions," says President Obama .
 A further important consideration is that Track Two operations may compromise Track One operations . Track Two Operations may compromise track One operations, the U.S. Air Force says .
 Another conflict arises from the President's desire that a Cuban Brigade be formed . The President wants to form the Cuban Brigade .
 It should be recognized that a number of young men qualified for infiltration activities will probably join the Brigade . While this would not necessarily be a serious conflict with the program envisaged, for there are probably enough exiles for both programs .
 If we attempt our program on a large scale, or with more than one group, the problems would multiply . If we attempted to do so again, we would have to deal with the same problems . We hope to find a solution to the problems we face in the future .
 "The program we would visualize is one of providing the selected exile group with funds, arms, sabotage equipment, transport and communications equipment for infiltration operations," the group says . The program would also provide funds to build a political base of opposition inside Cuba .
 Our role would essentially be that of advisors and purveyors of material goods— it would be the exile group's show . Our role is essentially that of that of . advisors, purveyers of . material goods .
 Cuba would insist that hit and run raids or similar harassing activities that clearly originate from outside Cuba do not be engaged in . The Cuban government would insist those activities originate from abroad .
 In sum, we should be cautious about grandiose schemes, a ""major"" U.S. effort, and deep commitments to the exiles . We should also be cautious of grandiosing schemes, the author says .
 We should experiment in this new venture on a small scale with patience and tolerance for high noise levels and mistakes, says author . "We should experiment with this kind of experiment on a very small scale," he says .
 A week ago Ambassador Dobrynin called my office to say that he understood I was leaving for Africa and would like to have our "long postponed luncheon" before my departure . Ambassador Dobynin called a week ago to say he understood that he was leaving .
 With the exception of an occasional exchange of courtesies at diplomatic functions, this was the first time I had talked with him . With the exceptions of occasional exchanges of court-style court-by-court conversations, he said .
 It was a frank, free-wheeling discussion, lasting more than an hour and a half . It was the first time CNN has hosted a panel of experts in the U.S. for more than 30 years .
 Dobrynin's manner was pleasant, with a show of reasonableness and concern about the current drift in SovietAmerican relations, he said . Dobrynins was pleasant with a pleasant manner .
 At my first opportunity, I expressed deep disappointment that no more progress had been made in reducing tensions, and concern over the consequences of a further decline . At his first opportunity to speak, he expressed his disappointment at the situation .
 "I said that since I was speaking wholly unofficially, he should not attempt to read anything into my remarks," he said . I said since he was speaking, he was not attempting to read it into anything into his remarks .
 Dobrynin expressed worry and surprise at the intensity of U.S. public reaction to Cuba . Almost immediately Dobrynins brought up the question of Cuba, he said .
 In 1898, U.S. public agitation abetted the outbreak of war against Cuba . President Roosevelt drew a parallel to the situation in 1898, the presence of Spanish misrule, and the presence .
 President Obama said the U.S. had inherited a status quo that had grown up since the war . When he protested that the Soviet presence in Cuba was no greater provocation than the United States presence in Turkey, I pointed out .
 In some areas the advantage in this status quo had been with us, in others with Moscow . In others it was a stand-off, in still others, it was with Moscow, says the Russian president .
 Our presence in Greece and Turkey, for instance, represented our reaction to Stalin's military and political pressures against these two countries following the war . We are proud to present our presence in these countries as a result of Stalin's political and military pressures .
 It had become part of a status quo which could safely be changed only by negotiation with reciprocal benefits to each side . It was part of the status quo that could only be changed by negotiation, says David Cameron . He said: "It's a very complex issue which can only be negotiated
 Kennedy Administration hoped and expected to negotiate a more rational set of relationships, easing the various danger points on a basis of reciprocal action to everyone's benefit .
 In Cuba the U.S.R. had unilaterally altered this status quo by introducing a wholly new element . However, in Cuba, this was not the first time this had happened .
 If this kind of thinking had in fact played a part in the Soviet analysis, it was extremely dangerous . If it had played a role in the analysis it was very dangerous .
 If we did move into Cuba in response to some overt act or offensive build-up by the U.S.R., a global chain of events might be set in motion which could have catastrophic consequences . If we moved into Cuba, it could be catastrophic consequences for the world .
 The Soviets might then be tempted to take what they would term ""counteraction" in Berlin and perhaps Turkey . The United States, by that time in an extremely tense mood, would react .
 The U.S.R. would feel pressed by the Chinese and other extremists to counter our moves, writes David Frum . "We would be on our way together down the long slippery slide," Frum says .
 I urged him to read at least the first few chapters in which he would see a pattern of politico-military action and counteraction that could be repeated in the next six months . I urge him to take a look at the pattern of political and military action in Iraq .
 In July 1914, men of intelligence in Russia, Germany, Austria-Hungary, France and England found themselves enmeshed in internal pressures and commitments which left them powerless to avoid the inevitable .
 It would be the greatest folly in history if we were to repeat this insane process in the nuclear age . It's not the only folly in the history of the world's nuclear age. It's a folly to repeat the insanity of nuclear power .
 Dobrynin asked me what, in the circumstances, I thought could be done in regard to Cuba . "Dobrynin" was asked what he could do to help Cuba, he said .
 Stressing that he was speaking solely as an individual, I suggested three moves that the U.S. could sponsor to ease the situation . Stressed that I was speaking only as a . individual .
 Dobrynin should remind his government of President Kennedy's distinction between defensive and offensive weapons in his statement . President Kennedy made the distinction between offensive and defensive weapons .
 Reports indicated that Soviet shipments were in fact beginning to include weapons which had a clearly offensive capacity . I was particularly concerned about this point because current reports indicated that . Soviet shipments of weapons had been starting to include . weapons that had clearly offensive . capacity .
 If this continued, it could produce— with the help of some incident perpetrated perhaps by individuals striving to provoke another ""Remember the Maine"" incident- the very conflict which the Administration is anxious to avoid . If this continues, it . could produce . another incident .
 President Kennedy committed himself to act under certain specific circumstances . President Kennedy had committed himself himself to action under certain circumstances .
 This was a clear commitment, and the U.S.R. should not take it lightly, says CNN.com . "This was a very important commitment to the United States. This was not an act of cowardice," she says .
 Castro now has ample defensive arms with which to protect himself from casual landings . Castro now had plenty of weapons with which he could protect himself .
 The U.S.R. should tell him that under present circumstances no more arms will be shipped, he says . "Under present circumstances, he should not be shipped," he adds .
 The U.S.R. should then ask Castro himself to make a statement announcing that the defense of Cuba was assured and that no more arms were needed . Castro should then announce that he will no longer need arms to defend Cuba .
 Castro should be asked by Moscow to state that he has no design on his neighbors, that his entire energies would henceforth be devoted to the economic development of Cuba . He sought only peaceful competition with other Latin American nations .
 His decision not to indulge in further subversion, propaganda, and expansion in neighboring Latin American countries would, of course, have to be confirmed by deeds .
 Soviet assurances on this point would serve to reduce some of the current tensions and give us all a breathing spell . However, Soviet assurances would help ease tensions .
 "If some progress along these lines were not possible, I had deep forebododging about the weeks ahead," he said .
 The U.S.R. was not shipping offensive weapons and well understood the dangers of doing so, he said . He answered that in spite of our worries he was not sending offensive weapons .
 It was unreasonable for the U.S., as a major power, to expect a small, weak country such as Cuba to make such public concessions to the United States public opinion even though both the US.S.R. and Cuba might accept all three points in principle .
 The U.S.R. could not let Cuba down, they had no desire to complicate the situation further . The Cuban government had no intention of letting them down, but they did not want to complicate it further .
 In 1959 most Americans had strongly applauded Castro's revolution in Cuba . In 1959, most Americans supported Castro's overthrow of the government .
 If Dobrynin were misinformed about the types of weapons now arriving in Cuba, it would not be the first time in diplomatic history that this had occurred .
 As long as Soviet weapons flowed into Cuba and Cuban money was used to subvert Latin American countries, the situation would remain dangerously explosive . The situation would continue to be dangerously explosive, says the Foreign Office .
 "I hoped that his government would see the danger and act accordingly to help ease the tensions," she said . She said she hoped that the government would act accordingly .
 I replied that our government would have no part in such an operation . I said that we were genuinely worried, and that his government should view the situation with serious concern . The government would not take part in the operation, he said .
 On October 14, 1962, a U-2 aircraft flew a reconnaissance mission over the western part of Cuba, flying from south to north . Air Force Major Richard D Heyser was the pilot of the aircraft .
 Three medium-range ballistic missile sites were being developed near San Cristobal, in Pinar del Rio province . Analysis and interpretation of the photographs at the National Photographic Intelligence Center revealed the sites . The photos were taken at the time of the missile sites .
 Analysts counted eight large MRBM transporters at the three locations and four erector launchers in tentative firing positions . Photo analysts counted eight . launchers at three locations .
 Two further U-2 missions revealed a fourth MRBM site near San Cristobal . Two intermediate-range ballistic missile sites were discovered at Guanajay .
 Photos also reveal 21 crates for Soviet IL-28 Beagle medium-range bomber aircraft at San Julian airfield . Photos also revealed 21 crates of Soviet Il-28 aircraft .
 This was very big news, and its validity would need to be demonstrated clearly to you and others before action could be taken . This is very important to be shown clearly to the public before action can be taken.
 The blow-ups and other elements of such a presentation would not be ready before morning . "The blow-up" would not arrive before morning, says the team .
 "I was satisfied that the word was going out quietly to those with an immediate need to know. I was satisfied with the word being going out quiet to those ... with the immediate need of knowing," she said .
 The one obvious operational need was for more photography, and that was in hand . The project was in need of more photography and that's what the team needed .
 "It was a hell of a secret, and it must remain one until you had a chance to deal with it," he said . It was "a hell of secret," he added .
 Everything should go on as nearly normally as possible, says President Obama . There should be no hastily summoned meeting Monday night, he says .
 President Obama should not leave a dinner at his home with knowledgeable foreign guests, he says . He says he knew others were in the same spot .
 This was not something that could be dealt with on the phone except in the most limited and cryptic terms . On the other hand this could not be done in the phone . This is not the best way to deal with the situation, says the author .
 A quiet evening and a night of sleep were the best preparation you could have in the light of what would face you in the next days . So I decided that a quiet night and a quiet evening would be a good preparation .
 On October 15, 1962, a major amphibious exercise was initiated in the southeastern United States and the Caribbean . The exercise took place in southeastern U.S.
 On October 15 more than 40 ships involved in the exercise were underway . The exercise took place between October 15 and October 15 .
 The objective of the exercise was to conduct an amphibious assault on Vieques Island, Puerto Rico, according to the U.S. Navy .
 The stated intent of the assault was to overthrow the imaginary tyrant ""Ortsac"— Castro spelled backwards . Castro spelled . backwards . The assault was intended to overthrow an imaginary tyrant .
 Approximately 20,000 naval personnel and 4,000 marines were involved in PHIBRIGLEX-62 . The mission was the first of its kind .
 The CINCLANT history of the missile crisis notes that as early as about 10 October the National Military Command Center began inquiring informally about the nature and scope of the PHIBRIGLEX-62 .
 For Taylor's draft account of this meeting, October 16, including a list of participants, and Carter's memorandum for the record, dictated on October 17, see the Supplement . For Taylor: "For the record" Carter's memo was dictated on Oct. 17 .
 McGeorge Bundy informed the President about the U-2 photographs of the missile sites at 8:45m. Bundy had informed him about the photographs at 8.45m .
 Kennedy immediately called for a meeting of his principal advisers at 11:45 a.m. October 16 . Kennedy called the meeting to discuss the health of the nation .
 U.S. denied that they were going to establish bases of their own with a Soviet base, thus making it Cuban point of view .
 "The point where we [make or think?], that is the, uh, overriding, overriding necessity to take all the risks that are involved doing that," he says .
 "This is the time to eliminate the Cuban problem by actually eliminating the island," says President Obama . "Or we're going to decide that this is . uh, or we're ... going to ... eliminate the island"
 I think there are certain military actions that we might well want to take straight away, says President Obama . And he says there is certain military, um, uh, uh- uh, actions that could be taken .
 "We then would move openly and vigorously into the, into the guerrilla field, and, uh, create maximum confusion on the island," he says . "We won't be too squeemish at this point about the overtness, covert of what is being done"
 We get Miro Cardona and his group in, Manuel Rey and Manuel Rey . See if they won't get together on a progressive junta .
 "All principal elements, other than the Batista group, as leaders of Cuba" would be Cuba's leaders . "That would pretty well combine all principal elements ... other than Batista," she says .
 "Get, get, get the Cuban elements highly organized on this matter. And, uh, have them, give them more of a status," President Obama says .
 In any event, we would be prepared, following the air strike, for an air, invasion, both by air and by sea . We would have to be prepared for air, sea and air strikes, he says .
 Approximately seven days after the start of the air strike, that would be possible if the political environment made it desirable or necessary at that time . The political environment would make such a move possible, he says .
 Secretary of State Hillary Clinton ordered an air strike on Syria . Clinton: "We know of. missiles, airfields, uh, unclear sites"
 Short range missiles could be used for short range missiles against the U.S. State Department says .
 I think it's really rather unrealistic to think that we could carry out an air attack of the kind we're talking about. I'm not optimistic about carrying out such an attack. I think we can't carry out such a sort of air attack. We're not going to be able
 "We're talking about an air attack of several hundred sorties because we don't know where these airplanes are," says President Obama . "We are going to attack them," says Obama .
 The Cuban air force is capable of penetrating, in small numbers, our coastal air defense by coming in low over the water . We're not prepared to report to you exactly what, uh, what the Cuban air forces are capable of, but I think we must assume that, we must
 Castro's air force is intact, leaving the risk of using nuclear weapons against coastal areas . And I would think that we would not dare go in against the missile sites, knock those out leaving intact Castro's Air Force, and run the risk .
 It would be a, a very heavy price to pay in U.S. lives for the, the damage we did to Cuba, says President Obama . The United States has been criticized for its actions in Cuba .
 "We hope to take out a vast majority in the first strike," he says . "This is not just one thing, one strike, one day, but continuous air attack," he adds .
 Bundy: I do raise again the question whether, uh, whether we the problem, military problem, but there is, I would think, a substantial political advantage in limiting the strike in surgical terms to the thing that is in fact the cause of action . Bundy: "There is,
 I suggest, Mr President, that if you're involved in several hundred strikes, this is what you would-and against airfields— this is how you would do, pre-invade . Mr President. I suggest Mr President .
 "It would be very difficult to convince anybody that this was not a pre-invasion strike," he says . "And, uh, it would be hard to ... convince anybody ... that this is not a ... pre-insurgent strike"
 "There's little difference. I think also once you get this volume of attack that public opinion reaction, uh, to this, is little difference," he says .
 "If you're talking about a, a general air attack program, you might as well think about whether we can eradicate the whole problem by an invasion just as simply with as little chance of reaction," he says .
 Well, I would think we would have, should be in a position to invade at any time if we so desired, he said . Well, he would think that we should be able to invade, he added .
 CNN's John Sutter says the U.S. military has some missile bases in North Korea . Sutter: "They have some more there. Well, let's say we just take out the missile bases"
 "You just can't keep high strikes on. Obviously they can get 'em in by submarine and so on, I don't know whether you, you just can’t keep high strike on," he says .
 We set up a, uh, new security classification governing precisely the field of offensive capability in Cuba just five days ago, four days ago .
 "Oh, that will be a very large number, but that's not generally where leaks come from," he says . "That will be very large, but ... that will not generally be the case"
 I think we should assume that this will become fairly widely known, if not in the newspapers, at least by political representatives of both parties within-I would, I'm just picking a figure-Id say a week . Well, Mr President, I, I think, to be realistic
 Police chief: "This type of information is going on throughout the department. We have stopped all that, and this, this is going to continue"
 I doubt very much that we can keep this out of the hands of, uh, of members of Congress, for example, for more than a week. And I, I,  ,  I doubt very little that we . can keep it out of [the hands of
 Senator Keating has already, in effect, announced it on the floor of the Senate. Well, Sen. Keating said, "I have already announced it"
 I think we can count on announcing it not later than Thursday or Friday of this week . I think it will be announced not later this week, but we'll be announcing it soon .
 There is a refugee who's a major source of intelligence on this, of course, who has described one of these missiles in terms which we can recognize, who is now in this country . There is also a refugee in the U.S. who is a major intelligence source .
 "Mr President" asks if we should not interview Senator Keating and check out his data . "We ought not to interview him," she says .
 An open officer of the intelligence agency should do this in a routine sort of way, he says . Seems to me that that ought to be done in the sort of . way by an open officer, he adds .
 I think that, uh, we're committed at any time that we feel that there's a build up that in any way endangers to take whatever action we must take to assure our security. I think ... that's a commitment to the U.S. government .
 "I spent the weekend with the ambassadors of the Organization of American States," says President Obama . The ambassador to the U.S. was invited to a summit in Washington DC .
 I take the position that Mr Bundy says, We ought to be living all these years with get your blood pressure up. And, I, the fact that we're talking about our other allies, uh, I take that position .
 "Any time the build up endangers or threatens our security in any way, we're going to do whatever must be done immediately to protect our own security. One, one, one of the points you make-that any time . any time [building up] endangers our security
 "We have to be prudent and cautious, talk to the commanders and see what they say, what they're ... not much for circularizing it over the Hill or our allies," she says .
 There are perhaps two or three of our principal allies or heads of government we could communicate on a 24-hour notice basis, says David Cameron . "There are perhaps a few countries we could talk to," he says .
 President Obama says Russia is "almost incumbent upon the Russians" to send troops back into Syria . He says it's almost incumbent on Russia not to send them in again .
 "We ought to just decide who we talk to and how long ahead and how many people, really, in the government," she said . "We should just decide ... who we talked to," she added .
 There's going to be a difference between those who know that-this will leak out in the next few days— there are these bases, until we say or the Pentagon or State won't be harsh, he says .
 "What we're going to do about it really ought to be, you know, the tightest of all," he says . "Otherwise we botch it up," he adds .
 Mr President, may I suggest that we come back this afternoon prepared to, to, answer three questions. Mr President . Mr President. Mr Obama, may . I suggested that we . come back . prepared to answer three . questions .
 Another memorandum for the record of this meeting, drafted by Parrott, is ibid. This memorandum was drafted by the secretary of state of state .
 At 2:30 this afternoon, the Attorney General convened in his office a meeting on Operation Mongoose . General Lansdale and Colonel Patchell, General Johnson of the Joint Staff, Robert Hurwitch of State, Hewson Ryan of USIA, and the undersigned. The undersigned
 He traced the history of General Lansdale's personal appointment by the President a year ago . Lansdale was appointed to the post by President Obama last year .
 The Attorney General then stated that in view of this lack of progress, he was going to give Operation Mongoose more personal attention .
 Attorney General spoke favorably of the sabotage paper presented by General Carter this morning to the meeting of the Special Group 71/ He obviously did not like the earlier memorandum, since he felt it showed no ""push"" in getting on with the sabotage .
 "When asked for my comments, I stated that we were prepared to get on with the new action program and that we would execute it aggressively," says the minister .
 The objective of Operation Mongoose would have to be determined at some point, he says . The Cubans with whom we have to work were seeking a reason for risking their lives in these operations, he adds .
 Cuban DRE are willing to commit their people only on operations which they regarded as sensible . I related my conversation with a young Cuban from the DRE who pointed out that they were willing to . commit their personnel only on . operations which are sensible, he said .
 I defined ""sensible"" in Cuban terminology these days as meaning an action which would contribute to the liberation of their country, another way of saying that the United States, perhaps in conjunction with other Latin countries, would bail them out militarily .
 He said that these meetings might later be changed to every other day when and if he finds they are not necessary .
 Khrushchev expresses disappointment at U.S. trying to stop Soviet airplanes from flying to Cuba . Khrushchen said he wanted to express his disappointment at one thing that adds fuel to the cold war .
 After I interjected confirmation, he said they regard this as unfriendly act . He said: 'They regard it as an act of friendship'
 United States was boycotting trade with Cuba and appealing to all countries to stop their ships from going there . U.S. appealed to all nations to stop ships going to Cuba . Cuba has been a source of Cuban oil wealth for years .
 Khrushchev said the U.S. was doing complicated life of simple people and did not simplify it . Khrushchev said that what United States was doing was complicated life .
 When last war started in USSR, on third or fourth day, a certain General came to him, where he was serving as member of military council of front, and said everything was lost, just as in France . He said everything in the USSR was lost just like in France.
 General went to sleep that night and next morning came into peasant hut in which Khrushchev was staying and shot himself . General went out of the house and shot his own self-inflicted shooting . General then shot himself in the head .
 "He was a coward, lost his self-control, and let his nerves dominate his mind," he said . He was a 'coward' who lost self control and let nerves dominate mind, he added .
 Not only US, but all Western Hemisphere countries, feel Castro has let Cuban people down . Not only U.S. but all . Western . Hemisphere countries feel Castro . has let Cuba people down, says Castro .
 U.S. and other Western Hemisphere states not going to help Cuba, Cuban leader says . United States and other western Hemisphere states will not help Cuba . Cuban leader: "We are going to do whatever we need to do"
 The size of Soviet shipments to Cuba has increased feeling in U.S. on this problem, he says .
 Khrushchev said we must be responsible, since our countries are great powers, since we were great powers . Khrushchev said: "We must be held responsible for our countries being great powers. We must take responsibility"
 "We cannot demand that other countries live as we like or there would be war," says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Putin: We cannot demand other nations live as they like or we would be at war .
 United States has bases in countries neighboring USSR, such as Turkey, as well as in Greece, Italy, France, West Germany and Pakistan . United States bases in Turkey, Greece and Italy .
 USSR does not recognize right of U.S. to be everywhere in world and to rule everywhere, says U.K. State Department . U.N. should not be allowed to be part of world and rule everywhere . USSR did not recognize rights of United States .
 President Obama says the U.S. is now a force as great as yours . Obama: "It was one thing when United States was very powerful, but now there is a force that great as you"
 Let's respect internal affairs of other countries and not interfere with life of other nations, says President Obama . Let's not interfere in other countries' internal affairs, says Obama .
 President has made it clear we are not going to interfere in Cuba by force, says President Obama . Cuba has been a source of tension in Cuba for decades .
 "We are not going to help Cuba, which does not mean we intend to interfere there," says President Obama . "We will not help Cuba," says Obama .
 Khrushchev accepted this, saying he also understood President that way . But must still express his disappointment about blockade, which is inimical action, he said .
 You should trade with Cuba, as we do with Turkey and other of your allies, says President Obama .
 Following the first meeting at the White House the JCS and the commanders involved with Cuba planning met at 4:30 m.m. ET .
 All significant military targets in Cuba and not just the missiles should be attacked, says McNamara . They were joined by McNamara at 5:40m, and agreed to attack all military targets .
 Many participants went to the Department of State for further discussions, which ended at approximately IIm.
 No other record of these discussions has been found . (FRC 65 A 3501, Cuba, 1962)
 There's good evidence of their back-up missiles for each of the four launchers . There would be twice the number for a total of eight which could eventually be erected . Back-up missile launchers would be double the number .
 This would mean a capability of from sixteen or possibly twenty-four missiles . This would be from 16 to twenty-24 missiles . It would mean that the U.S. would be able to launch more missiles .
 We feel, on the basis of information that we presently have, that these are solid propellant, inertial guidance missiles with eleven-hundred-mile range rather than radar-controlled missiles . We feel these missiles could be radar- controlled .
 We have no indication of any radar or any indication of oxygen equipment . Primarily because there is no indication that radar or oxygen equipment has been used .
 "It would appear to be logical from an intelligence estimate viewpoint that if they are going to this much trouble that they would go ahead and put in the eleven hundred miles because of the tremendously increased threat coverage," the president says .
 All brackets except those citing declassification excisions and unrelated material are in the source text . Let me see that 71/ /I/All brackets except that cite declassified excisions .
 It was drawn in, uh, some time ago, I believe, but the ranges there are the nominal ranges of the missiles rather than the maximum . The missile range was drawn into the U.S. during the Cold War, President Obama says .
 It would appear that with this type of missile, with the solid propellant and inertial guidance system, that they could well be operational within two weeks as we look at the pictures .
 They'll have a refire rate of from four to six hours over each launcher . The launchers will be available for up to $1 million each .
 They're not nearly as vulnerable as the oxygen propellant, but they are vulnerable to ordinary rifle fire . They are not as much vulnerable as oxygen .
 We have no evidence whatsoever of any nuclear warhead storage near the field launchers . We have 'no evidence whatsoever' of any such storage near field launchers.
 The facility now has automatic anti-aircraft weapon protection . The facility has been observing since February .
 There are some similarities, but also many points of dissim-, similarity between this particular facility and the national storage sites in the Soviet Union . The facility is located in Moscow, Russia, and is located on the outskirts of Moscow .
 It's the best candidate for a site, and we have that marked for further surveillance . It's not the best site in the world, and it's been marked for more surveillance .
 There is 'totally inadequate evidence' to say there is nuclear storage capability now . However, there is really inadequate evidence to say that there is a nuclear storage capacity now .
 The missiles have a four-in-line deployment pattern in launchers which is identical— complexes about five miles apart-representative of the deployments that we note in the Soviet Union for similar missiles . The U.S. has a similar pattern of deployment patterns in its missiles .
 "We estimate that these could be fully operational within two weeks. Well, our people estimate that we could ... well, well, these are fully operational," says the BBC .
 "It would be considerably longer since we don't have any indication of, uh, oxygen refueling there nor any radars," he says . It would be "much longer" if the plane refueled there, he adds .
 This wouldn't rule out the possibility that one of them might be operational very much sooner . It's not the first time they've been in operation .
 "Our people feel that this has been, being put in since probably early September," says local resident . "This has been put in place since early September"
 We have had two visits of a Soviet ship that has an eight-foot-hold capacity sideways . The Soviet ship has a capacity of eight foot-holds .
 "So far, so far, is the only delivery vehicle that we would have any suspicion that they came in on. And this about, so . So far, the only . only delivery . vehicle that would be suspected of coming in on is the delivery vehicle .
 Much of the central and, in fact, much of the . central and . part of the eastern was cloud covering . But, uh, part of . the central . and, indeed, the central, was cloud .
 If the weather is not good, we'll start off with two and we'll have the others ready to go during the day as the weather improves . We'll also have the other ones ready for the day if the weather isn't good .
 Weather aircraft surrounding the periphery of Cuba will keep track of the weather during the day over all parts of the island .
 We are planning to do this every day thereafter for an indefinite period . We have the capability to do it, or have the . capability to . do this, every . day thereafter . for an . indefinite period. We are . planning to . use this as a way to get more
 This is a field-type missile, and from collateral evidence, not direct, that we have with the Soviet Union, it's designed to be fielded, placed and fired in six hours . This is the missile, which can be fielded within six hours, the U.S. says
 "We have caught this in a very early stage of deployment. Uh, it would appear that we have caught it," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 It would also appear that there does not seem to be the degree of urgency in getting them immediately into position . There does not appear to be an urgency in moving them immediately .
 Could be because it is the shorter-range missile and the radars and the oxygen has not yet arrived . Or it could be because the missile and radars are too short-range . Or because it's the shorter range missile .
 CNN's John Sutter says it would be 'catastrophic' to make a bad guess as to whether these things are good or not . Sutter: "I don't mean to go behind your judgment here, except that there's one thing that would be really catastrophic"
 "These signatures are identical with those that we have clearly earmarked in the Soviet Union," says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Putin: "We have fully verified"
 "We, uh, know something from the range firings that we have vetted for the past two years," says CNN.com's John Sutter . "We have vetted and vetted for two years. We ... know something," he says .
 "We know also from comparison with the characteristics of our own missiles as to size and length and diameter," says Russian President Vladimir Putin .
 We have a family of Soviet missiles for which we have all accepted the, uh, specifications . Uh, as to these particular missiles, we have ... accepted the specifications .
 We know from a number of sources, including our Ironbark sources, as well as range firings, which we have been vetting for several years, as to the capabilities . Well, we know from . sources, . including our . Ironbarks sources, and from range fir
 CNN.com: "I would have to get the analysts in here to give you the play-by-play account. But, uh, I would have had to get them in here."
 If they're missiles this size, they are missiles of considerable range, I think. In other words, if they are . This is a missile that could be capable of a range of missiles .
 I tried to prove today— I am, I am . satisfied— that these were not MRBMs. I'm satisfied, he said . "I'm satisfied," he said. "I am satisfied"
 "I could not find evidence that would support any conclusion other than that they are MRBMs. I got our experts out, and I could find evidence," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Whether they're eleven-hundred miles, six-hundreds-mile, nine-miles is still a guess in my opinion, says author .
 The U.S. has not confirmed that they are MRBMs . But that is the most probable assumption that they will be MRBMS .
 The one is, um, the chance that, uh, this might be the issue on which ... Castro would elect to break with Moscow if he knew that he were in deadly jeopardy . The other is the chance he would break with Russia if he was in deadly danger .
 "We're very much ... interested in the possibility of a direct message to Castro, uh, as well as Khrushchev, might make some sense here before an actual strike is put on. But, in any event, um, we ... uh, we're very... interested in
 Mr Martin will present you with outline of message to Castro that, uh, we had been in mind, Mr Martin says . Mr Martin: "We had a message that we had in mind"
 CNN's John Sutter describes what we know about missile sites in Syria . Sutter: "We are informed that we are informed about what's going on. Uh, first, uh, describing just what we . know about what . exists"
 "It's a breach of two of the points that you have made public. Uh, second, to point out that the issues this raises as far as the U.S. security is concerned,” he says . “Uh, second . Uh, first . It's
 A ground-to-ground missile was launched from a Soviet-operated base in Cuba . The missile is believed to have been launched by the U.S. military .
 This raises the greatest problems for Castro, as we see it, as it sees it . Uh, thirdly, this raises the biggest problems for the Castro family .
 The Soviets have threatened him with attack from the United States, and, uh, therefore the overthrow of his regime; used his territory to put him in this jeopardy . In the first place, by this action the Soviets have ... threatened him .
 The Soviets are talking to other people about the possibility of bargaining this support and these missiles, uh, against concessions in Berlin and elsewhere, and therefore are threatening to, to bargain him away . And, secondly, the Soviets are negotiating with other people ... to get him away, he says
 "We wonder whether he, uh, realizes the, the position that he's been put in and the way the Soviets are using him," says CNN. "Uh, in these circumstances, we wonder whether ... he ... realizes the ... position"
 "We mean to take action about it in the next day or so," he says . Then go on to say that, uh, we will have to inform our people of the threat that exists here, he adds .
 We'll have to do this unless we receive word from President Obama that he is prepared to take action to get the Soviets out of the site . And we'll have it unless we get word from him .
 "We intend to, uh, keep close surveillance by overflights of the site to make su-, to know what is being done. Uh, he will have to show us that not only by statements, privately or publicly, but by action," he said .
 "We will have to know that he is doing something to remove this threat, uh, in order to withhold the action that we intend to, we will be compelled to take," he says . But he says he's not sure if the threat will be removed .
 President Obama has been in Cuba for more than a year and a half a year . President Obama says he wants to remind Castro of the statement he made a year ago that there are two points that are non-negotiable . Obama: If Castro feels that an attempt by him to
 Russia's influence in Latin America is tied to its ties to Latin America, says Vladimir Putin . Putin says Russia is interested in Latin American affairs, especially in Russia and Latin America .
 This is a, a hint, but no more than that, that, uh, we might have sympathy and help for him in case he ran into trouble trying to throw the old-line Communists and the Soviets out . "This is a hint that we might ... have sympathy ... for
 The disadvantage in that is, of course, the advance notice if he judges that we, uh, we would not say exactly what we would do, he says . It might lead him to bring up mobile anti-aircraft weapons around these missiles themselves .
 If we strike these missiles, we would expect ... maximum Communist reaction in Latin America, President Obama says .
 Venezuela, Guatemala, Bolivia, Chile, possibly even Mexico-uh, could easily be overthrown . The question will arise as to whether we should not somehow indicate to them in some way the seriousness of the situation so they can take precautionary steps .
 "We would estimate that the Soviets would almost certainly take, uh, some kind of action somewhere," says CNN's John Sutter . The Soviets would 'almost certainly' take action somewhere, he says .
 U.S. President Barack Obama made a decision to take action without letting allies know of a matter which could subject them to very great danger, he said .
 "We could find ourselves, uh, isolated and the alliance crumbling," he says . "But at a moment of much greater danger over an issue of ... greater danger than the Suez affair"
 I think that these are matters that we'll be working on very hard this evening, but I think I ought to mention them because it's, uh, necessarily a part of this problem . I think it's important that we're working on these matters very hard, but it's not
 General Taylor has just been with the Chiefs, and the unified commanders went through this, uh, in detail . General Taylor: "Uh, General Taylor ... uh, uh- in detail"
 U.S. could take out missiles and the MIG aircraft and the associated nuclear storage facilities if we locate them, uh, could be done in twenty-hours' warning .
 Twenty-four hours between the time of decision and time of strike, uh, starting with a decision no later than, no earlier than this coming Friday and with the strike therefore on Saturday ,/3/ or anytime thereafter . That is to say, . beginning with a . decision no
 General Taylor will wish to comment on this, but the Chiefs are strong in their recommendation against that kind of an attack, believing that it would leave, uh, too great a capability in Cuba undestroyed . "It would leave too much of Cuba undistroyed"
 The specific number of sorties required to, to . accomplish this end has not been worked out in detail . It is not known how many sorties will be required .
 The capability is for something in excess of seven hundred sorties per day, says the U.S. Air Force . The U.N. has the capability to launch more than 7,000 sorties daily .
 The U.S. Air Force says it has the capability to carry out limited missions . That capability is available in the air force alone, and the navy would rise on top of that number .
 Chiefs have also considered other alternatives extending into the full invasion, uh, you may wish to discuss later . Chiefs considered other options, including a full invasion .
 Could be done with twenty-four-hours' notice and would require a relatively small number of sorties, less than a day's air attack, in other words .
 "We said, uh, five days perhaps- perhaps-to do the complete job. But we then have to come back day after day for several days- uh, perhaps- to complete job"
 We could then be making up our mind as to whether or not to go on and invade the island .
 "I'm very much impressed with the need for a time something like five to seven days for this air purpose because of the parachute aspect of the in-and-out invasion," says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 "You can't take parachute formations, close formations of, uh, troop carrier planes in in the face of any air opposition really really," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The first job, before the, any land, uh, attack, including , including , is really cleaning out the, the MIGs and the accompanying aircraft . So the first job is to clean out the . the, um, the . MIG and the . accompanying aircraft,
 The danger of starting military action after they acquire a nuclear capability is so great I believe we would decide against it, particularly if that nuclear capability included aircraft as well as missiles .
 Now this lies short of military action against Cuba, direct military action is needed . Now this is not only possible, it's also possible to use Cuba's own territory .
 The third course of action is any one of these variants of military action directed against Cuba, starting with an air attack against the missiles .
 Max suggested seven hundred to a thousand sorties per day for five days . He said: 'To move from that into the more extensive air attacks against the MIGs, against the airfields, against potential nuclear storage sites, against radar installations'
 This is the very, very rough plan that the Chiefs have outlined, and it is their judgment that that is the type of air attack that should be carried out . The Chiefs' decision to carry out the attack was made in a "very rough plan" that was outlined by the Chiefs
 To move beyond that into an invasion following the air attack means the application of tens of thousands, between ninety and, and, uh, over, over a hundred and fifty thousand men to the invasion forces . The invasion forces would have to be at least 100,000 men, says the
 Is a great possibility they can place them in operational condition quickly, says CNN.com's John Defterios . Is a 'great possibility' they can .
 General Carter said the system may have a, normal reaction time, set-up time of six hours . Unless, as Carter said, it may not have a normal reaction .
 We don't know how much time has started, nor do we know what air-launch capabilities they have for warheads . Whether it has six hours or two weeks, we have no idea how long time has begun .
 "We don't know what air-launch capability they have for high explosives," says CNN.com's John Sutter . "We're not sure if they have air-launching capability," he says .
 It's almost certainly, uh, a, a substantial high-explosive capability in the sense that they could drop one or two or ten bombs some place along the East Coast . The U.S. has a "substantial" capability, the author says .
 "That's the minimum risk to this country we run as a result of advance warning, too," says President Obama . "We run a nation that is run by advance warning," he says .
 "We are very vulnerable to conventional bombing attack, low-level bombing attacks in the Florida area," says U.S. State Department .
 "It would be entirely possible for MIGs to come through with conventional weapons and do some amount, some damage," he says . "MIGs would be able to do some of the damage"
 "I would not think that they would use a nuclear weapon unless they're prepared to a nuclear war, I don't think," says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "They would not be prepared to go to nuclear war"
 "We've never really believed that, that Khrushchev would take on a general nuclear war over Cuba," he says . "That would mean that, uh, we could be just utterly wrong, but ... we've never believed that"
 We'd have to target them with our missiles and have the same kind of, of pistol-pointed-at-the-head situation as we have in the Soviet Union at the present time .
 No question, if this thing goes on, the attack on Cuba becomes general war, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "No question" if this goes on .
 A quarter of a million U.S. troops, marines and airmen would be needed to take the island of Cuba, President Obama says .
 "Psychological factor that we have sat back and let v em do it to us, that is more important than the direct threat. Well, it's a psychological factor," says Paul Scholes .
 Less than 1 line of source text not declassified: "Let's say we, twenty-four hours ahead of our doing something about it, we make a public statement that these have been found on the island"
 "Anything that shows, uh, our intent to strike is going to place the airplanes and, and the missiles into, these are por-, really mobile missiles," President Obama says .
 "I think before you make any announcements, you should decide whether you're going to strike," says President Obama . "I don't think you should go to strike. I think you need to decide before you do," says Obama .
 The only advantage is, it's a kind of ultimatum . There is an opportunity of a response that would preclude it. Well, the only announ-, the only advantage .
 I mean it's, it's more, more, for, for the appearance than as for the reality. "It's more than a more, a more ... for ... the appearance," she said. "For the appearance, I mean, more than as a reality."
 Ball: "You're compelled and you've gotta move quickly and you want them to know it" Ball: You're compelled to do this, you're compelled, you've got to move quickly . Ball: It's a job, you have to do it. You have to move
 Latin American governments are not easy to deal with, says President Obama . "What you do with them is another matter. And then the question of what you do," he says .
 "We are doing only what we warned repeatedly and publicly we would have to do. Uh, it corresponds to the, the punishment fits the crime in political terms," he says .
 I'd have to say first find out, uh, the air, so that I would think that we ought to be in position to do one and two . I'd say first, uh ... find out what's going to happen .
 "One would be just taking out these missiles, if there were others we'd find in the next twenty-four hours," says CNN's John Sutter .
 "We've decided, uh, we've gotta go in the whole way. Okay, well, let's say we've decided," she says . "I'm going to go in, I'm going in, and I'm not going in"
 Mr President, it requires no action other than what's been started, and you can make a decision prior to the start Saturday or any time thereafter . Mr. President, Mr. Obama, said. "Mr. Obama can make the decision before or after the start of Saturday or after
 The Secretary has given you the, the time, the minimum time is to make a decision, uh, now to, so that we can brief the pilots and then crank in the new intelligence . The Secretary of State says the time is now to make the decision .
 Sweeney has said that he will take the tape that comes in tomorrow and process it Thursday and Friday and Friday . He will prepare the mission folders for strikes on Saturday or Saturday or earl-, every day thereafter .
 There'll be, oh, would say four hundred pilots will have to go, to be briefed in the course of this. And there'll be ... around 4,000 pilots will be briefed, he says .
 "This is widening the, the whole military scope of this thing very materially," he said . "If that's what we're, we're supposed to do at this time," he added .
 The President does not have to make any decision until twenty-four hours before the strike, except the decision to be prepared . The President is expected to make a decision on the strike .
 The process of preparation will not in itself run the risk of overt disclosure of the preparation . And the process of preparing will not run in itself risk overt disclosure, he says .
 I'd like to say this, Mr President, the more time you can give, the better. Mr President's time is running out, he says . Mr Obama's time will be wasted, he adds .
 The problem is that we don't have the unknown targets, specifically these, these, missile-launchers and nuclear storage, and we won't have that until tomorrow night at the earliest . It'll be processed photographically on Thursday, interpreted Thursday night, turned into target folders on Friday
 This is Sweeney's estimate of the earliest possible time for a spare strike against the missiles . This is estimated time for the missile strike .
 McNamara: "It will run more smoothly. More than twenty-four hours between the time of decision and the first strike" McNamara says . McNamara hopes to have more than 24 hours between decision and strike .
 First, we need to develop a specific strike plan limited to the missiles and the nuclear storage sites, he says . "We have not done. We have not developed a specific plan," he adds .
 "Since you've indicated some interest in that possibility, we ought to provide you that option," he says . "We ought to be able to provide that option. Since you've expressed some interest, we should give you the option."
 The second thing we ought to do, it seems to me as a government, is to consider the consequences of the decision . The government should also consider the impact of the consequences, says David Cameron .
 McNamara: "Because we haven't considered the consequences, I'm not sure we're taking all the action we ought to take now to minimize those" McNamara says .
 I don't know quite what kind of a world we live in after we've struck Cuba, and we, we've started it. I, I, don't, know quite . I, for example, I struck Cuba. It's not quite a world after we struck Cuba .
 "We've put let's say a hundred sorties in, just for purposes of illustration, I don't think you dare start with less than a hundred," says the pilot .
 "There's the absolute minimum that you would wish to kill. Well, you have twenty-four, uh, vehicles, plus, uh-16 launchers, plus a possible nuclear storage site, but there's the minimum" "The absolute minimum" is "the minimum"
 "You couldn't possibly go in after those with less than, I would think, uh, fifty to a hundred sorties," he says . And you couldn't go after those sorties, he says. "You can't go into after those."
 President says the Chiefs and commanders feel so strongly about the, the dangers inherent in the limited strike, that they would prefer taking no military action rather than to take strike .
 CNN's John Sutter says the best thing to do is to be bold if you're thinking about Cuba . Sutter: "I quite agree that the, if just . thinking about trying to get this thing under some degree of, uh, control, control. I quite agree"
 President Vladimir Putin says he is considering a combination of the plans which might be considered, including the limited strike and then the messages to Khrushchev and Castro . Putin: "This is simply the, fulfilling the statements we've made all along"
 It seems to be a limited strike plus planning for invasion five days afterwards, makes much more sense, says David Cameron . "It seems to me it seems to make sense," he adds. "To be taken unless something untoward occurs"
 President Obama is trying to eliminate as effectively as possible every weapon that can strike the U.S. President George W. Bush says he's "incomprehensible"
 This is why I say I, I think we have to think of the consequences here. This is what I think is a very serious thing,’s why I think this is a serious thing . This is where we need to think about the consequences of our actions, he says
 I, I would think an, a forced invasion, uh, associated with assisting an uprising, following an extensive air strike, is, is a highly probable set of circumstances . I,    I would think, a, a ... forced invasion ... is,  is,
 I don't know whether you could carry out an extensive air strike of, let's say, the kind of the kind we were talking about a moment ago-seven hundred sorties a day for five days-without an uprising in Cuba .
 "We have seven hundred targets here we're talking about. Well, when you . talk about military targets, we have seven . hundred targets," he said .
 "It seems to be if we go in there, lock-stock-and-barrel, we can consider them entirely Cuban," he says . "We can't wait to see what happens next."
 "What we say for political purposes and what we think are not identical here. Ah, well, what we say is not identical," he said .
 Khrushchev himself would never, would never risk a major war on, on a fellow as obviously erratic, uh, and foolish as, as Castro Castro . Castro's behavior was erratic, erratic and foolish, as well as his behavior .
 We think, Mr President, that under any of these plans we will probably get an attack on, on Guantanamo, by, by fire . We think under any plan we would probably get a attack on ... Guantanamo .
 "They have artillery and mortars in the, easily within range, and, uh, any of these actions we take we'll have to give air support to Guantanamo and probably reinforce the garrison," he says .
 CNN's John Defterios: "It seems to me that, uh, this, if we decide that we are going to be in a position to do this, either one and two Saturday or Sunday, then I would think we would also want to be able to do the eviction
 "I thought we ought to be moving, I don't want to waste any time though if we decide that, uh, time is not particularly with us," she said . "I just wanted to, just wanted, I thought we should be moving," she added .
 "I just think we ought to be ready to do something, even if we decide not to do it," she says . "We should be ready for something," she adds .
 I would say that my answer would be largely planning, particularly in the field of mobilization, just what we will ... want to recreate after we, uh, want to ... recreate . What we want to do is to get Cuba back to Cuba, he says .
 Air defense measures have been started already, says U.S. President Obama . He says air defense measures are being taken already .
 "We moved more fighters into the southeastern United States and gradually improving some of our, uh, our patrol procedures," he says . "Under the general guise of ... preparations for that part of the country"
 "We don't think there'd be any, any leaks there that might react against our military targets," says Pentagon . "There'd be no leaks there," Pentagon says .
 I, I'd repeat that our defenses have always been weak in that part of the country. I, said, "Our defenses have never been weak," says President Barack Obama .
 Military planning has been carried on for a considerable period of time, is well under way, he said . No, sir, I believe that the military planning is under way .
 All the necessary reconnaissance measures are being taken and are authorized, he says . And I believe that all the preparations that we could take without the risk of preparations causing discussion and knowledge of this, either among our public or in Cuba, are authorized .
 "The only thing we haven't done, really, is to consider fully these alternatives," he says . "We need to look at all these alternatives. The only thing is that we need to do," he adds .
 This may be incidental, Mr President, but if we're going to get the prisoners out this would be a good time to get them out, he says . Mr President .
 It's not a very loud noise to raise at a meeting of this sort, but I think it would need your approval . It would need you approval. It would be a very quiet noise, but it's not very loud .
 Most of them relate to infiltration of raiders, and will simply be deniable internal Cuban activities . Most of these relate to infiltrations, and are simply deniable, Cuban activities.
 The question is whether you now wish to authorize sabotage which might have its impact on neutrals or even friendly ships . The question that we need guidance from you on is whether it is possible to authorize such sabotage, the U.S. Navy says .
 "We want to have from the department tomorrow in a little bit more concise form whether there is any kind of a we have to give," says the mayor . The mayor says he will meet with the department to discuss the matter .
 Mr Secretary, some of the staff are in trouble with the dinner for Schroeder tomorrow night . Mr Secretary: Mr Secretary. Mr Secretary .
 It would be a great improvement not to have any more intense White House meetings— trouble with all the if we could meet at the State Department tomorrow, says President Obama .
 I could meet you, Mac, when I get back tomorrow and just as well, whatever the thing is, and then we can meet Thursday morning. All right, then we could meet Thursday, Mac says . Mac: "I'm going to meet with you when I'm back in
 I think the question that I'd really like to have is some sort of a judgment on, is whether we ought to do anything with Gromyko . I'm going to see him Thursday and I think I'd like to ask him to make a judgment .
 Whether we ought to, uh, indirectly give him sort of a, give him an ultimatum on this matter, or whether we just ought to go ahead without him, he says . "We ought to say anything to him," he asks .
 The Attorney General told the ambassador, the ambassador told the Attorney General, as he told Bohlen, that they were not going to put these weapons there . The ambassador said the attorney general told the Ambassador that they would not be putting weapons there.
 Whether the Attorney General saw Dobrynin— not acting as if we had any information about 'emsaid that, of course, that they must realize that if this ever does happen that this is going to cause this, give a very clear indication of what's going to happen, says
 "If these ever come up that we're going to do, the present state would have to take action," says Bobby Kennedy .
 "This could cause the most far-reaching consequences. And, uh, this [words unintelligible], uh-this could cause ... consequences," he said .
 On the possibility that that might cause them to reconsider their action, he says they might reconsider their actions . On the question: "What do you think they're going to do? What do they want to do?"
 "I can't understand their viewpoint, if they're aware of what we said at the press conferences," says Daley . Daley: "I don't know what the people are thinking, I don't understand it"
 Taylor: "There's evidence of sightings in late August, I think, and early September of, of some sort" Taylor: Why it's, I mean there's evidence that sightings occurred in August and September . Taylor: There's evidence there's been sightings in August, September of
 "Your hand is strengthened somewhat if the Soviets have, uh, lied to you, either privately or in public," says President Obama .
 JFK: If anybody can tell me any other time since Berlin blockade where the Russians have given us so clear provocation, I don't know when it's been, because they've been awfully cautious really . JFK: I don’t know enough about the Soviet Union, but if anybody
 "Maybe our mistake was in not saying some time before this summer that if they do this we're [word unintelligible], to act. Now, maybe ... maybe our mistake," he said. "We're not going to act"
 CNN's John Sutter asked if he could get someone in and out of the building so we can take a look on the ground . "I was asking Pat if they had any way of getting quick intelligence," he said .
 "Your problems about exfiltration and your problems with training an individual as to what to look for are not handled in twenty-four hours. Uh, we can try it, but we can't try it." "We're going to try it," she says. "It's
 McNamara: "We were using the low-flying planes until shortly before the intention to strike" McNamara says . McNamara was using the planes until 'shortly before' strike, he says .
 This was considered by the, by the co- commanders today, and they're all of that opinion that the . loss of surprise would there, was more serious than the, the loss of the information we'd get from that, the commander says .
 I would think it would be very valuable to have them go in shortly before the strike, just to build the evidence . I'm not sure if they would be able to go in, but they should have gone in before they struck .
 Pictures show what you were, what was there. I mean, when you've got pictures that really show ... what's there. It's important to remember when you were there, what you are there .
 "We, uh, have a lot of on that to discuss," he says . "We were halfway in early in the morning. We were halfway into the morning."
 Schroeder makes a very strong case for refusing visas on the grounds that he thinks that, uh, that would undermine morale in Berlin in a very dangerous way . The big issue that has come up is Schroeder .
 "I would suggest that we get into this hot water partly because of this," says David Cameron . "We're getting into this trouble partly because this is what we need to do," he says .
 I would suggest dividing targets up by numbers of DGZs and, uh, and numbers of sorties required to take those out of the targets . Starting only with missiles and working up through the nuclear storage sites, the U.S. should do so .
 This target system would take so many points, eighty points and so many objects . So we can say, "This target system takes so many sorties to knock out," says Air Force commander .
 'Someone be deputized to do a piece of paper which really happens. What I would suggest is that someone be deputed to, to do, to ... what really happens'
 I think the margin is between whether we take out the strike or take out a lot of air bases . I think it's between taking out a strike or taking out air bases, he says . The margin is not clear whether the strike will be successful, he adds .
 "Now, doesn't, overwhelmingly, it may substantially change the world. It may substantially if it doesn't overwhelmingly change the . world. Now, however, it does substantially .
 The question is how to get ahead with that, and whether, uh, I would think, myself, that it, myself . It's not the appropriate place to make this preliminary analysis is at the Department of State, he says .
 I think the rest of us ought to spend the evening really to some advantage separately trying to have our own views of this . I think we should spend the night trying to separate ourselves from each other, he says . The rest of the evening should be spent trying to understand each other's
 "I think we should meet in order, to trade pieces of paper, before two o'clock, uh, tomorrow morning if that's agreeable," says President Obama .
 The only one who's tied up tonight is the Secretary, the Secretary . He is coming down at eleven o'clock from his dinner to look at what we will have done in the meantime. Uh, the situation is that .
 The argument was really between Hilsman's demonologists, who were already cut in because they your boots, who thought this was a low-risk operation . Well, the, the ... argument was between, uh, Hilsmansman's . demonologists .
 Tommy thought it was a high-risk operation by the Soviets, in other words they were taking real chances . Tommy thought the operation was a 'high-risk' operation .
 Other people thought that they, they probably had miscalculated us and thought this wasn't a risky operation. Other people rather thought they . thought this was not the most risky operation in the world .
 SAM sites hadn't been set up to protect it, the various factors which suggest to them that they didn't think anything was gonna happen . Ball: Either impatient like the SAM sites weren't set up, or impatient like they hadn't .
 "I suggest that tonight we actually draft a paper and it start this way— just a paragraph or two of, of the knowns. Could I suggest tonight we ... draft a . paper and start with a . paragraph or . two of the . knowns .
 We're not certain of any of the known knowns, because we're not sure of any . Let's say the, the, knowns . The probable knowns are the most likely knowns.
 The probabilities are that they won't be operational in less than X days, although we can't be certain . The probability is that they will be operational within less than a week, although it's impossible .
 Another known I'd put in is that they have about fifty X, uh, MIGs,.15,17 and-19s . That they have certain crated X crated MIG-21s, only one of which we believe to have been assembled .
 "They have X crated IL-28s, none of which we believe to have been assembled," says CNN.com.com .
 CNN.com's John Defterios offers a look at the most likely alternatives in the world . He says he would like to see what the alternatives are open to us . He would then look at what the more likely alternatives would be .
 And would hope we could stay just a second here, see if we could sketch them out now. And would like to stay just one second here and see if you could sketch it now.
 "I would like to throw one in that I do not think the army and the Chiefs would normally consider," he says . "It's not simply to increase the chance that we've hit most of them," he adds. "It would be a quite large-scale, uh,
 "There's always unc-, incompleteness in a military opera-, in an air operation," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com . "There is always unc-uncompleted in military opera-operations," he says .
 If these things are what the pictures show, you could drop a batallion of paratroopers and get 'em . But if these things were what it looks like, it's not a surprise .
 "I think the risk troubles me, it's too great in relation to the risk of not knowing whether we get them," he says . The risk is "too great" to not know whether they will be delivered, he adds .
 If Cuba should possess a capacity to carry out offensive actions against the U.S., the United States would act, the president says . The Cuban government has been accused of using Cuba's military assets to launch attacks on the United.
 "This is the, this is the problem, but I've thought something about the others this afternoon," he said . "I've thought about the other things this afternoon."
 The Cuban uprising is a most important element of category three . It applies to some elements in categ-, some categories of category 3, but not all . And I think there is, at least in the sense of the Cuban uprising, which I happen to believe is the most important .
 McNamara: "We've got a whole series of precautionary measures that we, we think, uh, should, should be taken" McNamara says .
 I ought to, uh, join the President for the meeting with Schroe-der and I'll be involved in getting some, started for that until ten o'-, uh, from about nine-thirty on .
 "We'll go to work tonight and get these numbers of sorties by target systems laid out," says President Obama . "We're going to go to a work tonight," he says .
 I'll, Reilly's up in Mac's office and I'll go down there now, get them started on it . I'll be down there to get the job done, and Reilly is up in the office .
 MEMORANDUM OF MEET ATTACHES OF SECRETARY BALL'S CONFERENCE ROOM . MEMORandum of meeting was held at 0830, 17 October 1 .
 Meeting involved an inclusive exploration of alternatives open to us in connection with the Cuban matter . Meeting involved exploration of alternative alternatives to Cuba's sovereignty .
 Kohler discussions with Khrushchev did not fit in with Soviet action in Cuba/l/ Suggested Cuban situation might be by inadvertance . Kohler discussed discussions with Soviet leader but did not agree with him .
 Suggested we might give Khrushchev an ""out"" on the grounds that he does not know what is going on in Cuba and discussed various types of action ranging from a limited military strike to minimize losses to the calling of a Summit conference . Suggested giving Khrushvic an ""
 During the discussion Taylor and Ball speculated as to whether this whole thing was not a ""mock up"" designed to draw out action by us, and that the war heads were not there .
 McNamara urged avoiding taking a position, considering all alternatives, with meetings this afternoon and this evening in preparation of final discussion with President tomorrow .
 Cuba has about 50 or 60 MIG 17s and 19s now in Cuba . These apparently have no offensive capability . Cuba has no offensive capabilities .
 Warhead locations unknown; also unknown whether MRBM's are nuclear or conventional . Unknown whether MRMs are nuclear, conventional or nuclear .
 Also feels that if nuclear warheads supplied them Soviet will also supply nuclear bombs for bombers with offensive capability . Also believes that if . supplied them they would also supply . Also feels they would be able to use nuclear warheads for bombers .
 Mysterious excavations, revetments, covered buildings, railroad tracks through tunnels, etc. might be nuclear storage site . Sited at Havana, Havana, Cuba, might be site of nuclear storage . Havana .
 General Taylor and Thompson discussed political nature of problem including possibility of forcing settlement in Berlin and elsewhere . Khrushchev wished show down on Berlin and this gave a show down issue . General Taylor discussed political nature of the problem including possibility of forcing settlement in Berlin
 Thompson: Khrushchev wants Berlin settlement but on his terms . Thompson emphasized Khrushiev wanted Berlin settlement with Berlin but on terms . He also emphasized that he wanted to see more peace with the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev recognizes that action by us would be devisive among our allies . Also Khrushchnchev recognized that action would bedevisive among his allies . The U.S. government has been in touch with the Soviet Union since 1956 .
 McCone reviewed recent Chicadee reports, indicated considerable autonomy in hands of field commanders much more so than we have . McCone said recent reports indicate considerable autonomy .
 The Deputy Secretary of Defense's handwritten notes on the day are in the Supplement .
 The purpose of the discussion was to develop a plan of action in connection with Cuba, and the alternatives are summarized in my memorandum of October 18th addressed to USIB, copy of which is attached .
 Secretary Ball emphasized the importance of time, stating that if action was over quickly, the repercussions would not be too serious . Ball: If action was taken quickly, it would not have been too serious.
 The Attorney General raised the question of the attitude of Turkey, Italy, Turkey, and Western European countries, all of which have been ""under the gun"" for years, and would take the position that now that the United States has a few missiles in their backyard, they become hysterical .
 Secretary McNamara made the point that missiles in Cuba had no great military consequence because of the stalemate mentioned in my October 18th memorandum . McNamara: "The stalemate was a stalemate that led to missiles being fired at Cuba"
 General Taylor expressed increasing concern over the importance of the missile threat from Cuba . General Taylor supported this view in the early parts of the discussion, but in the later meetings expressed increasing concerns over the threat .
 He and McCone felt that a complex of MRBMs and IRBMs in Cuba would have very important military significance . Nevertheless, McCone said that the complex would have significant military significance.
 McNamara took issue claiming that the military equation would not be changed by the appearance of these missiles . McNamara: "The military equation won't be changed" McNamara claimed that the situation would not change .
 Bohlen and Thompson questioned the real purpose of the Soviet's actions in Cuba . They felt that their acts may be in preparation for a confrontation with President Kennedy at which time .
 McCone indicated this might be one of several objectives and undoubtedly would be the subject of discussion at the time of confrontation . McCone doubted that this was the prime purpose of such an elaborate and expensive installation in Cuba .
 Bohlen seemed to favor precipitating talks, and was supported by Thompson . Bohlen was in favor of precipitating negotiations . Thompson was in support of Bohlen and Thompson .
 SecDef and Taylor objected to political talks because it would give time for threatening missiles to become operational . The talks would also give the Soviets an opportunity to camouflage the missiles, they say . SecDef: Talks would give the Russians an opportunity for camouflage .
 McCone pre-sented most recent photographs and indicated CIA opinion that the first missiles will be operational within one or two weeks . McCone said most recent photos were taken by the CIA .
 McNamara agreed that this would be desirable but emphasized the importance of developing sequence of events which would lead to military action . McNamara: "It's important to develop sequence of event which would be followed by action"
 There followed an extensive discussion of the advantages and disadvantages of a military blockade, total or partial . There followed a lengthy discussion about the advantages of a blockade .
 It was at this point that McNamara and Taylor presented their schedule of alternative military strikes, which was the subject of continual discussion in the ensuing meetings .
 McCone gave an intelligence estimate on the effects of a blockade, indicating its seriousness would depend upon how hard a blockade it turned out to be . McCone said the main objective of taking Cuba away from Castro had been lost and we have been overly consumed with the missile problem .
 There is not much profit in preliminary exchanges with Khrushchev and Castro because of the President has said that the establishment of Soviet bases and offensive weapons in the Western Hemisphere would raise serious problems . The President has in effect warned both Khrushvic and Castro .
 Rusk continued that more talks with Khrushchev would result in extended parlays and therefore he recommended against such an approach . Rusk recommended against further talks with the Soviet leader .
 McNamara raised innumerable questions concerning military operations . The manner in which the strike could be properly covered with protective air and how it might be restricted . McNamara also raised questions about the advisability of case one .
 General Taylor at this point spoke in favor of a military strike taking out the MRBMs and the planes as well, and was supported by McCone, who took the opportunity to cover the points set forth in a "talking paper for principals, October 17, 1962,"" attached .
 At the conclusion of the meetings, which served the purpose of airing the views of all parties responsible for giving advice to the President, the alternatives open to us were summarized by the Attorney General/13/ .
 On Tuesday, 23 October, inform Western European and some Latin American leaders of the situation . The situation is under way in Latin America .
 On Wednesday, attack the MRBM's, issue a public statement, and send a message to Premier Khrushchev . Send a message of support to the Soviet Union, writes David Frum .
 Same as 1, but notify Chairman Khrushchev beforehand and wait about three days to obtain his reply . Wait three days before receiving reply .
 Tell the Soviets that the U.S. was aware of the missiles and would prevent any more from arriving . Told them that the United States was aware .
 Mr Rusk and Mr Ball seemed inclined to favor this course, but first wanted surveillance without air strikes . The two men said they wanted to avoid air strikes in Syria . Mr Ball and Ms Ball said they would prefer surveillance without the air strikes, but wanted surveillance .
 After limited political preliminaries, attack targets in Categories III-IV and prepare for invasion . Attack targets in categories III and IV and prepare to invasion .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff met on October 17, 1962, to discuss a surgical strike against MRBM sites alone . Joint chiefs of Staff decided that such a strike would be an unacceptable risk .
 They incorporated their views in a memorandum to Secretary of Defense McNamara . They suggested air attacks on a wide variety of military targets . The memo was sent to the Defense Department .
 Letter From the Representative to the United Nations to President Kennedy was sent October 17, 1962 . It was signed by the President of the U.N. in Washington, DC .
 I think your personal emissaries should deliver your messages to C and K . There is no disagreement as to C As to K an emissary could better supplement the gravity of the situation you have communicated to Gromyko . I have reviewed the planning .
 "I think it would be a mistake at this time to disclose that an attack was imminent," he says . "Just reciting the facts, emphasizing the gravity of the situation would be enough"
 An attack would very likely result in Soviet reprisals somewhere-Turkey, Berlin, etc. - it is most important that we have as much of the world with us as possible .
 To start or risk starting a nuclear war is bound to be divisive at best . The judgments of history seldom coincide with the tempers of the moment, says historian .
 If war comes, our case must rest on stopping while there was still time the Soviet drive to world domination, our obligations under the InterAmerican system, etc. etc. The U.S. must also stop stopping before there is still time for war, the author says .
 We must be prepared for the widespread reaction that if we have a missile base in Turkey and other places around the Soviet Union surely they have a right to one in Cuba . We must prepare for a widespread reaction to the widespread demand for a Cuban missile base .
 If we attack Cuba, an ally of the USSR, isn't an attack on NATO bases equally justified? If we attacked Cuba, it isn't a NATO base attack on Cuba, the attack is justified .
 While the explanation of our action may be clear to us it won't be clear how many others will not understand . We apologize for our actions and apologise for any of our actions . We are happy to clarify that our actions are not always clear to many others .
 If war is the consequence, the Latin American republics may well divide . Some say that the U.S. is not acting with their approval and consent .
 Unless the issue is very clear there may be sharp differences with our Western Allies who have lived so long under the same threat of Soviet attack from bases in the satellite countries by the same IRBMs .
 All these considerations and obstacles to clear and universal understanding that we are neither rash, impetuous or indifferent to the fate of others are, I realize, only too familiar to you . But all these considerations are only too common to you, he says .
 I know your dilemma is to strike before the Cuban sites are operational or to risk waiting until a proper groundwork of justification can be prepared . I know this is your dilemma .
 The existence of nuclear missile bases anywhere is negotiable/1/ before we start anything. But the means adopted have such incalculable consequences, he says .
 Cuban President Barack Obama says he can't negotiate with a gun at our head . Obama: "If they won't remove the missiles and restore the status quo ante, we will have to do it ourselves"
 In short it is they, not the U.S., that have upset the balance and created this situation of such peril to the whole world . The U.N. should not be blamed for the situation, says Julian Zelizer .
 I confess I have many misgivings about the proposed course of action, but to discuss them further would add little to what you already have to say . I confess to many misdivings, but I'm not sure what I think about the proposal .
 The U.S. is ready to negotiate the elimination of bases, bases and anything else, says President Obama . Obama: "They have upset the precarious balance in the world in arrogant disregard of your warnings"
 Adlai S Stevenson signed a copy of the original . Stevenson signed the original.