 During the early 1960s the intercontinental ballistic missile introduced the world to the possibility of instant total war . During the 1960s, the world was confronted by the threat of war .
 Orthodox history holds that a succession of defensive nuclear doctrines and strategies worked, almost seamlessly, to deter Soviet aggression against the United States and to prevent the use of nuclear weapons .
 The possibility of U.S. aggression in nuclear conflict is seldom considered . "The possibility of United States aggression in a nuclear war is rarely considered," says author .
 The main documented exception was the Air Force Chief of Staff in the early 1960s, Curtis LeMay, a seemingly idiosyncratic case . LeMay was an Air Force chief of Staff during the 1960s .
 The U.S. military did prepare plans for a preemptive nuclear strike in 1957 . Top military and intelligence leaders presented an assessment of those plans to President John F Kennedy in 1961 .
 The meeting recessed under a Presidential injunction of secrecy that has not been broken until now . The meeting was held under the Presidential injunction that has been broken .
 The Real Missile Gap In 1960, claims of a ""missile gap"" favoring the Soviets had given the Democrats a critical election theme . Many Americans entered the Sixties feeling vulnerable to the new Soviet ICBM threat .
 Kennedy was quickly convinced of this truth, which was further confirmed as new satellites brought back new information . Kennedy was soon convinced of the truth, with new satellites bringing back new evidence .
 Defense Undersecretary Roswell Gilpatric was to acknowledge in a public speech that U.S. forces were vastly superior to those of the Russians . The speech was to be made in the fall, and the speech was made public .
 Kennedy faced his first nuclear-tinged crisis, which erupted over Berlin in July of 1961 . It was in this context, of an increasing nuclear edge based on a runaway lead in land-based missiles .
 The Soviets were threatening to turn control of access to West Berlin over to the East Germans . Now, the Soviets are threatening to conclude a separate peace treaty with that satellite state .
 Dean Acheson had prepared a paper arguing that Krushchev would be deterred only by a U.S. readiness to go to nuclear war rather than to abandon the status quo . As Arthur Schlesinger, Jr., Jr. later summarized for the President, .
 He encouraged Schlesinger to produce an unsigned memo critical of Acheson's stance . While not directly challenging, he encouraged him to produce the memo . The memo was critical of the former Secretary of State .
 Before you are asked to make the decision to go to nuclear war, you are entitled to know what concretely what nuclear war is likely to mean . Before you decide on a nuclear bomb, you should know what it means .
 Declassified only in June of 1993, it has not previously received any public attention so far as we have been able to determine .
 General Hickey and his group, the Net Evaluation Subcommittee, are on a Net Evaluation subcommittee . The first paragraph of this article contains a photo of the group's Net Evaluation Committee .
 The Subcommittee report is described as ""annual,"" this would be the first one given to President Kennedy and his advisors . It is unclear whether President Eisenhower received such reports in person .
 Lemnitzer responded that he would later answer both of the President's questions in private . He said he would answer both the President and the Secretary of State of State John Kerry's questions later in private.
 December of 1962 was too early for an attack because the U.S. would have too few missiles; by December of 1963 there would likely be sufficient numbers . December of 1961 was too soon for a attack because of the United States' lack of missiles .
 Kennedy's personal reaction to the meeting has been reported . On the other hand, the fact of a meeting, and Kennedy's reaction to it, has also been reported.
 Schelling also advocated centralization of the control of weapons in the hands of the President . Schelling: "permit deliberate, discriminating, selective use for dangerous nuclear bargaining" Schelling says centralization would allow deliberate use of nuclear weapons .
 All were to be unleashed in a single paroxysm of mass annihilation, know as SIOP, the Single Integrated Operating Plan . The plan was known as the single integrated operating plan .
 SIOP was a recipe for blowing up the world, whether in a first or a second strike, says author . SIOP "wasn't just a first strike," says author of the book, "but it's not a first and second strike" "SIOP" was a
 Kennedy also launched efforts to gain operational control of the nuclear force, then far from being securely concentrated in the President's hands . Kennedy launched efforts in the 1960s to gain control of nuclear force .
 Burris memorandum may help explain the military's drive for a vast U.S. nuclear build-up . Despite the fact that America was already far ahead, the resistance from JFK and McNamara was resistance .
 By October of 1962, the United States nuclear lead remained strong, though perhaps not yet air-tight, given the number of Soviet bombers and the risks to Europe . The U.S. nuclear lead was still strong in October 1962 .
 Not even the American editors of Khrushchev's memoirs took these remarks seriously at the time they were first published . The remarks were taken seriously by the Soviet Union leader in 1959 .
 Had tensions escalated or been aroused in late 1963, the President might have faced an excruciating choice to strike first, or to give up ""victory"" during the last brief moment when it could conceivably have been won .
 We cannot say whether Kennedy believed the Net Evaluation calendar, or indeed, perhaps equally serious, whether he believed that others in the government might believe it .
 Kennedy's actions and remark are consistent with the possibility that the calendar and risks of a first-strike window remained in the minds of both men as late as November, 1963 and possibly in Johnson's mind for a good deal longer .
 The fact that first-strike planning got as far as it did raises grave questions about the history of the Cold War .
 The war with Russia will not end, says Dutch President Vladimir Putin .
 NOS Propaganda NATO NEEDS WAR . Hillary Kills Land of the Free . NATO needs to be ready for war .