 Khrushchev, could not match the U.S. in nuclear weapons or strategic delivery systems, nor push the western nations out of Berlin . Khrushchevsvsvs: "Khrrushchev could not . match the United States in nuclear arms or strategic . delivery systems"
 In the east, the Chinese constantly harassed him concerning Soviet weakness . The Chinese constantly monitored him . In the East, he was constantly harassed by the Chinese .
 In 1959, Fidel Castro had overthrown the dictator, Fulgencio Batista, and assumed power . Fidel Castro assumed power in 1959 after the overthrow of the dictator .
 In mid-April 1961, the Cuban exiles landed at the Bay of Pigs and suffered a crushing defeat . The Cuban ex-cuba forces were defeated by the Soviet Union in March 1961 .
 On October 13, Major Anderson deployed to McCoy AFB, Florida, to join a U-2 aircraft ferried in for the special mission .
 The wing began immediately to move RF-101 and RB-66 aircraft, personnel, and photographic equipment to Florida . The wing was able to move the aircraft and personnel to Florida, where they were based .
 On October 26, the wing launched the first flight of two low-level reconnaissance aircraft . The wing has already flown two reconnaissance planes .
 For the next three weeks, wing aircraft gathered vital data, including prestrike intelligence, air-surveillance verification of Cuban buildup and subsequent dismantling of the IRBM and MRBM sites .
 RF-101 returned with highly significant 35 SHORT OF WAR photos of Soviet ships entering and leaving Cuban ports . Photos show missiles and related equipment on docks at Cuban ports, the loading of Soviet freighters .
 The President of the United States was constantly aware of Soviet actions regarding the withdrawal of the missiles from Cuba .
 Analysis of 363d photographs provided a wide range of intelligence concerning Cuba . Analysis of the 363d photos provided a range of essential intelligence concerning the island nation .
 Frequent sorties over major Cuban airfields provided daily information on the number, type, and specific location of Cuban aircraft . Frequently, Cuban aircraft were flown over Cuba .
 Photos also reveal the number and location of assembled, partially assembled, or unassembled IL-28 Soviet twin-engine tactical bombers with a range of 1,500 miles . Photos also revealed the number of assembled or partially assembled IL-29s bombers .
 SAC ordered continual U-2 reconnaissance flights over Cuba . Medium and heavy bombers and tanker aircraft were deployed from Florida AFBs .
 In the midst of these preparations, President Kennedy and his advisors debated the sanest course of action . President Kennedy's advisors debated whether to take action against the Soviet Union .
 Fear of Soviet reaction soon eliminated talk of a 37 nuclear strike . But support for a conventional air strike followed by invasion continued to grow .
 Kennedy ordered the state department to develop a plan for civil government in Cuba . While the invasion forces gathered in Florida, Kennedy ordered an invasion plan for Cuba .
 Tension mounted as Soviets continued to work on missile sites and ships moved toward Cuba . Tensions mounted as the Soviets continued work on the missile sites .
 Khrushchev offered to withdraw or destroy the weapons in Cuba, provided the U.S. lift the blockade and promise not to invade the island . Then on October 26, he sent another message in which he offered to destroy or withdraw the weapons . The United States refused to lift the
 The Soviets wanted the United States to withdraw all missiles from Turkey . Now the U.S. wants to withdraw missiles from the country .
 TAC forces in Florida assumed a one-hour alert and prepared to go to a fifteen-minute alert . The alert involved pilots waiting in aircraft for launch orders .
 The U.S. Navy tracked every known Soviet submarine in the Western Hemisphere . The Navy patrolled the high seas waiting for the Soviet ships to arrive .
 In Washington, the President's advisors examined the Khrushchev letters and debated the appropriate action . The letters were signed by the Soviet Union in 1961 .
 The launch pads in Cuba were almost finished, and there were already missiles on the island . The launch pad in Cuba was already almost finished .
 The Soviets began turning their ships around, packing up the missiles in Cuba, and dismantling the launch pads in Cuba . The Soviet Union began turning its ships around and packing up its missiles .
 SAC initiated shipping surveillance assistance fifteen hours after receiving the request from Commander in Chief Atlantic . In addition to the assistance, SAC also initiated monitoring of shipping .
 The Air Force flew daily high and low-level reconnaissance flights to keep the U.S. leadership apprised of activities in Cuba and on the high seas .
 Military Air Transport Service, Tactical Air Command, and the Air Force Reserve played a vital role during the crisis . The airlifters of Military Air . Transport Service and Tactical Air . Command played a crucial role in the rescue effort .
 McNamara noted the shortage of fighter aircraft . Air defenses in other parts of the United States had been stripped because of the need in southeastern part of the country . McNamara also noted the need for air defenses in the southeast .