 The Cold War: 1945-1962 Lesson Plans by Richard Cleggett . The United States and the Soviet Union dominated the Cold War in the aftermath of World War II .
 These two nations defined the course of history in the second half of the 20th century, and the legacy of their Cold War continues to the present day .
 Students will be able to outline and define the events that led to both the United States and U.S.R. being on the brink of nuclear war . Students will learn about the events leading up to the nuclear crisis .
 It will highlight major global policies and negotiations that took place to avoid conflict and nuclear destruction . Furthermore, it will also highlight major policies and . policies that . took place in the wake of the Cold War .
 This will help explain the growing tensions that existed between the United States and U.S.R. by Kennedy’s presidency, and give understanding as to just how the Cold War was a continuous ideological war . In addition to this, this will also give understanding of how the U
 After the Cuban Revolution, Fidel Castro and his forces rise to power . The Cuban Revolution was overthrown by the Cuban government in 1959 .
 United States ENDS DIPLOMATIC RELATIONS WITH CUBA CUBA ALIGNS WITH SOVIET UNION CUBA In response to Cuba's open declaration of aligning with communist ideals, the United States breaks all diplomatic ties with Cuba .
 Castro and Cuba openly align themselves with the Soviet Union, as well as their communist policies . Almost two years removed from their revolution, Cuba aligns itself with the communist policies of the USSR .
 Under President John F Kennedy, a group of Cuban exiles and U.S. military personnel aim to launch an invasion at the Bay of Pigs to trigger a anti-Castro rebellion . Under President Kennedy, the group of exiles want to launch a revolt against Castro .
 Khrushchev and Kennedy meet in Vienna to try and negotiate terms concerning the growing Cuban crisis . The two leaders met in Vienna at the height of the Cuban crisis in 1959 .
 Khrushchev leaves with a poor impression of Kennedy . The meeting, however, does not go well, and Kennedy is not impressed .
 U.S. military planes photograph what appear to be constructed missile bases in Cuba . Missile Crisis in Cuba is over and out of control .
 The United States enters DEFCON 3 as a precaution, preparing for the worst . The U.S. enters the country's highest-level of preparedness as a result .
 After an extremely tense October, the United States and Soviet Union come to terms . The U.S. and the Soviet Union came to terms after a tense October .
 The United States agrees to remove missile bases in Turkey, while the Soviets agree to withdraw missiles from Cuba . The U.S. and the Soviet Union agree to remove missiles from Turkey, Cuba .