 See page 23 U ; Anastas I iviikoyan, First Deputy Chairman of the Council of Lunisters oi the USSR Ambassador Anatoliy F Dobryuin Air .
 Yuriy N. Vino-Gradov, Soviet Delegation to XVH General Assembly (Interpreter) Vino Gradov was a member of the Soviet delegation .
 The President a, :..;r. ivjr. iuikoyan said that he had enjoyed his stay in Cuba very much . Igor D Bubaov, Third Secretary , Soviet Embassy Aiter made brief remarks about lung cancer .
 There is also an older brother who wai one time against the Cuban revolution but now approves of it . He said: 'There is also a brother who once was against the revolution'
 He told his brother Fidel that if he had known how history vould _ he vo uld have joined the revolutionary cause sooner . As a .. of fact, he told Fidel that he told him he would join the revolution sooner .
 Fidel and Raoul gave away their holdings a long ti:..The older brother gave up his holdings only recently . Fidel gave away his holdings to Raoul, Raoul .
 The Hag under which Fidel Castro waged his revolution was that of li^.ra. lie . The Hag became S MSKS&Si more recently under the influence of the wishes of the Cabaa people .
 Fidel Castro was moved towards Marxism by the play of the revolution itself . Raoul Castro, Che Guevara, and the eldest Castro brother /"",'/ were Marxists already before the revolution .
 The President said that Mr Mikoyan obviously believes that it will happen to the President's brothers . The president said that he was not surprised that it would happen to them .
 He admires greatly the liveliness of the Cuban people and the progress accomplished in Cuban agriculture, he says . The president of Cuba says he admires his country's liveliness .
 Castro is doing a lot personally to mechanize agriculture and he is personally known by most of the farmers . Mr Mikoyan saw Canadian milking machinery .
 All told, more schools were built in three years in Cuba than had been built during the 50 year period before Castro . More schools in Cuba were built during that period than in the 50 years before Castro's reign .
 The mansions of :i capitalists who have left Cuba — which the Cuban Government permits them to do — have been made into youth hostels .
 During the recent <.u.u .u the militia has been mobilized though on an entirely voluntary basis . The militia was mobilized on a voluntary basis during the recent uprising .
 President said now he understood why Mr Mikoyan nau liked his travels in Cuba . President said he now understood why he liked traveling to Cuba .
 Mikoyan said that indeed hi3 visit in Cuba reminded him of his jtn when he also was working for the cause of the revolution . He also said that hi3 visits in Cuba remind him of the time he spent in Cuba working for a revolution .
 He also gave speeches at several universities and felt that the students greatly dm trust ..d 1538 SECRET secret i£jt distkibutign 6/3 the United States.
 It is expected that the exchange of correspondence between Chairman Khrushchev and President is to be registered with the United Nations . It is possible that the fears of the young Cubans will be calmed by the recording of this memorable correspondence .
 President said that the relations between the U.S. and Cuba are bad . But this is not the part of Cuban events which is of primary concern .
 Is tfc* use of Cuba as a 3pringboard for subversion, waning both Soviet subversion and Castro's own efforts in that direction? Shat we are concerned with use of Cuban territory as a springboard to subversion .
 There is no reason why statements that the U.S. does not intend to invade Cuba should not go on record . There is also a need to be clear that the United States will not invade Cuba, the author says .
 The U.S. could have invaded Cuba any number of times beginning with April I960 but did not do so . Yet this is hardly necessary since it is obvious that the United States could've invaded Cuba many times . The United States never invaded Cuba .
 As a matter of fact, only recently the President was speaking against those Americans who suggested an invasion of Cuba . President Obama has spoken against those who suggested that an invasion was possible .
 It is difficult for the President to say at the present moment that the situation with Cuba is in any way satisfactory, since it is not known what will happen next month or what *he Chinese will do .
 Maybe the Chinese Communists will start an arms build-up in Cuba in January, or maybe the Soviet Union itself will start agsia sash & balld-up . Maybe the Communist Party will start a arms-building in Cuba .
 No one could blame a certain feeling of mistrust on the part of the U.S. after what had happened . After all, what the Soviets did once they could do again sad no one can blame a .
 Mr Mikoyas stated that what the President had said presents an extremely serious matter . The President's comments present a serious matter, he said .
 No one can believe that the arms build-up in Cuba was offensive and intended against the U.S. No one believes it was intended to attack the United States .
 It had, in fact, been decided as early oECRET . aj/in;in;^isy.RjBu r nQ^a/.s ( SLCIiST LIS1IT DISTRIBUTION I early as June)
 Silkoyan was one, that the U.S. would be told about the arms build-up, in every detail, by the Soviet Union at an appropriate moment . The Soviet Union would have to tell the United States about its arms build up, he says .
 First it was intended to communicate with the U.S. Government on a confidential basis and then to make an announcement to the press . First the government intended to make a confidential announcement .
 The United States do©3 not inform the Soviet Union of its military moves . The Soviet Union was not obligated to do this since after all, the U.S. was not obliged to do so .
 No military man and not even a civilian could ever believe that rockets in Cuba could be necessary or even useful for an attack against the United States. As for the purpose of the military build-up, it was obviously not offensive, says author .
 The decision was made to inform the United States after the elections so as to avoid influencing any way the political campaign in the U.S. The decision had been made to .
 The President himself certainly would not want to have the elections influenced by Soviet moves . President himself would certainly want to avoid having the elections affected by Soviet influence .
 No intimation of the build-up was made by the Soviet Union on the 22nd of October . Even if a disclosure had not taken place they would have brought it to the attention of the U.S. on November 3th or 10th .
 The President said that the problem wa3 not due to the fact that the soviet Union did not make a statement to the United States about the arms build-up . The Soviet Union had made a statement according to which no offensive weapons were being sent to Cuba or were going to
 Sdkoyan said that obviously the two speakers had a different interpretation of the recent events . S.S. S.Koyan: Obviously the two . speakers had different interpretations of recent events.
 The purpose of the arma build-up in Cuba was defensive and not offensive . The fact remains that the purpose was defensive, not offensive, according to the Cuban government .
 They were seat there to defend the island against invasion and for no other purpose . They were there to protect the island from invasion . No other purpose was to defend against invasion .
 It is silly to believe that those missiles emplaced in Cuba could be needed for an attack against the U.S. The missiles were placed in Cuba in the 1960s and 1961 .
 There exist other missiles with a much longer range that cannot be tested within the territory of the soviet Union and must be shot into the sea . After all, there is a long range of missiles that can be tested in the Soviet Union and cannot be fired at sea .
 On the other liand, the President had spoken in his exchange with Chairman Khrushchev of a United States pledge of non-invasion . On the >40 ^£CRLT USUT DISTRIBATION 3/3 SECRET IJMT DISTRIBUTION S/S
 Mow: "When the United States is making this pledge conditional on .tflte"" ■• conduct of Cuba it is departing from its previous position. Mow"
 Mr Iviikoyan said he was reminded of conversations he had with President Eisenhower and Secretary Dulles . He said he had conversations with both men .
 He had asked Secretary Dulles whether he thought the Soviet Union wished to attack the U.S. He asked him whether the latter thought the . latter thought . the . Soviets wanted to attacK the United States .
 Secretary Dulles asked j*r. iviikoyan whether he thought the U.S. wanted to attack the Soviet Union . Dulles had replied that he did not think that the Government of the . Soviet Union in power at that time wanted to . attack* Secretary Dull
 Mr iviikoyan replied that he did not think so but that he had some doubts in the matter . He said he had doubts about whether it was true .
 Mikoyan would like to ask once more whether the President thinks that the Soviet Union wishes to attack the U.S. President. President Vladimir Putin has been accused of attacking the United States .
 The President said that he did not know what may have been, the reasons of the .soviet Government to establish the base . The President did not say why the base was established .
 At the end of September and throughout October the President attacked those people in the U.S. who spoke in favor of an aggressive policy towards Cuba . President Obama attacked those .
 Soviet Union considered any aggressive attack on U.S. states, says Soviet leader . J. J.Y.
 Khrushchev: 'I'm glad to say then as he says now that no invasion oi Cuba is Intended' Had the question been addresao&fd th© President by Chairman Khrushchell at that time, the President wwsld .
 An invasion of Cuba is not a solution to the Cuban problem. ‘, euo not live now in the early days of the Twentieth Century.’ ‘Euo does not live in early days,’ he writes .
 The Soviet Ambassador in the United States must have been aware of that . Unquestionably, as able a man as well as the Soviet ambassador in the U.S. must have known that .
 'Maybe war was not an aim of the Soviet Union but it seems that a policy of threat may well have been the objective. As for . 'Soviet intentions, maybe war was . not an . aim of war . But it seems to be that a . policy of . threat may
 The entire episode cannot be Interpreted in any other way than as a major attack against the present Administration and the Govexwa«H4 of the United States. The episode is not only an attack on the U.S. government, it is also a major threat to the
 The question is whether the lack of understanding between the two governments can be transformed into mutual understanding . The question Is nocrbow the question Isnocrbow .
 Mr Kiikoyan said that he would first speak about the President's concluding remarks . Mr Kiakoyan: "I will not speak about that"
 In regard to the President s concluding remarks he wished to say that he fully agrees that agreement is necessary for peace . Datween the two great Powers may well lead to disaster, he said .
 As to tA* Pr«aWtoA** first remarks, he must emphasise that the Soviet mow 3 was a purpose only defense and deterrence . As to . tA*. Pr«AWto*A**: "The Soviet mowed 3 was only a
 The Soviet U.S. asSffld i& orte to facilitate an agreement leading to peace . The Soviet Unionate. as . as . orte was to facilitate a . peace agreement .
 Counter-revolutionary gangs were being trained in camps In the United 3tat©3 and on the territories of other countries of the Western Hemisphere allied with the U.S. After all, H is 'ntlt1«Abt that counter-revolutionaries were training in camps
 Mr Xflkan spoke in favor of an invasion of Cuba, so did Pentagon generals . Pentagon generals also spoke out against the invasion .
 Under such circumstances, there was 4542 JECRET Ulvirr DISTRIBration J/S 7 . good"" reason to prepare deterrents and defense . "Good" for the U.S.
 It is quite clear that such was the purpose of the Joviet Union, which was going to inform the U.S. that what it intended was the defense of that island and not an aggression against the United States .
 The soviet Union has more than enough long-range missiles emplaced on its own territory to need anything else . It has a long history of missile launches in the Soviet Union .
 Forty-two missiles are something insignificant for offense and therefore it is clear that they were meant for defense . The missiles were not meant for offense, the U.S. military says .
 The missiles remained in the hands of the Joviet military and could nd have been used without signal authorization from Moscow .
 States and the ooviet Union and therefor© misunderstandings and threats must be eliminated from those relation*, ivirir. States and oviet Union must be removed from those relations*.
 Mikoyan remembers a conversation with Secretary Cordell Hull in 1926 . Secretary Hull was a very wise man, bacx in 1926.
 Secretary Hull had said that German fascism and Japanese militars were preparing for war . At that time, Secretary Hull said that Germany and Japan were preparing to war .
 Only the United otates and the soviet Union rare in a position to demcu peace . Only the U.S. and the .soviet Union are rare in position to . demuise peace .
 The situation at that time was already what it is at the present. 3oth countries have terrible weapons and therefore both have an overwhelming responsibility before the entire world .
 The President said that he did not know what exactly Iat. .axon . -c said . He said he was not sure what it said .
 The Pentagon is under the control of the Administration and there certainly be«a lift statements on their part calling for aggression. As for Pentagon g . . .U.S. military, they are under control, they say .
 There were no United States forces at the time of the attempt at landing made by Cuban patriots . No U.S. forces were involved .
 There were no statei:' ..u .y any people in positions of responsibility . In the United Gtates which . i . t oECRET oECEET LIMIT DISTRIBUTION S/S have led to the belief that an invasion was being contemplated . There were
 The problem is not Cuba, the problem is the attitude of the Soviet Government. The problem in Cuba is not the Cuba, it is the Soviet attitude, says CNN.com .
 U.S. has very little liking for the present government of Cuba, it has said . States Government has little love for the Cuban government, it said .
 After all, the ooviet Government does not like the present government of Albania . The Albanian government is not happy with the government of the country .
 This does not mean that the ooviet Union will invade Albania, as in such a case as well as in that of a hypothetical invasion of Cuba, the international consequences could be very grave .
 The President stated that he is not, however, so terribly interested in Mr Castro . The President said he does not want to meet Mr Castro, but he is interested in him .
 He is interested in, once again, is the attitude of the ooviet Government, he says . What he's interested in is the attitudes of the government, he adds .
 How is it possible to go through the coming decade if we are, as in the past* to move from crisis to crisis? How is the future of the world?
 The President hopes that some day the Soviet Government will understand thai its main duty should be the defense of the interests of the Joviet Union . lAx, Iviikoyan 3aid that Chairman Khrushchev shared the President' 3 opinion that an understanding between the tw
 All the points of disagreement have to be taken one by one and resolved . Therefore, all the points must be taken by one, resolved .
 The first step should be a final resolution of the Cuban affair — as the President himself said . President himself himself said, "The first step" should be to resolve the issue .
 Much was don© in that direction, but unfortunately, no final situation has yet achieved . Much was said to be going in the direction of the project .
 This is because the U.S. government's attitude is not as helpful as it should be, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 Once the Cuban crisis is resolved, the next steps might well be a uon-aggressioa pact between the Vvarsacv pact organisation and NATO, the rqtfffiffiMi of aatslear tests, disarmament, and Berlin .
 President ha3 noted the fact that the Cuban cri3la haa bftsa f resolved proves the necessity of talks and negotiations between ISm tw© gwarnments .
 As the President has communicated It to Chairman Khrushchev, negotiations should not stop short of a final solution, says the President .
 The ><14 JECRET LIMIT DISTRIBUTION 3/5 SECRET OMIT a STRIBUTION o/5 9Tfee exchange o€ correspondence between the two heads oi state provides a basis for such a solution . The <14 JECRET DISTRIB
 A draft protocol, which would also include the position of the Cuban Government, was drafted by the Soviets . A good way to carry it out would be to place this exchange of correspondence within an agreed protocol, ouch .
 President asked whether Mikoyan meant an approval by the Security Council or a recording of the declarations with the Secretory General . The President also asked whether Mr Mikoyans meant a Security Council approval .
 Cuban declaration would make the entire procedure impossible to accept . This, as well as the inclusion of a Cuban declaration, would make it impossible for the whole procedure .
 The U.S. representative in the Security Council cannot be expected to vote in favor of Mr Castro'3 declaration .
 Mikoyan said that after all, the Cuban question is on the agenda of the United Nations and must be discussed there . Mikoyans said after all the Cuban issue is .
 An agreement should be obtained between the two Governments before a discussion in the Security Council . What would be important is that an agreement be obtained before a Security Council discussion is held .
 The lack of an agreement would amount to keeping alive an international dispute . Hie latter, however, cannot be avoided, and the lack of a deal can't be avoided . The United States is seeking a resolution of the dispute .
 The two countries, therefore, should come forward with an agreed position . The two nations should come together to discuss an agreement on the issue .
 As for such points which are ast agmd^ ttagr night be the object of separate statements. As for . such points . be the . object of separating statements. Such points should be separate statements, such as such .
 Tfeft PmStaft said that the Cuban Government must be left out of th* aa gQ t&8lt ffl M|» ffi» problem now may be whether there whould be agr«««m«ffit' d» »
 Mr Mikoyan said there should be two declarations, one by each Government, however, that the texts should be agreed upon by the SECRET LIMIT .
 The Security Council could then call on the two Governments to resolve the remaining points of difference, ft hat hat is necessary is a preliminary agreement by the two governments on the texts .
 The President said that he understood that Soviet representatives did not like the American draft . The draft draft was drafted by the Soviet Union in the early 1950s . President George W. Bush said he understood the draft was a problem .
 Mr iviiitoyan said that the President guessed correctly of the opinion of the Soviet Government .
 The President said that Soviet missiles, have been removed from Cuba aid that he expects that the Soviet bombers will likewise be likewise be.-t&kea out .
 Chairman Khrash* chev. He hopes that the same thing will apply to the other military units and weapons covered by his correspondence with the Chairman . He also hopes that this will also apply to all military units covered .
 i-iikoysa said what Khrushchev has promised to do lias either been done or is being done . Mr i-Iikoyas said that what Mr Khrushvic has promised is either being done or being done.
 /jm unclarity in translation 3eems to have led to a temporary misunderstanding . No other weapons, however, will be removed from the site .
 Mr Mikoyan 3eems to have believed that the President's remarks applied also to military materiel beyond those specifically ""service or guard"" units .
 The condition in question is that the pledge applies only if Cuba abstains from any action which may be considered subversive or of a nature to undermine the governments of others of the Western Hemisphere . The condition is that Cuba abstain from taking part in any action that may be deemed subversive .
 Mr Mikoyan said that Castro was right in saying that noone gave the U.S. the right to invade or abstain from invasion according to its own interpretation of Cuban actions .
 According to the United States, Cuba must not undertake subversive action, but the U.S. and its Allies are free to undertake such actions . The United States is free to conduct such actions, but Cuba is not allowed to do so .
 Castro's demand that the agreement cut both ways la reasonable and in agreement with international law is reasonable . Castro: "It's not just about cutting both ways, it's about cutting the deal both ways"
 His de* mands for the liquidation of an economic blockade, the abstention from piratical acts, especially by ships belonging to Cuban counterrevolutionaries but based on United States ports and in particular Miami, are reasonable .
 Jo is his wish for a normalization of relations between the two countries . Jo is also hoping to normalize relations between North Korea and South Korea .
 Mr Castro does not ask for the immediate elimination of tie Base but only for the opening of negotiations to determine the time when it would be surrendered . Even there, however, he does not want to end tie Base .
 The President agreed that the actions of Cuban students shooting at Cuba from small boats are against U.S. legislation . The actions are against United States legislation .
 Such actions are unimportant and only the sporatic exploits of publicity see seeKero.com . Such actions were unimportant .
 The United States IS not training any Cuban forces for action against Cuba . Neither MM* such forces trained on the territories of the other nations oi the Western Hemisphere . The U.S. Goveranaeai IS NOT training Cuban forces .
 The important point is that of a noninvasion policy by the United States. The U.S. should not invade the region, the author says . "The important point of the important point was that of the U.N. policy," he says .
 It is difficult to put such a statement in an official document without surrounding it with the necessary guarantees . It is, however, much more difficult than putting such a claim in such a document, it is .
 President cannot expect to tie the hands of the United States regardless of any situation which might arise . Regardless of how the word "imperialists" might apply, the President cannot be expected to tie up the U.S.
 It applies also to the future, at least to the next two or six years depending on the wishes of the American electorate . It applies to the current and future of the United States .
 The President is stating once again that the United States does not Intend to invade Cuba . President Obama said the U.S. does not intend to invade the country .
 Any official written document, however, must be drafted as to recognise the international responsibilities of the United States . The U.S. must be 30 drafted so that it recognises its responsibilities .
 Soviets have removed missiles from Cuba, This is the gist of the agreement between the two Heads of State . This is not the first time the missiles have been removed from Cuba .
 "No control has been, allowed, as requested by the United States and agreed upon in the exchange of correspondence," the U.S. says . After all, no control was allowed .
 The United States is forced to carry on the overflights against which the Soviet Union and Castro are protesting . In consequence, the United States has been forced to continue to carry out overflights . The U.S. has been criticized by the Soviets and Castro .
 The lack of international control places the United otataa Qw&mmm& In an exceedingly difficult position, as It makes it almost impossible for it to reply to charges that there are still Soviet missEes In Cuba, The <18 SECRET UMET DISTRIBUTION S/
 Mr Mikoyan said that such articles are obviously written by crooks and thieves .
 Mikoyan reiterated that the agreement between the two Chiefs of . ^tate in regard to weapons has been reached and is being carried out accordingly . Mikoyans said the agreement was reached and will be carried out .
 U.S. press and attitude of U. otates military constitute an obstacle to resolution of the crisis, says U.N. diplomat .
 U.S. says it intends to contiraMi its overflights of Cuban territory . The United States says it will continue to make overflights to Cuba . The U.N. wants to prevent overflights into Cuban territory.
 The United States has aerial cameras which make It possible to photograph Cuba from outside Cuban airspace . In spite of that the United Jtates insists on violating Cuban airspace.
 The President said that there are no such cameras . The angle at which photographs can be taken from outside the three-mile limit calces the photographs untrustworthy . The President also said that the angle of photographs taken outside the limit calcs the photographs .
 The U.S. endeavors to keep overflights inconspicuous by carrying them out at hign altitude and avoiding low altitude flights . The United States is known for its frequent overflights .
 Castro is right when he says that he will have to deal with su>h overflights by his own means . Castro says he'll have to use his own way of dealing with the overflights .
 Any country would protest against k state efa&iirs which hurts the legitimate pride and selfesteem of tie Cubans . Cubans are proud of their self-esteem in Cuba, says CNN.com .
 Ca3tro has agreed to controJU but insists that such a control apply to all the parties concerned and not be strictly strictly oECixET LIxvUT DISTRIBUTION 3/S "" "" ""SECRET * LIMIT DISTRIBATION 3/3 onesided.
 The United States is refusing to release a statement on the ratter in the declaration . The United Nations is demanding a statement from the U.S. government .
 Trying to find out about facts by using ones own facilities is against international law but mig,ht be ignored . However* statement to that effect in a declaration does violate international law and cannot be accepted .
 The declaration that a noninvasion pledge is conditional on Cuba' 3 abstention from subversive activities cannot be reconciled with international law as it gives to the United States the right to determine by itself whether an invasion should take place .
 The President said that he understands Mr Mikqyan's concern . The President also said he understands the concern .
 If he keeps peace we shall not invade Cuba, regardless of what Mr Castro does within the borders of his country, says President Obama . Mr Castro's Cuba is the only nation to be invaded, says Obama .
 Mlkoyan said that the United States declaration means that the U.S. intends to control the actions of the Government of Cuba .
 Castro wants to see if there is to be control it should be multilateral, he says . Castro wants a multilateral solution to the problem . Castro: "What Castro wants is simply that if there are to be . control it is multilateral"
 His position is fully in agreement with the spirit of the &&> change of letters between the two Chiefs of state . His position has been in agreement .
 The President said that Castro is an enemy of the United States and that the U.S. is going to terminate its blockade only under certain conditions . On the contrary, the President said the President .
 This n»ana that the United States 13 moving bade |rom the position, agreed upon in the exchange of correspondence . The U.S. agreed upon the position .
 It means that the United States is to be free to continue its anti-Cuban policies but that Castro would be prevented from doing anything without the permission of the United Multilateral control c&i be accepted . A situation according to which one government would be in a position to judge the
 The fact that the United States has responsibilities under the Rio Treaty does not need to be inctaded, as this la of no concern to the Soviet Union . Furthermore, as the United states end its Allies have pushed Cuba out of the KIo Treaty organization .
 I said that Mr MJkoyan had accused the U.S. of retreating from the position expressed in the exchange of correspo&daas&ft TMfi la set so. I said the United States fl£ was retreating from its position .
 Soviet Union wnich L3 moving ossfc frssfc . Ite position, as the correspondence specified, was allowed . Inspection nspection was allowed.
 U3yan had said that the declaration should not contain any suggestion that one government might judge the actions of another government . The declaration was made in response to criticism of the declaration .
 The hands of the United States would be tied even while the policy of the Soviet Union would be free to change . However, some safeguarua 4551 SECRET Iim* DISTRIBUTION 3/S .
 Nothing was said in the exchange of correspondence about any control of American territory .
 Mlkoyan suggests that the United States as well as Cuba submit to control . No control would be exercised over the territory of the Soviet Union, he says . Wow, however,
 The Soviet Union proposes that the declaration be placed before the Security Council by a simple expression of Soviet will . The declaration describes a state of affairs depending entirely on Soviet intentions .
 The United States does not Intend to Invade Cuba and is ready to make that known . The U.S. does not intend to invade Cuba, but is ready for the invasion .
 It must, however, insist on a minimum of control, and the expression of its obligations under the Rio Treaty . It must also insist on the express of its . obligations under Rio Treaty, it says .
 Rio Treaty has been ratified by the United States Senate . Rio Treaty is part of U.S. legislation to which the President is subject to . President himself is subject .
 If the Soviet Union prefers it, however, it may be possible to -,*ue the United States intent known in a way which would be quite m clear . Not imply the same legal complications .
 In fact, the President has already made a statement of this kind at his last press conference . "In fact, this kind of statement was already made by the President," he said .
 If an dfHal declaration is called for it must Include references to all aspects of the problem . If, however, an
 States does not intend to invade Cuba, with the hope that Castro will not undertake any provocative action and that the Soviet Union does not reintroduce a military threat into the W estern Hemisphere . If Mr Castro wishes to carry on the activities described by Mr Mikoyan such as the education
 "All we ask is that he does not cause any trouble outside of his own borders," says President Vladimir Putin .
 The President said that if no agreement can be reached on formal declarations, then it might be possible for him to clariiy the position; of the United States by means of a statement at a press conference expressing the spirit of the exchange of correspondence between the two Heads of Gtate
 President also expressed part of what he thinks about Mr Castro, but this is not the same thing as an invasion* Thus a lot of progress was accomplished on the most difficult and important elements of the crisis .
 Let us hope that progress will be possible also on its remaining formal aspect through agreed daoiwatlons registered with the United Nations, If not, th* Prams* is racfy to make an adequate statement at a press conference . Let’s hope progress is possible also
 A statement by the U.S. or a statement agreeing with the United States will have to contain references to control and to the Rio Treaty . The Rio Treaty is the basis for a statement by a statement to discuss control of the Rio treaty .
 At that the two Governments could perhaps pass on to the other problems such as that of disarmament . At that, they could perhaps be able to pass on the other issues .
 President hopes that the Cuban affair will cool off for a long time . In the meantime, the President hopes it will remain cool .
 Mr* fdikoyan said that, in fact, what the President wants is merely to cool off a burning situation . The Soviet Government wants to put the fire out for good before passing on to otharquestions .
 President said the interpretations of the two parUclpaato in the conversation obviously differ . The President said that the interpretations in the conversations obviously differ.
 Mr Mikoyan suggested that if an agreement could be obtained on a part of the items to be included in the declarations, such declarations could be registered officially with the United Nations* Any points on whi-n there would be no agreement would then be the object of the statements outside
 The President said that he wished to make it quite clear for the record that the United States is not moving back from any position agreen to in the correspondence . i quoted from the exchange of correspondence to tie efiect t&ft the rensewal of missiles and other strategic weapons
 The United States will abide by the exchange of coOTe&pan&ttBee t& he letter . This was a& tftUMe U w* w* Soviet Union can manage to abide by that exchange .
 Mr MIkoyan stated that the Soviet Union fully abides by the exchange of correspondence . If not, the President can only act in the best way the s ituation permits .
 Inspection allowed inspection as owner of missiles and other weapons . It had allowed inspection of the missiles and weapons .
 Th* permission of the government on the soil of which the missiles were placed still remained necessary, and this is something over which the Soviet Union has no control of . The Soviet Union was not in control of the missile program in the 1980s .
 Chairman Khrushchev's letters of October 27 and 28 . This is what he said in his letters to the Soviet Union . The letters were signed by Soviet leader Vladimir Putin .
 The only differences between the two letters are that all mention of Turkey was deleted from the October 28 letter . The only difference between the letters is that all reference of Turkey has been deleted from one letter .
 Secretary General U Thant kept informed of what the Soviets were doing . Secretary General was kept informed about what the Soviet Union was doing .
 U.S. newspapers published photographs of missiles being removed and American officers made sure that the removal of missiles was taking place .
 At the point where the entire deal is about to be finalised, the U.S. refuses to move forward but takes a step backwards . The United States is refusing to move ahead with the deal .
 The United States may take care of the obligations arising from the Rio Treaty . The U.S. may take them as it wishes, either through a statement at a press conference or by other means .
 Presided said that nothing was said in the correspresp ondence acout any formal declarations . Presided: "Nothing has been said in a formal declaration"
 The only thing mentioned was an affirmation of United Sts&os lutes* In regard to the question of a hypothetical invasion of Cuba, Cuba was a hypothetical question .
 The U.S. continues to be ready to do, and as a matter of fact, which it has done and is doing again . TM: i* something which the United States continues to do . i*
 The draft declaration is not to the liking of the Soviet Government . As for the draft declaration, it seems that the United S.S. ates* draft is not .
 The President said that in such a case he does not have anything that should worry him . President says he has nothing to worry about after the incident .
 Mr Mikoyan said that the draft proposes that the actions of one sovereign government be subject to the control of another government .
 The President said that the United States affirms its intent not to invade Cuba, such affirmations are not usual either either . The President also said that U.S. affirms it's not usual to say that it will not invade Cuba . Such affirmations have never been seen in
 Mr Mikoyan said that this pledge of naninvasion is made subject to a condition placed unilaterally on Cuba and to be enforced unilaterally by the United States .
 The President said that we cannot be expected to let this assuranc e stand if someday missiles or other similar weapons are introduced by Communist China, or once more by the Soviet Union .
 The pledge of non-invasion should be stated in the terms Ha which it appears in the correspondence . Mr Mikoyaa said that the pledge should be state in terms of the correspondence.
 If the Soviet Union insists on binding declarations, it must accept the complexities which unavoidably accompany the drafting of legal documents . The Soviet Union must accept that, however, the complexities of drafting legal documents are unavoidable .
 McCloy, Stevenson and Kuznetznov agree with understanding that the declaration must include references to the obligations of the United States under the Rio Treaty . U.S. must also agree to some alternate system of guarantee and control, they say .
 U.S. guarantees apply only as long as Castro abides by peaceful statements . Thirdly, it must be specified that United States guarantees only apply only .
 The United States i3 preparing to consider any draft which the Soviet Union might submit and which would satisfy those points . The draft would be submitted to the U.S. in order to satisfy those requirements .
 Mr Mikoyan said that the draft protocol contained all the necessary points but wa3 not accepted by the United States .
 "The United States does not intend ta invade Cuba and never intended to invade Cuba," says U.S. President Barack Obama .
 If the Soviet Union does not repeat such an action, there may not be any problem to worry about in the future . The Soviet Union may not repeat this, but there may be no problem with the situation .
 In any case it is clear that the United States does not intend to invade Cuba . The U.S. does not want to invade the island nation .
 "The most difficult problem has been resolved, and what remains is only a secondary one. In fact, the most difficult problems have been resolved," says President Obama .
 Mikoyan said that much progress has been made and that is why he is so surprised at the President's position in regard to the final step of the declaration . He said that he is surprised by the president's position .
 The President said that the difficulty is due to the failure of carrying out control . The difficulty was due to a failure to carry out control, he said .
 The Soviet Union objects to U.S. overflights of Gab&TlielfefaeA States must insist on some means of control . United States should insist on control of the airspace .
 A statement on the girt of the President may be a step along the way . If not, a statement would be a sign of progress .
 Mti Wkxstfk said that he fully agreed with the spirit of the President's statement . Mti said he agreed with President's spirit of saying that he did not agree with the statement .
 He realizes it will be impossible to discuss the declaration paragraph for paragraph in the present conversation . He realizes that it will not be possible to discuss paragraph-for-paragraphs in the current conversation .
 He is concerned, however, with the proposal to replace action within the United Nations SECRET LIMIT DISTRIBUTION S/S 22 Nations by a simple statement at a Press Conference . The proposal is proposed by the U.N. Secretary of State John Kerry .
 The Cuba affair is on the agenda of the United Nations . Failure to agree in that forum would keep the question alive . The U.N. is holding a meeting on the Cuba affair .
 The carrying out of its obligations by the Soviet Union hsbeen verified, SB says . SB: In fact* there is no reason to keep it alive. SB: There are no reasons for keeping it alive .
 Agreement has been reached on the difficult question, the points of disagreement deal with something which should be easier to resolve . Agreement has now been reached, but the disagreement is not over whether it should be resolved .
 Mr Mikoyan understands the President's concern, but he does not see why this concern should justify the inclusion of new conditions to the fulfillment of pledges .
 As for the question of preventing subversion, it should apply to all parties alike, not on a unilateral basis . As for subversion in the U.S., it should be on a bilateral basis, not unilateral basis, he says .
 Mikoyan has not fully understood what he must report to Chairman Khrushchev . Nevertheless, he has not understood what must be reported to the Soviet leader .
 The President said that the United States does not intend to invade Cuba . President Obama said that he already has answered that question .
 If the Soviet Union abides by the exchange of correspondence so will the U.S. If the United States abides, it will also abide by the agreement . The United States.
 The President said that he had made a statement to that effect already at the proceeding week's press conference .
 At the present .moment, the only question that remate is that of formal documents . At the . present . moment the only . question that .remate is the issue of formal . documents . "At the present moment, the . only question . is that the . question
 The Soviet Govearam«st h& anow come up v&tih a proposal of a formal protocol to be sigaedvtt&Cabfe Itot Prmitimi. does not intend to sign any documents with Castro.
 A stai©m«St at &|WS3 'conference vo uld be a simple manner of resolving the questions. A sta©m »St at . &|W3 'conflict' will be a way of solving the questions .
 An official document signed by all the parties Induces legal complesdties . Induces a legal agreement between the parties .
 Mr Mikoyan said that he liked what the President said at his last Press Conference . Chairman Khrushchev also liked what he said, so did Chairman Khruschev .
 The President said that much progress has been accomplished perhaps more will be accomplished in the next few weeks . President Obama said that perhaps more progress will be achieved in the coming weeks .
 Mikoyan will be able to report to Chairman Khrushchev the precise understanding that the U.S. has of this matter . In any case when Mr Mikoyans returns to Moscow he will be .
 Mr. Thompson G Mr Johnson ARA Mr. Martin EUR Mr Tyler SOV Mr John Guthrie BTF Mr Hillenbrand INR/D . Mr Hilsman ACDA Mr Foster White House 4 cc USUN SECRET LIMIT DISTRIBATION S/S SlL