 Despite the discoveries of recent research, there is still much more to be revealed about the handling of nuclear weapons before and during the Cuban missile crisis .
 The volume highlights the importance of memory as an essential foundation of historical understanding . It also demonstrates how events that rely only on historical records can provide misleading accounts .
 This focus on memory extends the scope of the existing literature by exploring hitherto neglected aspects of the Cuban missile crisis . Analysis of the operational aspects of Bomber Command activity, explored through recollections of the aircrews that challenge accounts .
 The editors then go on to explore aspects of intelligence whose achievements and failings have been recognized to be of central importance to the origins, dynamics and outcomes of the missile crisis . The editors also explore the failings of intelligence that led to the crisis .
 Studies of hitherto neglected organizations such as the U.S. Defense Intelligence Agency and the British Joint Intelligence Committee extend our understanding of British and American intelligence machinery in the missile crisis .
 Finally, the book explores the risk of nuclear war and looks at how close we came to nuclear war . The book also explores the threat of nuclear weapons .
 The risk of inadvertent use of nuclear weapons is evaluated and a new proposed framework for the analysis of nuclear risk put forward .
 This volume will be of interest to students of intelligence studies, international history, foreign policy, security studies and IR in general .
 David Gioe is a PhD candidate at Corpus Christi College, Cambridge . He previously spent a decade working in the U.S. intelligence community .
 The Australian Security Intelligence 50 years of the CIA Organization . Nothing Sacred Policing Politics . The CIA was founded in 1945 .
 No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system .
 Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are used only for identiﬁcation and explanation without intent to infringe . Product and corporate names are trademarks and registered trademarks . Use these trademarks to identify and explain your use of these trademarks .
 He is a former Central Intelligence Agency Operations Ofﬁcer and Analyst . He is also a former CIA Operations Of ﬁcers .
 David was a Presidential Management Fellow at the FBI and is a Naval Reserve Intelligence Ofﬁcer . David is also a Naval Researcher at the Naval Reserve . He is a former President of the United States Navy and FBI .
 His 18 books include a number on the role and in﬉uence of intelligence services, especially in Britain, the Soviet Union and the United States .
 He is editor of Harold Macmillan’s xiv Contributors diaries . He is currently writing a book on religion and politics in inter-war Britain .
 Dr Michael Goodman is a Reader in Intelligence and International Affairs in the Department of War Studies at King’s College London . Goodman is also a Reader at the King's College London War Studies Department .
 Squadron Leader Robin Woolven was a navigator 1956–78 on tactical and strategic bomber squadrons until 1967, then on maritime surveillance squadrons . Woolven served in the Royal Air Force from 1967 to 1978 .
 He spent 17 years in the Security Service before retiring to complete a PhD at King’s College, London . He is now a Research Associate at the London-based institution .
 She is writing her dissertation on Australia and the Cuban missile crisis .
 Her research has appeared in the Australian Journal of Politics and History, The Conversation and on Australian Broadcasting Corporation radio .
 La crisi dei missili di Cuba e le sue percezioni internazionali (Le Monnier, forthcoming, 2014). Non solo canzonette. Cuba .
 A Concise History, and writes frequently on security and intelligence issues . He has written frequently about security, intelligence and security issues .
 Canadian Foreign Policy: Selected Cases, Rethinking National Security: The Public Dimension and Hazardous Waste Siting and Democratic Choice . The Public Dimensions of the Public Dimension is at odds with the Canadian government .
 A former NATO and Fulbright Fellow, he taught at various universities in Canada . He has been academic visitor in the United States, United Kingdom and Japan .
 He is currently completing books on the histories of Denmark and St. Petersburg, respectively .
 He has participated in numerous international conferences in Russia, as well as the Junior 8 Summit in Japan in 2008, attended by Presidents Bush, Medvedev and Fukuda .
 The Cuban missile crisis has left one of the most vivid vapour trails of memory in our lives . For anyone alive, with a pulse to feel and eyes to see, during the days of the crisis, it has left .
 The missiles of October 1962 rank with the Guns of August 1914 in their compelling fascination . For professional historians and scholars of war, near-war, and strategic studies, the missiles are a compelling fascination for historians .
 Both subjects and debates that will never wither as long as human curiosity continues to embrace a sense of the past . They are both subjects .
 We have a superb range of scholars to make new sense of that extraordinary crisis for a wider readership . And we have within these pages we have . within these . pages a superb . range of . scholars to . make new . sense of the extraordinary crisis .
 "It was a far, far closer thing than we realized even at our moments of highest anxiety in the autumn of 1962," says the author of the book .
 That we can recall the Cold War crisis and write about it in tranquility is perhaps the greatest single shared boon for humanity in modern times . The Cold War ended as it did without general war or nuclear exchange .
 Be fascinated – and breathe as many signs of retrospective relief as you wish . Be fascinated by the story of your own life. Be fascinated with the stories of your life .
 The authors are grateful to Trish Hayes and the staff of the BBC Written Archives for kind assistance with copyright permissions .
 Gregynog Conference was held in October 2012 in Tokyo, Japan . Chikara Hashimoto organized the conference in honor of the event . The conference was the first of its kind in Japan .
 The actions of the Soviet Union, Cuba and the U.S. in October 1962 brought those nations to the verge of military conflict .
 What was not known then, and what was not fully recognized today, was how close the world came to the brink of nuclear disaster . The world came close to a nuclear disaster in the 1950s and '60s .
 Anniversaries of, and conferences on, the Cuban missile crisis have been of great value to historians, as well as the general public .
 "They have generated new sources of understanding and new interpretations," they say . They say .
 Much has relied on memory of those who lived through the events of October 1962 . The release of documents has played an important part in this process .
 Twenty-ﬁve years after the crisis the series of conferences organized by North American academics James Bight, David Welch and Bruce Allyn brought together former Americans to remember and debate their experiences .
 President Kennedy’s Executive Committee of the National Security Council . These ventures in ‘critical oral history’ initially involved members of the Executive Committee . Soviet and Cuban survivors, including diplomats and intelligence ofﬁcers.
 Thirty years after the crisis, a conference in Havana brought together American, Soviet and Cuban ofﬁcials . The conference was held in Havana, Cuba, Cuba .
 Fidel Castro attended the Havana conference, exchanging views with his former adversaries, and providing recollections of, and re�ections, on, his own actions . Most dramatically Fidel Castro exchanged views with former adversaries and provided recollections .
 The conference was also notable for revelations from a former Soviet General, Anatoli Gribkov, that the Soviets had deployed tactical nuclear weapons in Cuba . An ex-Soviet General revealed that the Soviet Union had deployed nuclear weapons .
 McNamara stated that he and his colleagues had not known there were such weapons in Cuba . McNamara said he did not know he had such weapons . He said he and colleagues did not even know there were weapons in the country .
 Khrushchev delegated authority for their use to Soviet commanders in Cuba, Gribkov said . Gribkkov said authority for the use of the weapons had been delegated to Soviet leaders in Cuba . Khrushchevitch said the weapons were used by Cuban commanders .
 The suggestion that an American invasion would have led to the almost inevitable use of nuclear weapons gained immediate currency . The suggestion was made that the U.S. invasion would lead to the use of nukes .
 Gribkov’s statements provoked robust exchanges among historians about the value and reliability of oral testimony, in particular that of former Soviet ofﬁcials .
 Gribkov clariﬁed his remarks and explained that he had felt constrained about what he could reveal at the Havana conference . He did not explain that Khrushchev had changed his mind and insisted that no nuclear weapons of any kind could be used without his authorization .
 Gribkov’s clariﬁcations are reminders that some memories need to conform to of course, practices . The author of the book, "Gribkov's Clariari," is published in New York .
 Much of what we have learned of the crisis has illuminated and challenged the accuracy and at times the veracity of many accounts, CNN.com has reported .
 They are, moreover, a means of verifying the accounts of those senior American ofﬁcials whose recollections have helped shape our understanding . They are also a way to verify the account of senior U.S. officials .
 Robert Kennedy’s depiction of his own attitude to using military force against the missiles is an illustration of his attitude to military force . An illustration is Robert Kennedy's depiction of himself .
 Secret tapes make clear that RFK supported a military attack . RFK was in discussions on 16 October on how to react to a possible attack .
 The Director of Central Intelligence, John McCone, raised the Pearl Harbor analogy with the President on 17 October . George Ball, Under Secretary at the State Department, spelt out in a memorandum that ‘we tried Japanese as war criminals because of the sneak attack on Pearl Harbor’
 The evidence from the ExComm tapes suggests they meant the exact opposite . The evidence suggests the tapes were intended to be a joke .
 Introduction 3 Thirteen Days is based on Robert Kennedy’s diaries . It was written as the former President was preparing himself for a presidential campaign . Robert Kennedy's diaries were written as he was preparing to run for president .
 Ted Sorensen, JFK’s speech writer and ExComm participant, edited the book . He was assassinated before it was published and the editing was completed .
 Thirteen Days provides an account of Robert Kennedy’s meeting with the Soviet ambassador, Anatoli Dobrynin, on 27 October . It has assumed a particular signiﬁcance in debates about the resolution of the crisis .
 RFK relayed a message to Dobrynin that indicated JFK’s willingness to withdraw Jupiter intermediate-range ballistic missiles from Turkey – a demand that Khrushchev had raised publically earlier that day .
 Historians have debated whether Robert Kennedy’s offer to withdraw missiles from Turkey represented a deal, an understanding or an arrangement . Kennedy offered to withdraw the missiles, but historians have questioned whether it was a deal or arrangement .
 Toshihiko Aono’s chapter sheds new light on this problem . In this volume, Toshihio Aono's chapter sheds light on the problem .
 Kennedy and Rusk secretly attempted to arrange mediation by third parties such as the UN Secretary-General . As the United States could not take public initiatives for a Cuban–Turkish deal, the U.S. tried to arrange for mediation .
 Khrushchev had already decided to withdraw missiles from Cuba in return for a no-invasion pledge, before he learned of Kennedy’s offer .
 Khrushchev had made up his mind – and secured the unanimous agreement of the Presidium – to retreat by Thursday 25 October . Indeed it is now clear that Khrushchev had decided to retreat .
 Don Munton argues that analysts of the missile crisis should have come to the conclusion much earlier than most did that President Kennedy had offered the Soviets a deal on the Jupiter missiles . Munton: Analysts should have been able to come to that conclusion sooner than most thought .
 Munton argues that the government of Turkey was, by late October 1962, willing to relinquish the Jupiters, and Kennedy may well have been advised of this through allied channels . Munton also argues that Turkey may have been willing to hand over the weapons .
 If so, the Turkish switch in policy helps explain why Kennedy made the offer he did to Moscow . Kennedy's offer may explain why he made it to Russia .
 In 1989 Sorensen admitted that he had altered Thirteen Days to preserve the myth that the President had refused to compromise and stood on missiles in Turkey .
 U.S. government had not ignored Khrushchev’s demand that withdrawal of the missiles from Cuba required reciprocal action in Turkey . The United States had withdrawn the missiles, but Turkey had taken action in retaliation .
 Dean Rusk and Robert McNamara both testiﬁed to Congress that the Turkish missiles were in no way connected to the withdrawal of the missiles from Cuba . Yet in 1963, they said they were not connected to withdrawal of Cuba missiles from the country .
 The fragility and ambiguity of evidence often present challenges of interpretation for Cold War historians . More generally, the fragility of evidence (oral and written) presents challenges for historians .
 As Sergei Radchenko argues compellingly, the evidence about Khrushchev’s motives for the deployment is at times fragmentary . Radchenko: The evidence is fragmentary, and evidence is incomplete .
 The argument that a principal reason for the deployment of the missiles in Cuba was to defend Cuba rests on testimony of former Soviet ofﬁcials, including at the ‘critical oral conferences’ of the 1980s and 1990s .
 The conferences in Florida, Cambridge, Massachusetts, Moscow and Havana brought together senior ofﬁcials and diplomats .
 In the 1990s, the historiography of the crisis increasingly began to explore events and incidents at the operational level . In the 90s, historians began to look at the events at an operational level, such as in the military .
 The memories of submarine commanders, missile crews and aircraft pilots assumed a growing importance in assessments of the risk of nuclear war . Over the next twenty years the memories of submarines and missile crews became increasingly important .
 The fortieth anniversary of the crisis in 2002 generated accounts of events at sea that revealed to Western audiences the activities of Soviet submariners . In 2002, the events in which the crisis occurred in the Soviet Union were revealed .
 Dramatic accounts suggested that commanders of Soviet submarines may have been close to ﬁring nuclear weapons against American warships . American warships that were dropping explosive devices to force them to surface were dropped by Soviet submarines .
 Greater understanding of operational level generated increased understanding of the risk of war . Greater understanding led to greater understanding of risks of war, author says .
 Many of the risks were unknown, or only partially known, to senior political and military ofﬁcials . Many of these risks are unknown or partially known to senior officials, officials say .
 Michael Petersen’s essay in this volume offers an explanation for this by placing the crisis in the context of the sweeping military intelligence reform ordered by McNamara the previous year . Petersen: The crisis was the result of the reform of the military intelligence .
 Petersen argues that while those reforms helped hasten the discovery of the Soviets’ strategic missiles, their then-incomplete nature and the parochial nature of American intelligence combined to provide a complete picture of Soviet deployments . Petersen: While those reforms may have hastened the discovery, they
 David Gioe’s chapter focuses on the role of intelligence, but at the operational and tactical level instead of the structural understanding . Petersen's chapter, like Petersen's, focuses on intelligence, as well as intelligence .
 Gioe reviews and critiques the human intelligence tradecraft used by the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency and British Secret Intelligence Service to run Soviet Military Intelligence Colonel Oleg Penkovsky . Oleg's vital information fed many of the Joint Intelligence Committee and ExComm assessments .
 The world was at ‘one minute to midnight’ on the Doomsday clock, the author of an account of the crisis illuminates many of these risks . In the view of Michael Dobbs, the world is at 'one hour to midnight'
 Dobbs provides new evidence of the risk of nuclear war in Cuba . Dobbs: Soviet troops in Cuba testified about the risk . The Ground Launched Cruise Missiles were deployed within range of the U.S. base at Guantanamo .
 Historians of the crisis have also developed beyond America and the Soviet Union . Global scope and focus of the history of the Soviet-U.S. crisis has developed beyond the borders of America and Russia .
 Most notably, the perspective and role of Cuba has enjoyed a growing salience . Cuba's role in the United States has also been growing in recent years . The U.S. has been in touch with Cuba for decades .
 Understanding of the roles of America’s allies, including Britain, Canada and Brazil, has also developed . Understanding of Britain's allies, Canada, Brazil, and third parties has developed .
 Aono’s chapter reveals that Britain, as well as the US, tried to arrange mediation by third parties . In this volume, Aono's chapter reveals the UK tried to organise mediation by the US .
 London worked hard to establish the UN presence in Cuba in order to provide the U.S. with diplomatic alternatives . Especially, London .
 This chapter argues that Kennedy eventually began to see Britain as one of the possible mediators . This chapter also argues that he eventually saw Britain as a possible mediator .
 Michael Goodman's chapter on the role of Britain’s Joint Intelligence Committee during the missile crisis draws on previously closed archives of the UK . Goodman reveals fraught decision-making and a feeling of peril in Whitehall alongside Washington .
 Laura Stanley’s chapter on Australia provides the perspective of another U.S. ally . Laura Stanley contributes to the growing literature on state viewpoints from across the globe .
 Leonardo Campus’ chapter explores the Italian political perspectives on the crisis, using new documents from Italian, US and British archives, as well as interviews . Leonardo Campus' chapter uses new documents and interviews to explore the Italian perspective .
 The divisive nature and the desire for peace that characterized such reactions are highlighted . The divisive and the need for peace is highlighted .
 The presence of NATO nuclear missiles made Italy both a target at risk and a possible subject of negotiation . It will be shown how Fanfani secretly tried to use them to play a role as a peace mediator .
 Such documents traverse diplomatic activity and some places encompass diplomatic engagement and initiative . Such documents are often used in diplomatic documents .
 The 'world crisis' threatened a nuclear war in which hundreds of millions might die . More broadly, the ‘world crisis’ as Harold Macmillan described it in his diary, threatened a world crisis .
 This prompted ‘the frightful desire to do something’ he went on to record in his diary,24 which included attempts to manage responses to the crisis in, and through, the United Nations . Peter Catterall points out in his chapter here .
 No other phenomenon in human history can have so engaged the attention and anxieties of so much of the global population . No other thing in history has so engaged so many of the world's anxieties .
 A rare example of the social history of the crisis is provided by Alice George’s Awaiting Armageddon, which examines American attitudes to the crisis . The book is based on the views of Alice George on the crisis in America .
 George begins with the observation that, ‘For a precarious week in 1962, all Americans got a taste of life on death row’
 The U.S. came remarkably close to the accidental detonation of a hydrogen bomb in North Carolina in January 1961 . Three out of four safety mechanisms failed after a B-51 bomber broke up in mid-air . It was not revealed until 2013 that the United States .
 In October 1962 it was not only Americans who felt that the end of the world might be at hand . But in Britain the sense of danger was equally acute .
 TV brought the Cuban crisis into the living rooms of the nation, says Rosaleen Hughes and Jean Seaton . Flashpoint Cuba left an indelible mark on the consciousness of the viewing public .
 While it was a programme put together in an enormous hurry, it can only properly be understood as the product of the BBC’s institutional position and the way in which it practised its journalism .
 Memories are fallible – and not just long-term memories . Fallibility, bias and necessity are all factors in memory . Memories fallible, bias, necessity and necessity .
 It’s just as if we suddenly began to put a major number of MRBMs in Turkey, the Turkish president says . It's not as if the Turkish government is putting more MRMs into Turkey, he says .
 Memories of events many years past can also be fallible . More understandably, memories of events in the 1980s are also fallible. Memories of the past can be easily recalled, as are of the present .
 At one point, Anatoli Dobrynin mistakenly recalled that his crucial meeting with Robert Kennedy took place on Friday 26th rather than Saturday 27th October, raising the prospect of an entire recasting of the denouement of the crisis .
 Historians, of course, seek to use all forms of evidence in devising their narratives and analyses . Historians use all sorts of evidence to devise their narratives, analyses .
 Introduction 7 decision-makers considered the use of weapons of mass destruction – be they heads of state or captains of submarines – require enquiry beyond memory and experience . Introduction 7: Introduction 7 .
 Seeking the recreation of the nuclear past and the moment of greatest global peril in October 1962 remains a necessity for those wishing to understand the past and to preserve the future .
 The wording could nevertheless be interpreted as denoting a deal . Sorenson used the wording to talk about a possible deal .
 Schlosser provides a profoundly disturbing account of American nuclear weapons safety during the Cold War . He provides an account of the dangers of nuclear weapons in the United States .
 A possible alternative explanation was that the key word was ‘suddenly’ and that JFK recalled the deployment which as he remarked had been decided years previously .