 The findings are not to be construed as an official Department of the Army position unless so designated by other authorized documents . Subject to General Declassification Schedule of Executive Order 11652. d .
 The document was prepared in response to a requirement initiated by the Director of Plans, Office of the Deputy Chief of Staff for Military Operations .
 This is a final report prepared by the Strategic Studies Institute, U.S. Army War College . It does not reflect approval of the initiating agency or the Department of the Army .
 The report was written by Kenneth E Roberts, a member of the Strategic Studies Institute, United States Army War College .
 The assistance and support of the Staff and Faculty of the U.S. Army War College and the United States Army Military History Research Collection is gratefully acknowledged .
 This document should not be released to agencies other than those on the Distribution List without prior approval of the study sponsor .
 In all three of the crisis periods, the actors responded on the basis of their own national interests, within the constraints of a short timeframe, and with a limited choice of alternatives . The actors responded to their own interests, the authors say .
 Each crisis was preceded by indicators which were incorrectly analyzed because of preconceived notions, stereotypes, and personal biases . Each crisis is preceded by numerous indicators which are incorrectly analyzed by people who believe they are the cause of the crisis .
 Fears of encirclement and containment influenced action and reaction . However, the importance of formal alliances . was minor .
 The numbness which analysts felt in each crisis due to previous false alarm9 was exacerbated by enemy deception, restrictions on access to raw data, secrecy in decisionmaking, an abundance of irrelevant data, simple bad luck, delays, and delays .
 The importance of surprise, a credible deterrent, direct and constant communication among leaders, flexibility, deception, timing, and the maintenance of forward deployed forces and strategic mobility have been revalidated . QaJ has been re-validated.
 The importance of alliances and their operation ^^P^~ during crises has apparently been exaggerated . This is apparently because alliances are important during crises .
 No ultimate intelligence source— ""MAGIC,""" the U-2, or satellite reconnaissance— is useful without sound political and behavioral analysis . No ultimate intel source— "MAGIC"" -- is useful . The U.S. should not rely solely on intelligence, but it
 Such planning allows the perception of more options and the time for more choice and commitment, such planning allows for more choices and commitment .
 This objective can only be achieved by a strong military capability and presence supported by an aware citizenry . This objective is only achieved by strong military capabilities and presence of an aware citizens .
 Future crises similar to Pearl Harbor, Cuba, and the Middle East can be averted by such a demonstration of will . Future crises such as Pearl Harbor and Cuba can't be avoided .
 Frequent rotations of duty should be required to avoid overspecialization in strategic intelligence and more improvization . Confidentiality should be encouraged in diplomacy and strategy formulation, says the author .
 A greater diversity of viewpoints should be encouraged and intellectual debate with nongovernmental scholars and specialists should be sought to challenge the conventional wisdom .
 Increased attention should be given to the development of additional airlift and troop mobility capabilities, says the U.S. State Department . Also, increased airlift, troop mobility and intelligence gathering capabilities should be developed .
 A thorough analysis should be made of the sources of vital raw materials and the potential for conflict and blackmail . Finally, because of the increasing interdependence of economies and use of embargoes, should be examined .
 A major R&D effort should then be undertaken to develop substitutes and synthetics . A major effort should be made to develop synthetics and substitutes .
 In this environment, the increased dependence on intelligence estimates in selecting and implementing foreign policy makes better strategic planning even more critical . Intelligence estimates are used to make decisions on foreign policy .
 The dangers of strategic surprise can only be eliminated if intelligence analysts and strategic planners base their conclusions primarily on an objective analysis of enemy capabilities . Intelligence analysts must remain prepared to react to <iny capability within that range .
 D-l APPENDIX E— RE— REFERENTS: E-4 . D-4 is an unclassified version of this article . Use this article to help people understand today's featured events in this article.
 The key to understanding the significance of these three crises lies primarily in the role played by intelligence processors and decisionmakers rather than the failure of the intelligence gatherers and technology .
 National intelligence prediction failed in all three of the crises under consideration . National intelligence predictions fail in all of the three crises .
 Diplomacy succeeded in Cuba and the Mideast but failed at Pearl Harbor . Diplomacy failed in Cuba, the Middle East and Cuba, but failed in the U.S.
 The role of intelligence and strategic planning in crisis decisionmaking process is becoming increasingly important . In terms of both long-range projections and short-term analysis, the role is becoming more important .
 Political scientists have recently undertaken efforts related to case study comparisons of various crisis situations . As a result, a number of prominent political scientists have undertaken efforts .
 Researchers in the areas of belief systems and decisionmaking have long held that analysts seldom review incoming information objectively .
 Such information is usually unconsciously fitted into preexisting intelligence positions and preconceived behavior patterns or else simply disregarded as irrelevant or erroneous . Instead, such information is often fitted into pre-existing intelligence positions or simply discarded .
 This study is an attempt to validate and expand these conclusions, to examine reasons for the successes and failures of diplomacy, and to identify relevant trends and commonalities upon which to base useful recommendations .
 The findings are based upon the most significant contributions of historians and political theorists and a review of various official intelligence documents, interviews, and personal analysis . The findings were based on the most . significant contributions .
 President Roosevelt was '•••evinced before the surprise attack on Pearl Harbor that war with Japan was inevitable . President Roosevelt believed war was inevitable after Pearl Harbor . Roosevelt was assassinated in 1941 .
 The volume and diversity of data provided by U.S. intelligence agents was excellent, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The breaking of the top priority Japanese diplomatic code enabled us to anticipate attack . The code was broken by the Japanese government in the 1980s and 1990s .
 There were warnings that the attack would occur at Pearl Harbor . Such a bold maneuver was by no means anticipated at the time by either diplomatic or military analysts .
 The United States and Japan began slowly moving toward crisis after the Japanese invasion of Manchukuo in 1931 . The U.S. and Japan moved slowly toward crisis in response to invasion .
 The United States attempted to influence Japanese policy by the use of progressively stricter boycotts and embargoes . The U.S. attempted to exert influence on Japan's policy by using boycotts .
 The signing of the Nazi-Soviet nonaggression pact and the Japanese treaty of neutrality with Russia meant that Japan would be forced to look southward for its supply of vital natural resources . Subsequently, the signing of . the . Nazi- Soviet nonaggressive pact and . the Japanese
 It was in this region that United States and Japanese interests and ambitions clashed . U.S. and Japanese ambitions clashed in the region .
 The United States and Japan presented a number of proposals and counterproposals for peace between 9 April 1941 and 20 November 1941 . The U.S. and Japan proposed peace proposals in 1941 .
 U.S. refused to accede to Japan's stated vital national interest of maintaining a strong protective position in China . These diplomatic efforts were doomed to failure, however, because the United States .
 Our negotiators insisted that Japan remove all of her forces, thereby leaving China in turmoil and hostile to Japan . This would have left the country in turmoil, leaving it hostile to China .
 After 26 July 1941, President Roosevelt froze &11 Japanese assets in the United States, closed all U.S. ports to Japanese vessels, and proclaimed a strict embargo on the sale of American petroleum products to Japan .
 Japan was forced to accept American demands for withdrawal from China and Indochina or obtain raw materials elsewhere . This action forced Japan to accept U.S. withdrawal from the region and trade restrictions .
 Tojo became Prime Minister because he opposed negotiations . The new cabinet labored to give the impression that it was still interested in discussions .
 As early as January 1941, the U.S. Ambassador to Japan, Joseph C Grew, obtained information from the Peruvian Ambassador in Tokyo, as well as from a number of Japanese sources . The Japanese intended to make a surprise mass attack on Pearl Harbor .
 The U.S. intercepted a message from Japan to Ambassador Nomura in Washington on 5 November 1941 . The deadline for diplomatic agreement with the United States was 25 November . The United States intercepted the message .
 Ambassador Grew and U.S. intelligence sources warned that a surprise aggressive movement might emerge from Japan suddenly in any direction at any time . In late November, ambassador Grew warned that such an aggressive movement could emerge suddenly .
 A message intercepted on 6 December from Japanese intelligence in Honolulu advised Tokyo that the opportunity for surprise attack against Hawaii was good . The message was intercepted by Japanese intelligence .
 The prior indicators and intelligence were not evaluated in such a manner, however, to predict that war would begin with a preemptive attack on U.S. territory in Hawaii .
 U.S. retaliatory powers crippled for more than a year after Pearl Harbor attack . Japanese forces escaped with minimum damage to their attacking forces .
 U.S. defending forces were unable to counter the Japanese attack . The United States was unable to . counter the . Japanese attack. United States defending forces . were unable .
 The surprise attack served to unify a previously divided American public opinion behind the war effort . In contrast to the physical damage inflicted upon U.S. forces, the surprise attack unifies a previously . divided public opinion .
 "No other single action could have accomplished this feat so quickly and efficiently," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Morale in the U.S. military and intelligence communities was lowered as a result of the surprise . Morale was lowered in the American military and . intelligence communities as a . result .
 scapegoats were found for the disaster and a number of promising careers were ended . Rightly or wrongly, scapegoats have been found .
 The American political elite has not yet regained faith in the validity of U.S. military intelligence . The U.K. has not regained its trust in the American intelligence .
 By September 1941, Japanese oil reserves stood at less than 50 million barrels, U.S. Strategic Bombing Survey reported .
 Delay means greater risks due to lack of oil and other vital raw materials . Delay meant greater risks once the decision for war had been made . Delay was due to the decision to go to war was made .
 Japan realized that to obtain these resources, necessary for a long war of attrition, she must expel the United States and Great Britain from the East Indies and gain control of the region . The U.S. and Britain were expelled from the region, Japan realized .
 The weather added urgency to the decision to go to war . Accepting this realization, the decision was made to go war .
 October and November were the best months for landing operations in the East Indies because of the northeasterly monsoons . November was the best month of landing operations for the first time in the island nation .
 Such operations would have become practically impossible after January . The operation would have been impossible if it continued after January 2015 .
 The United States had begun preparing for war in 1939 by building up its military strength . In the American viewpoint it was more advantageous that it come in 1942 or 1943 . The U.S. had begun building up military strength in 1939 .
 Every effort was made to gain time after it became clear that a war on two fronts was a distinct possibility . The U.S. became aware of the possibility of war on both fronts .
 Japanese realized any delay would mean that the U.S. forces would be stronger . The Japanese realized that the United States forces would benefit from delay . The U.N. forces were stronger than Japan .
 Military action quickly outpaced dipomatic and political reaction in both the U.S. and Japan . Immediately after the attack on Pearl Harbor .
 The United States Congress passed a resolution on 8 December declaring that a state of war had existed between the U.S. and Japan since the time of the Pearl Harbor attack . The resolution was passed by Congress in December .
 Prior to 1940 it was in the interest of the United States to maintain Japan as a counterforce to communism in Asia . The U.S. maintained Japan as an anti-communist force in Asia until 1940 .
 After 1940 Japan emerged as a more immediate threat to U.S. interests . After 1940, the United States faced a greater threat to its interests .
 The U.S. represented the status quo power in the Pacific . Japan represented the revisionist power .
 Japan sincerely felt that the extension of its control over the Western Pacific was both natural and destined and that it was mutually desirable for all concerned . The extension of Japan's control of the . Western . Pacific was "natural and destined"
 Japan claimed only to be interested in preserving peace and order in the Far East . Japan claimed that it was only interested only to preserve peace in the region .
 Japan desperately needed oil, scrap iron, bauxite, and other raw materials to expand its economy and maintain its military forces . The country desperately needed scrap iron and scrap iron to expand her economy .
 World depression had already made it difficult for the Japanese to sell their goods abroad . World depression was already making it harder for the country to sell its goods .
 British, Dutch, and American embargoes aimed at forcing Japan out of China and breaking her ties with the Axis powers were unsuccessful .
 The Pearl Harbor attack served as a positive action on the part of Japan in obtaining vital material resources over the long-range period . The attack on the U.S. took place in 1941, 1941 .
 Its root lay In a chain of events resulting from opposition to and misperception of these interests by the United States . The U.S. began with the insistence on total evacuation of Japanese forces from China and culminating in the embargoes .
 The United States could not accept the creation of a Japanese sphere of ""coprosperity"" in the Far East which Japan felt was so essential to her survival and economic growth, 6.6.5 . The U.S. refused to accept the existence of the "copros
 The fact that a declaration of war against Japan coincided with the interests of our allies in Europe was secondary once the U.S. was attacked, he says .
 Britain and Holland feared a Japanese attack on their colonies in the Far East would force them to open a distant second front in their war against the Axis powers .
 They saw little success in such an effort without overt military assistance from the U.S. They say they would have to rely on the United States for help .
 They were seriously concerned, since the United States had refused to obligate herself to enter the war or even to define the circumstances which might lead her to do so . The U.S. did not obligate itself to oblige herself to join the war, but refused to define circumstances
 Germany and Italy had long pressed Japan to declare war in the Far East to divert Allied forces to the area . Japan had long been reluctant to do so, but the U.S. was determined to win .
 Japan's final move toward war was made primarily on the basis of self-interest and perceived economic necessity . Although pressures may have had some impact on Japan's decision, the decision was made in the form of self interest .
 There was little real military cooperation between the U.S. and the British Commonwealth prior to the formal staff conferences held in Washington in the spring of 1941 .
 These conferences sought to deter Axis expansion of the war by coordinated strategic deployments, to develop unified plans in the event of U.S. participation in the war, and to devise ways to assure maintenance of freedom of the seas .
 A conference held in Singapore in April failed to establish a combined battle plan for operations in the Pacific . Kdnoye consistently refrained from informing Germany about the details of Japanese negotiations with the U.S.
 Japan apparently coordinated to a minimum degree with Germany and Italy on other matters also . Japan and the two countries agreed to work together on the matter .
 Assurances had been sought that Germany would not contest Japanese occupation of former Allied colonies in the Far East . Assurances were sought that 1-5 would not fight the Japanese occupation .
 Japan's detailed plans for attack were the work of Admiral Yamamoto . The detailed details of Japan's attack on Japan were detailed in detail . Japan also planned to attack Japan in 1941 .
 The Germans and Italians were pleased to see any form of aggression in the area . The Italians and Germans said they were pleased with the action in Italy .
 The American people were reluctant to go to war until they were given no alternative . The U.S. was given 'no alternative' by the war .
 Roosevelt worked hard to prepare the nation for the war he saw approaching . Roosevelt prepared the nation to prepare for the invasion . Roosevelt died in 1944 at the age of 92 .
 The lack of public belligerency perhaps contributed to the Japanese misperception of American will, perhaps . U.S. might not be willing to engage in a war with Japan .
 The manner of the attack, however, quickly solidified public opinion behind the declaration of war . Although Japanese opinion was divided for some time, the creation of the To jo Cabinet expelled all effective opposition to war .
 The nation was psychologically prepared for war and launched into the fray with zeal and enthusiasm, 9.9.1.1 . 9.2.1 is the first time the nation has taken part in a war .
 The United States refrained from threats and coercion against Japan until 1940 . The U.S. refrained to threaten Japan until the end of WWII .
 Roosevelt counted on the continued resistance of China and a growing dissatisfaction and impatience on the part of the Japanese public and the Navy with the sacrifices required for Japan's aggressive policies .
 Japanese political power was viewed as a counterweight to communism in Asia . Political power was seen as an effective counterweight in Asia's communist world .
 During the winter of 1940-1941 the situation became more serious, but U.S. policy continued to oppose war . The situation was more serious in 1940-41 .
 The terms for peace were irreconcilable with Japanese interests . The U.S. tried to negotiate with the Japanese, but failed to find a way to reach an agreement .
 In sum, the Japanese felt that the political power of the United States, based on democratic principles, was weak and consequently they had little respect for it . The U.S. felt that it was weak .
 U.S. efforts to avoid "creating an incident" seemed to confirm these views . United States efforts to . avoid ""creating an incident"" seemed to . confirm these . views .
 Domestic political power became identified with support for war after 16 October 1941 . Since Japan was ruled by an authoritarian regime, domestic political power was identified with war support .
 Political maneuvers and negotiations were used to deceive the United States and hide the true Japanese commitment to war . Subsequently, political maneuvers and . negotiations were . used to . deceive the U.S. and to hide . the true . Japanese commitment . to war was used to conceal the true
 The Japanese were cognizant of the superior military strength of the United States. The U.S. was a major ally of the Soviet Union in the Cold War .
 They gambled that we would not ""choose" to win a long war, however, and decided to resist an American counteroffensive as long as necessary to grind down American morale and will to win . The U.S. gambled they would not "choose"" to win
 Japan was well aware that she would become militarily impotent unless her forces were supplied with the necessary raw materials which were being embargoed . The embargo was imposed on Japan's supply of raw materials .
 The Japanese military played a direct role in moving the nation toward war . The nation's military helped push Japan toward war in the war .
 The Navy served as a moderating influence for peace until the summer of 1941 . The choice became agreement with the United States, prolonged sacrifices due to shortages or war .
 The Navy had previously opposed moving southward until an agreement had been reached in China . The Army consistently pressed for war, while the Navy consistently opposed war .
 The more militant voices became predominant in November of 1941 when General Hideki Tojo became Prime Minister . Diplomats failed to offer any hope of accommodation with the United States .
 The United States had the resources Japan desperately needed to maintain its preeminence as a major power in the Far East . The U.S. had to provide the resources needed to keep Japan preeminently in power .
 The successively stricter U.S. embargoes against Japan served as a challenge rather than a restraint upon Japan's aggressive policies . The successive U. States embargos against Japan .
 Secretary Hull's repeated warnings that such embargoes would reduce any remaining influence of Japan's advocates for peace were realized . Secretary of State Hull warned of the dangers of the embargos .
 The exercise of the joint American-British-Dutch boycotts, freezing of assets, and embargoes of oil, bauxite, and other vital raw materials, forced Japanese leaders to attack Pearl Harbor on 8 December 1 . This does not deny that such an attack might have eventual
 Japanese intelligence operating from Honolulu supplied military authorities in Tokyo with accurate information on United States deployments in Pearl Harbor . Japanese intelligence also advised of the likelihood of a successful surprise attack on the facility .
 Its success enabled the Japanese attack forces to deal a crippling blow to the U.S. Navy in the Pacific .
 American intelligence failed to produce an accurate reading of Japanese capabilities and intentions prior to the attack on Pearl Harbor . U.S. intelligence didn't produce a reading of the Japanese capabilities prior to Pearl Harbor despite the fact that we possessed a massive variety of information sources .
 The intelligence resources available to the U.S. included: Top priority Japanese worldwide diplomatic codes . The intelligence . resources available were those of Japan's top priority Japanese diplomatic codes.
 Results of radio traffic analysis which allowed the pinpointing of various Japanese fleet units . Many codes used by Japanese agents around the world .
 The competent economic and political analysis provided by Ambassador Grew in Tokyo and various naval attaches and military observers throughout the Far East . Results of British intelligence provided by British intelligence .
 Information provided by experienced foreign correspondents and newspapermen in the Far East .
 Her conclusion is that we failed to anticipate Pearl Harbor because all the signals were imbedded in an atmosphere of ""noise"" — not for want of relevant information but rather an overabundance of irrelevant data .
 In Washington, the signals from Pearl Harbor were competing with a plethora of signals from Europe . Pearl Harbor signals from the U.S. are competing with those from Europe and Japan .
 In Honolulu, the competition was with signals indicating a Japanese attack on Russia and expectations of local sabotage . The U.S. is expected to launch a counter-attack on Russia .
 Military retaliation was the only U.S. option seriously considered . Military retaliation is the only United States option seriously considering .
 President considered each of these actions, after listening to his advisers, he did none of them . The President considered several of the actions, but did not follow his advisers .
 He felt unsure what Congress and the people would approve until the Japanese military movement became better defined . He said he felt unsure until the military movement was defined .
 He would not have to contend with isolationists if the Philippines, Guam, or Hawaii were attacked . The isolationists would not be the isolationists .
 With Japan left to decide how the issue of war and peace would be brought before the nation, there was less risk of costly dissention and reaction which would probably have benefited Japan .
 Historians have pointed out that the U.S. had been led in ignorance by the Japanese attack . As a result, the American people learned more of what had taken place before the attack, they had a sense of ignorance .
 After the ouster of the Konoye Cabinet, Japan saw war as the only alternative . The Japanese government was overthrown by Konoyo Cabinet . The U.S. government was forced to withdraw from Japan .
 The decision to attack Hawaii first rather than move directly south was primarily a strategic gamble . The U.S. launched the attack on Hawaii in 1941 .
 The superiority of American forces was recognized and the eventuality of war against the United States was accepted . The U.S. was accepted by the British Empire .
 A direct attack on the United States Pacific Fleet in Hawaii to achieve maximum immediate destruction was accepted as the best alternative action by Japan . The U.S. Pacific Fleet was thus accepted as a best alternative to attack .
 It was the culmination of an opportunistic foreign policy, initiated months before, consisting of probing for weaknesses, disguising aims, and moving cautiously step-by-step in search of an expedient time to move .
 The decision to go to war was made by the Japanese military leaders within the framework of the Imperial Conference . The decision was made to go war in 1945 .
 President Roosevelt has been criticized for not informing the American public and Congress of the train of events and their implications before the attack on Pearl Harbor .
 The decision to go to war was a reflex and political declarations later caught up with military realities . Once the attack came, however, the decision was made, however .
 The warmth of Cuban relations with the Soviet Union increased noticeably after Defense Minister Raoul Castro's visit to Moscow in July . The warmest relations between Cuba and Russia increased noticeably .
 Refugee groups began to claim that Soviet military ""technicians"" were arriving in Cuba in large numbers . Refugees later claimed they were actually part of military units constructing bases in Cuba .
 Intelligence experts largely discounted these reports due to the lack of definitive proof . Intelligence experts say they are skeptical of the motives of the refugees .
 U.S. Navy air reconnaissance photographed all ships visiting Cuba during the summer of 1962 . Air reconnaissance photos were taken of ships visiting the island .
 High level U-2 overflights were conducted at the rate of once each fortnight until September when they were increased to once every week . High level overflights began at the end of September .
 By late September, U.S. intelligence had evidence of large numbers of Soviet military personnel, surface-to-air missile sites, and IL-28 light bombers .
 Premier Castro was making increasingly bellicose boasts and threats on Cuban radio and television and in the Cuban press . Castro's personal pilot was overheard to boast that Cuba had everything, including atomic weapons .
 Central Intelligence Agency chief John McCone suggested to President as early as August that he believed the Soviet Union was installing offensive weapons in Cuba .
 Robert McNamara, Dean Rusk, and other Presidential advisers continued to argue, however, that the buildup was merely defensive . McNamara and Rusk argued, based on their experience, beliefs, and perceptions .
 The United States did not begin low level reconnaissance flights over Cuba until after the President's 22 October speech . The U.S. began the flights in October .
 Early reliable reliable information on the number of Soviet troops and their equipment was difficult to obtain . Early reliable information was therefore difficult to get .
 If American intelligence analysts and foreign policy decisionmakers had been more ready to intellectually accept the introduction of strategic missiles into Cuba, certain ""signs" might have been detected earlier .
 Many Soviet ships arriving in Cuba were riding high in the water, thus indicating that they were carrying space-consuming cargo . One such sign was that many Soviet ships arrived in Cuba on high water . This sign of Soviet ships riding in water indicated that they would be carrying space consuming cargo .
 There were increasing indications from refugees, press reports, foreign intelligence sources on the ground, and from U.S. reconnaissance and visual observation that the USSR intended to install offensive surface-to-surface missiles in Cuba .
 Like Pearl Harbor, we failed to anticipate the Cuban crisis and recognize the signals, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer says the crisis was not because of a lack of relevant information but because of an overabundance of irrelevant data and a predisposition on the part of American officials to
 As soon as the U.S. knew of the Soviet offensive buildup in Cuba, many envisioned the possibility of another Pearl Harbor-type attack against the United States . The American leadership and public knew about the Soviet build-up in Cuba .
 This comparison and the fears it evoked influenced much of the counsel given to the President . The comparison and fears evoked . It led to some of the President's most important decisions .
 It undoubtedly made a strong U.S. reaction more likely and served to unite public opinion behind the President's policies . It also made it more likely that a strong reaction would be more likely .
 The secrecy and deception associated with the Soviet buildup also served to convince the nations of Latin America that they too were threatened by the missiles . The secrecy led to the creation of the Soviet missile program .
 It helped sway world opinion in favor of the United States and thus made the fulfillment of Soviet strategy more difficult . The U.S. helped sway the world opinion against the Soviet Union, according to the historian .
 Militarily, the surprise had little effect since the missiles were discovered before the installation was completed and full SAM coverage had been achieved . The surprise came after the installation of the missiles had been completed .
 Had this not been the case, the U.S. would have faced a fait accompli from which it would have been extremely difficult to force the Russians to retreat so gracefully .
 American intelligence assembled startling evidence which gradually led to the development of the hypothesis that Soviet offensive weapons were being installed in Cuba .
 The speed of the Russian buildup intensified the urgency for U.S. countermeasures . The time was actually rather long in terms of crisis decisionmaking, but the speed of Russia's buildup intensified .
 The fact that no immediate action was required probably significantly affected the eventual outcome . No immediate action required probably affected the outcome .
 The Soviets had planned to have their SAM defenses completed prior to installation of the offensive missiles to prevent a premature American discovery . The Soviets planned to install the SAM defenses prior to the installation of offensive missiles .
 Delays were encountered, however, which allowed the U.S. to detect the installation and therefore confront the Soviet Union prior to completion .
 The result was that the USSR was caught off-guard and put on the defensive . The result of the USSR being caught off the defensive was that it had to adapt quickly to the situation .
 The alternative chosen by the United States to meet the missile threat allowed Soviet decisionmakers time to reevaluate their actions and avoid direct military confrontation . The alternative to the U.S. missile threat was chosen by Soviet leaders .
 The flexibility of the quarantine delayed any confrontation with the Soviet Union approximately 24 hours . It was the first time the U.S. government had been able to quarantined a Soviet Union .
 The U.S. saw the existence of offensive missiles in Cuba as a serious, direct military threat . The United States saw it as a threat to Cuba .
 It endangered the early warning system and increased Russian first-strike capacity against the U.S. by 50 percent, it said . It also increased Russia's first strike capability against the United States by 50 per cent .
 The success of Soviet strategy in Cuba in Cuba would have challenged U.S. leadership of the Western world . Successful Soviet strategy would've challenged United States leadership of Western world, says historian .
 U.S. enemies would have proven their ""paper tiger" thesis and presented other challenges at perceived weak points around the world . United States enemies would've proven their 'paper tiger' thesis .
 The Soviet Union claimed only to be interested in maintaining Cuba's sovereignty but risked a carefully constructed policy of peaceful coexistence during the missile crisis in order to strengthen its hand in global strategic sense .
 A successful conclusion of the crisis from a Russian viewpoint would have left the United States completely discredited in the Western Hemisphere . Russia would have destroyed any notions of a sphere of influence in the area . The U.S. would have been completely discredited by a successful conclusion .
 It would have forced the Americans to pay such a high price for the removal of the missiles from Cuba that the U.S. would have been discredited in Europe and Asia also . The United States would have had to pay more than $1 billion to remove the missiles .
 In addition to the obvious military benefits, a victory in Cuba would have strengthened Soviet leadership of the Communist world . The Soviet Union would have been strengthened by a victory .
 Valuable propaganda would have been gained to exploit against the Chinese critics . The Chinese government should have been able to exploit the situation in China .
 Respect for Soviet military power and diplomatic ability would have increased throughout the world. respect for Soviet power and diplomacy would have been increased in the world .
 The interests of U.S. allies in the Western Hemisphere were directly threatened by the installation of Soviet missiles in Cuba . The Soviet missiles were installed in Cuba in 1961 .
 President Kennedy stressed the vulnerability of cities in Latin America to an attack . President Kennedy: "Cities in Latin American are vulnerable to attack. They are vulnerable"
 An American diplomatic defeat would inevitably lead to increased Communist subversion throughout the hemisphere . These friendly governments also recognized that an American . defeat would . inevitably lead . to increased . Communist subverted throughout the . hemisphere .
 American allies in Europe felt threatened by the consequences of the missiles if not by the missiles themselves . U.S. allies in the region felt threatened, but not by missiles .
 Turkey and Italy felt directly threatened due to the presence of U.S. missiles on their territory and their use as a pawn during the negotiations . The two countries felt threatened by the presence and the use of the United States missiles .
 West Berliners worried that the future of their city would be bargained away if the U.S. backed down . The U.K. refused to negotiate a deal with West Berlin .
 The fact that Allied interests coincided with American interests served to strengthen U.S. resolve and determination in the confrontation . The United States was strengthened by Allied interests in the fight against the Nazis .
 The Organization of American States met on Tuesday, 23 October, and gave a 19-0 vote in favor of U.S. policy . The vote was given to the United States by a unanimous vote .
 This unexpected display of support had both major psychological and practical effect upon the Soviet leaders in forcing them to back down over Cuba . The Soviet leaders were forced back down on Cuba .
 As far as Russia's Eastern European allies were concerned, their interests were not considered but their support was demanded and unconditional . Russia's East European allies are not considered considered, as well as their interests .
 Soviet concern for the interests and existence of the Castro regime may have been genuine, but the predominant factor in Soviet actions was that the installation of the missiles would benefit the Soviet Union foremost .
 Benefits to the security and prestige of Cuba in the hemisphere were of secondary importance . Benefits to Cuba's security was secondary importance to the country's prestige and security, the president said .
 The United States reacted unilaterally in the Cuban missile crisis since its vital security interests were threatened . The need for secrecy dictated action without prior consultation on a global scale .
 President Kennedy sought to retain control of decisionmaking . Kennedy realized that no international organization or diplomatic consultations could force the removal of missiles .
 U.S. allies were informed of American decisions after the fact . United States allies were also informed of the U.K. decision to withdraw from Syria .
 Kennedy did not consult NATO allies before taking actions which risked world war . Khrushchev apparently sought the opinions of his Warsaw Pact allies before deciding to install the missiles in the Western Hemisphere .
 Even during the actual crisis, the Soviet Union displayed its disregard for Castro by failing to consult with him . The Soviet Union did not consult with Castro during the crisis .
 Cuba played a minimal role in the UN talks . Cuban representatives expressed their dissatisfaction with the final agreement . Cuba played only a small part in the talks .
 American public opinion was generally aware that U.S. relations with Cuba were becoming more strained . Public opinion was not officially told that the Soviet Union had placed offensive missiles in Cuba .
 The American public strongly supported the position taken by the President once the nature of the crisis became apparent . The U.S. public supported the President's decision to take action .
 Those critical of his actions primarily felt that stronger steps should have been taken .
 Most major newspapers editorialized in favor of the President after his 22 October speech . Most of the major newspapers have expressed support for the President .
 Khrushchev was forced to moderate his position on Cuba . American public reaction may have been one factor in forcing him to moderate position .
 The Soviet and Cuban peoples were kept unaware of the actual realities t decisions and_terms of negotiation during the crisis .
 It is doubtful that their opinions affected decisionmaking in any way . It is therefore doubtful that they influenced decisionmaking .
 Khrushchev seriously misjudged the leadership abilities and determination of President Kennedy because of his failure to react forcefully to the Bay of Pigs crisis and to the construction of the Berlin Wall, he says .
 Soviet Union tried to effect a major strategic realignment in Cuba . Soviet impressions led to a general misunderstanding of the strengths of democracies . This led to the Soviet Union to attempt a major realignment .
 Khrushchev undoubtedly viewed this grand strategy as a means of assuring the stability of his own power and his influence internally . The grand strategy was meant to assure the stability and influence of the Soviet Union in the world .
 Political considerations prevented more intensive U.S. reconnaissance over Cuba which might have led to an earlier disclosure of the construction of the Soviet missile sites . There is some indication that political considerations prevented the earlier disclosure .
 Recent U-2 downings have sensitized U.S. policymakers to the political repercussions of these flights . Recent U.2 downsings have raised concerns about the political implications of the U.3-2 program .
 The State Department had not forgotten Khrushchev's use of a similar incident during his Paris summit with Eisenhower . The State Dept. had used the incident in a similar way during a Paris summit .
 UN leaders participated in the resolution of the crisis, but their importance in the final settlement was minimal . UN leaders took part in the crisis but their influence was minimal in the settlement .
 The diplomatic and political pressures brought against the Soviet Union by U.S. allies in Europe and Latin America revealed another Soviet miscalculation and significantly affected the outcome of the crisis .
 Latin American nations offered military forces and bases to enforce the quarantine . Latin American countries offered to help quarantine the region .
 Diplomatic action secured prohibitions on African or Caribbean air routes to Cuba for Soviet planes which might carry missile parts or nuclear warheads . U.S. diplomatic action secured the prohibitions .
 Had the United States been diplomatically isolated, Soviet audacity would have risen . Had the U.S. been isolated, it would have been easier for the Soviets to rise .
 The superior military position of the U.S. in the Caribbean prior to the completion of the planned missile installations was well understood by the Soviet Union . Soviet Union was well aware of the United States' superior position .
 Russia calculated that the U.S. would not react forcefully to the introduction of strategic weapons into Cuba . The Russians calculated, however, that the United States would not respond forcefully .
 Soviet strategists were convinced that their secrecy and deception and the rapidity of construction would preclude any effective U.S. response . The rapidity and secrecy of the construction would prevent any effective United States response .
 This conclusion was strengthened by the failure of the U.S. to respond to the previous buildup of conventional defensive weapons systems . The United States has not responded to previous buildup to conventional weapons systems, experts say .
 Military calculations were very significant in Khrushchev's Cuban strategy . The Cuban military calculations were significant in the Soviet Union's military strategy .
 Its success would have meant a dramatic automatic increase in the Soviet Union's preemptive strike capability . The Soviet Union would have had a dramatic increase in its preemptive strikes .
 Greater targeting flexibility and missile reliability would have resulted in greater targeting flexibility, officials say . The missile system would have been able to target the missile system with greater accuracy .
 The American missile warning system would have been bypassed and our primary deterrent in 1962, the United States bomber force . The U.S. bomber force in 1962 was largely discredited . The United States would have had to rely on its bomber force to defend itself from the threat .
 As a result, the entire global strategic balance of power would have been altered by decreasing the American-Soviet imbalance . The American-Russian imbalance would have changed the world's strategic balance by decreasing it .
 Cuban missiles could have been used to diminish U.S. influence in the Western Hemisphere by lending credibility to Soviet boasts of nuclear superiority . Cuba would undoubtedly serve as an important base for intelligence gathering and electronic surveillance against the United States .
 When the nature of the threat became clear and the decision was made by the President to use force if necessary, various tactical deployments were hurtled to make U.S. determination credible to the Soviet Union .
 The USSR had no real conventional military option with which to challenge the U.S. threat . The USSR would not be able to fight the American threat once the confrontation emerged .
 Neither air protection nor surface and submarine escorts were available to break the United States blockade . The U.S. blockade was the first time the blockade was ever attempted to break it .
 The massive U.S. preparations for a possible invasion of Cuba gave Khrushchev clear evidence of his military inferiority in the area .
 Nuclear war would not have served to achieve any of his original aims and would have resulted in unacceptable losses, he says . Nuclear war 'would not have succeeded any of its original aims'
 The United States utilized economic pressures to make it more difficult for the Soviet Union to supply Cuba . The U.S. made it harder for the Soviets to provide Cuba with food supplies .
 During September 1962, the State Department sought to persuade other Western nations to reduce or terminate shipment of supplies to Cuba . The State Department was trying to persuade others to reduce supplies to the island .
 The embargo presented a serious challenge since most shipping to Cuba was done in non-Communist flag ships . Most of the time, it was done by ships carrying non-communist flags . The embargo was imposed by the Cuban government .
 There is little indication that the embargo had any real impact on the subsequent crisis . The embargo had little impact on subsequent crisis.
 Little was heard about it after the 22 October speech and speculation has arisen that either the United States quietly abandoned it to show gratitude for the diplomatic support extended by our allies during the crisis . Or else it was initially intended only to serve as a ""counterdeception""
 The quality of the photographs proved to the world the validity of U.S. charges, the U.N. charges .
 The timely discovery of the construction precluded a more serious crisis which would have been inevitable if the U.S. had been faced with completed bases fully protected by SAHs .
 Intelligence analysts and decisionmakers failed, however, to accurately perceive Soviet strategy prior to the crisis . Intelligence analysts failed to accurately see Soviet strategy before the crisis, however .
 They either misunderstood or disregarded factors which might have led the Soviet Union to undertake gambles in order to improve its strategic posture, say experts .
 The pervasive belief that the Soviet Union would not deploy strategic weapons in Cuba caused the Administration to decline serious consideration of conflicting intelligence hypotheses . The Administration believed that the U.S. would not engage in Cuba in Cuba .
 It would have meant ignoring previous pledges and commitments, destroying our future credibility, and giving the Soviet Union a great political victory, says David Cameron .
 The use of diplomacy alone was rejected as being an inadequate response to the level of threat . Diplomatic diplomacy was rejected by the UN as being inadequate to combat the threat .
 The limitations of the United Nations were recognized by Washington as well as the fact that the many small new nations who comprised the bulk of the General Assembly membership would almost certainly oppose any action by a large nation .
 The Soviet Union had a veto and Ambassador Zorin of the Soviet Union was Chairman of the Security Council in October . In addition to the veto, the Soviet U.S. also had vetoes .
 Diplomatic protest was used in conjunction with more direct, forceful action, to legitimize the U.S. position . Diplomatic action was used, however, to support the United States position .
 This alternative was judged unnecessarily aggressive. Although given serious consideration, this alternative was deemed unnecessarily aggressive . The alternative was considered to be the most effective alternative to the current policy .
 Russian MIGs and IL-28 bombers could have still attacked Guantanamo and the southeastern United States. Civilians and Soviet military would undoubtedly have been killed . Civilians would have undoubtedly been killed in the attack .
 Robert Kennedy, among others, saw such an action as a ""Pearl Harbor in reverse"" which would have harmed the moral position of the U.S. for decades . Robert Kennedy saw such a move as a 'Pearl Harbour in reverse'
 This option would have seriously endangered U.S. allies in Berlin, Turkey, etc. and could possibly have led to nuclear war . This option could have endangered United States allies in Germany, Turkey and possibly led to war .
 Enforce a maritime blockade of all traffic entering Cuban territorial waters . Blockade of Cuban waters would stop all Cuban vessels entering Cuban waters .
 This course would have unnecessarily irritated many European allies and would have been clearly illegal in terms of UNCLASSIRED international law . This course of action would have . clearly illegal under international law, it is claimed .
 It would have weakened America's moral case and would have been in opposition to previous U.S. policy regarding freedom of the seas . The decision to take the ship out of the world would be a violation of American law .
 Soviet ships delivering missiles to Cuba were bound for only those Soviet ships . Enforce a quarantine to stop only those ships carrying missiles . The U.S. government was forced to quarantine the ships .
 It permitted a more controlled military escalation and greater political flexibility, it said . The move was a step to allow the U.S. to expand its military operations in the Middle East .
 "It represented a strong, positive action but did not preclude negotiation," he said . "It was a strong and positive action," he added. "But it did not necessarily preclude negotiation"
 It was viewed as moral and legal in terms of U.S. national purposes and international law . The decision was seen as legal and moral and considered moral .
 It was the credible response least likely to escalate into nuclear war . The U.S. responded with a credible response to the threat of nuclear weapons .
 A possible naval engagement in the Caribbean was viewed as the best strategic encounter in terms of U.S. capabilities . A possible engagement is viewed as a possible naval encounter .
 A temporary stalemate prior to any confrontation allowed time for a buildup of conventional forces in Florida and the Southeast, thereby strengthening the U.S. position .
 The United States combined diplomatic initiatives and military threats in a strategy to force a Russian retreat . The U.S. combined diplomatic initiative and military .
 The Soviet Union, confronted with the American response, was forced to withdraw or face the risk of nuclear war . The U.S. withdrew or faced the unacceptable risk of nuke war .
 U.S. military superiority in the region left no other real choice . United States military superiority left no real choice.
 This group bypassed the more formal arrangements of both the Cabinet and the National Security Council . This is the first time the government has bypassed its more formal arrangement .
 President constantly sought to maintain channels of communication to his staff and access to diverse sources of information . Counsel during the crisis was sought from a small number of advisers, he says .
 The final decision to pursue a simultaneous policy of diplomacy and quarantine was made by Kennedy in the face of significant high level opposition . Kennedy's final decision was made to pursue the simultaneous policy in spite of significant opposition .
 All indications point to the fact that the Cuban adventure was primarily the result of Khrushchev* s personal perceptions and strategy . The Cuban adventure is primarily a result of personal perceptions, strategy and perceptions .
 There were a number of conflicting signals prior to the 1973 Middle East War, as there were prior to Pearl Harbor and the discovery of Soviet offensive missiles in Cuba .
 Egyptian and Syrian reconciliation with King Hussein of Jordan after nearly two years of hostility marked the initiation of a new phase of Arab rapprochement . In September, Egypt and Syria's reconciliation with Jordan's King Hussein marked the beginning of a renewed Arab-Arab relationship . Egypt's Egyptian and
 President Sadat visited Saudi Arabia and Qatar, where he was assured of new assistance . Before meeting Hussein and President Hafez al-Assad of Syria in Cairo, Sadat met with President Hussein .
 Kuwaiti leader visited Cairo and offered Egypt similar promises . The next week he visited Egypt and promised similar promises to Egypt .
 Reports indicate the three oil-rich nations offered to give Egypt more than $1.1 billion to purchase modern weapons . Reports indicate that the three countries offered to buy Egypt's weapons . Egypt is one of the world's most populous countries .
 King Faisal began to Indicate his desire to use oil as a political weapon by freezing current production levels . The U.S. showed a willingness to revise its Middle East policy and follow a more even-handed approach .
 Faisal previously had been a rather conservative force in the region . He was considered solidly pro-American .
 The Syrian-Jordanian Accords allowed Syria to move a large number of her troops from the Jordanian border to the ceasefire lines along the Golan Heights . Syria's troops have been stationed in the area since the start of the conflict .
 Jordanian troops withdraw from the Syrian frontier to the Jordan River truce lines with Israel . Jordanian troops also withdrew from the Syria border to the Jordanian River truce line .
 Israeli troop movements were downplayed in the Israeli press . No military initiative was forecast for the Israeli military in advance of the move .
 The Egyptians moved large quantities of tanks, armored personnel, carriers, guns, and trucks to within a few miles of the canal in late September . The Egyptians have been moving large amounts of tanks and armored personnel .
 There was little concern shown toward subsequent Egyptian troop concentrations along the Suez Canal .
 These movements were viewed as a part of predicted training exercises which are held annually at the same time of the year . These movements are viewed as part of a predicted training exercise .
 These maneuvers were unusual, however, in that they occurred during the holy month of Ramadan . These maneuvers occurred during Ramadan .
 Not until the first week of October was there enough unusual activity to raise suspicions of an Arab offensive . Not until October 31, there were unusual activity .
 While Israeli forces were put on alert, there was no general mobilization and no official fear that war was imminent . No general mobilization was put on .
 Russian airlift from Damascus and Cairo to return home virtually all Soviet military personnel from both countries . Perhaps the strongest signal was the return home of Soviet personnel from Syria and Cairo .
 Jerusalem merely warned the U.S. that a major Arab attack appeared probable . It asked that Cairo and Damascus be warned to desist . Jerusalem did not say what happened .
 Israel claims to have known about the offensive several days prior to the attack but resisted the temptation to attack so the world would recognize the Arabs as aggressors . Israel says it knew about the attack several days before the attack, but did not attack .
 Few Americans predicted a renewed outbreak of fighting in the Middle East . Few predicted the renewed outbreak in the region .
 The United States apparently depends on second sources for a great deal of its intelligence in the Middle East . The U.S. apparently relies heavily on intelligence from second sources .
 Such sources, although generally reliable, provide information which is difficult to analyze and assess . Such sources of information are difficult to assess and assess, such as the Internet .
 The primary impact of surprise in the October War was that the Israelis suffered a series of initial setbacks which were costly to reverse . Israel suffered a number of setbacks in the first two years of the war . The Israelis suffered the most costly setbacks to reverse in October War .
 The confidence gained by the Arabs in these early victories helped eliminate some of the humiliation remaining from the June 1967 war . Secondly, the confidence gained in the Arab Arab forces was that they were able to defeat the British army .
 The attack put the Arabs at an initial strategic advantage and proved the Israelis were not immune to military defeat . It was the first time the Israelis had been defeated in the Arab Spring .
 The long-range Impact of these psychological readjustments at future peace negotiations can not be predicted . The long range impact of these readjustements at future negotiations can't be predicted.
 The assumption that the Arabs would be branded as aggressors and condemned by world opinion, as a result of the surprise attack was not realized to the degree expected by the Israelis . Israel expected to be branded aggressors by the world after the attack .
 Much of the world perceived the Arabs to be attempting to regain their own territory occupied by Israel since 1967 . Perhaps this was because of a desire not to be the target of the new-found Arab weapon of petropolitics .
 Many Israeli assumptions had to be reevaluated in the wake of new political and military realities . In any case, many Israeli assumptions must be re-evaluated .
 The Israelis attempted to obtain world sympathy from the fact that the attack came on Yom Kippur . Israel attempted to get world sympathy with the attack . The attack was the first to occur in Israel since the bombing of the Gaza Strip .
 Had the attack come on any other holiday, they would have been scattered throughout the country . Traffic on the roads would have interfered with troop columns rushing to the front .
 It served to strengthen the mistrust many U.S. decisionmakers have felt toward military intelligence since Pearl Harbor . The U.N. has been distrustful of intelligence since the attack .
 The United States had to react quickly to prevent the Soviet airlift from upsetting the balance of forces in the area . The U.S. had to act quickly after the initiation of hostilities .
 In the later stages of the crisis, quick U.S. reaction was required to respond to the threat of Soviet intervention . Quick American reaction was needed during the crisis .
 In the final stages of battle, time became more critical as arrangements for a ceasefire attempted to keep pace with a fluid militaiy environment .
 The inability to identify precise positions on 22 October caused serious political problems in subsequent negotiations . The situation has been described as a major political impasse .
 The primary national interests of the United States in the Middle East at stake in the October 1973 war were the prevention of any single power or coalition of powers from gaining hegemony in the region and the maintenance of the security and independence of Israel .
 The interest in continued access to the petroleum assets of the region did not seem as Immediate and did not greatly influence the U.S. response .
 The United States felt that the massive Soviet airlift of arms and equipment would upset the tenuous balance which had been achieved in the region between the Arabs and the Israelis . The U.S. felt the massive airlift would upset that balance .
 A resupply of Israel was initiated to prevent the danger of her defeat or the loss of such territories as would endanger her existence in future wars or at the peace table . Israel was therefore initiated .
 Soviet moral and military support of the Arab cause has greatly increased Russia's prestige and influence in the Middle East . Russia's support for Arab causes greatly increased its prestige and power in the region .
 Their stated intention to intervene directly in the fighting further posed a serious threat to U.S. interests, the U.N. said . The U.K. has been involved in the fight in Iraq and Syria since 2003 .
 President Nixon took both diplomatic and military action to warn the Soviet Union of the consequences of intervention . Nixon took military action in response to the threat .
 Soviet Union has long desired to gain a foothold in the Middle East for geopolitical, military, and psychological reasons . The Soviet Union hopes to gain access to the region for the first time .
 The expansion of Russia's influence there would strengthen her position as a world power . The expansion would render obsolete the old U.S. policy of containment .
 Her decision to support the Arabs was based primarily on these considerations . Her decision was based on her support for the Arab Spring .
 Soviet prestige has become linked to Arab success achieved with Russian weapons . Soviet prestige is linked to success achieved in Arab Arab countries .
 In detente with the West predominated, however, when a direct confrontation with the U.S. became a danger . Soviet global interests predominated in detente, however .
 USSR, recognizing there existed no serious threat to Arab territories, chose to accept United Nations mediation rather than pursue unilateral enforcement of a ceasefire and risk U.S. retaliation . The USSR accepted the U.N. mediation .
 American allies in Europe generally viewed their primary interest in the Middle East as continued access to Arab oil . U.S. allies in the Mideast viewed the region as a source of oil for Europe .
 The Arab countries refused to cooperate with the United States, therefore* for fear that the U.S. would cut off their oil supplies . The Arab nations are afraid that their oil supply will be cut off if they don't cooperate .
 Most Western European nations warned Washington that aircraft bound for Israel could neither land nor have rights of transit over their territories . Most Western nations warned that planes bound for Israeli airspace could not land or transit over the territory .
 This position was taken by Turkey despite the fact that Soviet resupply aircraft flew over Turkey without approval and without public protest . Turkey took the decision to allow the Soviet aircraft to fly over Turkey without approval .
 The European attitude did not deter the U.S. decision to transport needed supplies to Israel .
 The result was that a special, improvised system had to be devised to rush supplies to the Israelis . The result, however, was that the Israelis had to rely on an improvised system .
 There has been much criticism of the United States by European nations . Events in the Middle East were controlled by the U.S. and the Soviet Union without consulting other interested parties .
 Israel claims to have been forced by the United States to allow the shipment of provisions to the trapped Egyptian Third Army . Israel says the U.S. forced to allow it to do so .
 The United States and the Soviet Union inform rather than coordinate with their respective Mideast clients when it is in their mutual interest . The U.S. and the former Soviet Union are allies in the Middle East .
 Reports vary concerning Arab coordination with the Soviet Union prior to the attack . GeNHOENTIAL CONFIDENTIAL .
 Indications such as the Russian troop evacuation, however, support the contention of Russian foreknowledge . Indications suggest that Russian troops were aware of the situation .
 The Israelis, likewise, are usually forced to coordinate with the U.S. because of their dependence on American military aid . The Israelis are also dependent on the United States for their military assistance . The Israeli government has been criticized for not cooperating with the Palestinians .
 Despite minor trends to the contrary, the U.S. public is predominantly pro-Israel . The United States public, in general, is mostly pro-Israeli .
 There is also great support for President Nixon's policy of detente with the Russians and keeping the great powers in control .
 The factors of America* 8 influential Jewish population and our consciousness of being a nation of immigrants should not be ignored . America* is a nation that has a conscious consciousness of immigrants .
 Most important in explaining U.S. support for Israel is the American ideal of fair play and sympathy for the underdog . Israel is a major ally in the Middle East, but Israel is not the only one .
 President Nixon's pro-Israel orientation probably played a substantial role in Nixon's actions . Nixon's support for Israel was shown in Congress, according to historian John Avlon .
 Even the oil industry remained fairly objective amid promises of higher prices, increased stock values and profits . Oil prices are expected to be higher in the near future, and there are incentives for a renewed search for other sources of energy .
 "This industry position allowed the voice of the American general public to be more influential," says CNN's John Sutter .
 President Nixon had to force Brezhnev not to carry out a private threat . During the most serious hours of the crisis, President Nixon forced him to back down .
 Mutual Interest in the preservation of detente, after the U.S. displayed its determination in a show of force, allowed a peaceful resolution by political means .
 Even Soviet and American exchanges in the U.N. were rather restrained . The U.S. and the Soviet Union exchanged less openly .
 Summits and special emissary exchanges were utilized to maintain communication with the Soviets and both sides of the Arab-Israeli confrontation throughout the crisis .
 The importance of politics was best shown in the final outcome, however, however . It was not the first time politicians had been involved in the White House .
 Both the United States and the USSR modified their previous positions concerning Israeli withdrawal by jointly sponsoring the UN ceasefire resolution . Both the U.S. and the Soviet Union changed their positions by modifying their previous statements .
 Mutual promises to pressure their respective clients probably ended the fighting . Mutual promises of pressure from the respective clients ended the fight .
 The reluctance of the U.S. to get involved in another overseas war restrained definitive commitments . Oil companies were encouraged to avoid incidents and pressures from both the Arabs and the Israelis to limit reconnaissance .
 President Nixon responded quickly to counter Soviet supply activities to Arab combatants . Nixon ordered a worldwide military alert to demonstrate U.S. determination to oppose any unilateral Soviet intervention .
 Had the Russians not perceived this reaction as credible, the political resolution achieved would have been endangered . Had the Russian reaction to this reaction was not credible, it would have led to a political crisis .
 The role played by military power this time, however, was comparatively less important than during the 6-Day War .
 The Russians backed down only when President Johnson pointed the Sixth Fleet at the area of battle . The Russians had threatened to intervene with missiles against Israel, backed down .
 The Soviets withdrew their advisers from both Syria and Egypt prior to the fighting . This time, however, it was not the first time the Soviets had withdrawn advisers from Syria .
 In October, Russian military actions seemed more sublimated to diplomatic maneuvering . Russia's military actions seem more subdued to diplomatic maneuvers .
 The initial Arab military victories, combined with the heavy Soviet airlifts, forced the U.S. to react quickly in Israel's defense . The Arab victories forced the United States to respond quickly .
 The Arabs seemed to possess an unlimited supply of ammunition and their firepower was impressive . The Arab forces were impressive in the battle for control of the Arab Spring .
 The Israelis lost many aircraft due to their failure to recognize the SA-6 threat . They were forced to start a missile suppression program . Israel lost many planes due to the failure of recognition of the threat .
 U.S. forced to question Israeli air superiority and invincibility . They forced the United States to question Israel air superiority .
 Arab economic power forced European moderation and open support for the Arab cause . New-found Arab power forced EU moderation and, some cases, open support . European moderation forced by Arab power .
 It is also probable that resource needs in the area probably resulted in some moderation on the part of the U.S. The United States.
 Disunity in the West limited the credibility of threats of possible counterboycotts . Disunity also limited credibility of the West, however, according to the West .
 The Arabs also used their power to coerce the Black African states that retained relations with Israel to break them . The Arab states were also forced to break ties with Israel .
 In exchange for this support the Arabs promised to use oil embargoes to support policies of the O.A.U. against South Africa, Rhodesia, and Portugal . The Arabs promised the support in return for the support of the South African government .
 The 1973 Middle East crisis is yet another example of misinterpretation of adequate intelligence . The 1973 Mideast crisis was yet another case of misunderstood intelligence .
 Few U.S. intelligence analysts and decisionmakers believed that the Arabs were ready to risk another war with Israel . Few believed that they would risk a war with the Arabs .
 Despite warnings and clear signals of approaching conflict, we interpreted these actions in terms of preconceived notions, experience, and expectations . The actions were interpreted by people who had preconceived ideas, experience and expectations, according to CNN.com .
 The national policy of detente with the USSR and indications of developing detente between the adversaries in the Mideast made predictions of another Arab-Israeli war the subject of scorn .
 Valuable time was lost in the resupply of Israel because improvised routes had to be developed . Israel was forced to use improvised routes to get supplies .
 The use of American forces stationed in Italy, Greece, and Turkey was always considered essential to a viable U.S. policy in support of Israel .
 Military planning must now be revised in light of the refusal of those nations to allow U.S. troops and equipment stationed there to be deployed to Israel .
 American policymakers faced with the choice of continued aid to Israel or bowing to Arab warnings of reprisal . U.S. policymakers chose the former, choosing the former .
 To have done otherwise would have opened the door to initiatives toward Soviet hegemony over the Middle East and threatened the security of the state of Israel, says Israel .
 Soviet resupply effort to the Arabs by stepping up delivery of previously ordered supplies to Israel and authorizing additional aid . Match the Soviet effort with the Arab response to the Arab aid to Israel . Match that of the Soviet efforts with the Arabs .
 These actions represented the limits to which the U.S. public and Congress would go without a more defined threat . They served to warn the Soviet Union of American determination to protect its interests in the region .
 The Russians valued detente with the West and were suspicious of Arab motives and loyalties . The Russians were suspicious about Arab motives . They were suspicious that Arab motives were behind the West .
 They chose, therefore, to jointly sponsor a UN-enforced ceasefire proposal . They chose to sponsor the proposal, which they hope will be accepted by UN .
 U.S. decisionmaking during the Middle East crisis appears to have been made primarily by the President . Decisionmaking appears to be made by President Obama .
 President Nixon and Secretary of State Henry Kissinger exercised strong control over choices . The National Security Council, the Washington Special Action Group, and other similar bodies were employed to a limited degree .
 Soviet decisionmaking does not appear to be as strongly identified with any single individual as it was during the Cuba crisis . Soviet decision making is less identified with individual individuals as it is during the crisis .
 Arab decisionmaking was performed primarily by heads of state on the basis of their own particular interests . Inter-Arab conferences held prior to the fighting probably was used to coordinate the attack .
 The Egyptians realized almost any action would improve the conditions of the current stalemate . Egypt realized that any action was needed to end the unsatisfactory stalemate by evoking great power initiatives or intervention .
 Secretary of State Hull and Ambassador Nomura met approximately 40 to 50 times, usually at night, in Hull's apartment it the Wardman Park Hotel to try to avoid war . During the months preceding the Pearl Harbor attack, Hull and Nomura .
 Despite secret Japanese pressure for a Konoye-Roosevelt meeting, however, the President followed advice of Hull and Grew and avoided such an encounter on the basis that it would only serve to further complicate the foreign policy situation .
 President Kennedy and Premier Khrushchev discussed the crisis and proposed solutions in direct exchanges . President Kennedy was assassinated at the age of 60 .
 Diplomatic diplomacy was conducted via ordinary shortwave radio in order to speed the exchanges . At one point in the crisis, events were occurring at such a fast pace that diplomacy was carried out via shortwave .
 Kissinger and Assistant Secretary Sisco were hopping from capital to capital, first to Moscow and then throughout the Middle East . Kissinger and Sisco traveled with President Nixon to meet with Egyptian and Israeli leaders .
 The British and the Dutch became disturbed with the U.S. because Roosevelt refused to state the conditions under which we would supply assistance if their Eastern possessions were attacked or under what circumstances we would enter the fight .
 The U.S. and Great Britain were unable to agree on a common strategy in the Far East because of their differing interests . At Singapore, the United States and Britain failed to agree an agreement on a strategy .
 The distrust which emerged prior to and during the Second World War was accentuated by later crises . The distrust between the British and German governments was heightened in the aftermath of WWII .
 Interservice rivalries and rivalries between Naval War Plans and Naval Intelligence served to block communication and perception at Pearl Harbor .
 There was also a concentration on Atlantic and European affairs in Washington, which made comprehension of Japanese intentions, motives, and actions more difficult .
 Code analysts were believed to be too immersed in the ""oriental point of view" to be trusted entirely . Code analysts believed to have been too immersed into the 'oriental view' Code analysts thought to be 'too immersed'
 Officers in the field misunderstood the warnings from Washington . War Department misunderstood the extent to which Pearl Harbor was assured that the most likely danger from sabotage was from sabotage .
 Officials in Washington also were mistaken in their assumption that the Hawaiian Commanders knew the content of the secret Japanese cables available at headquarters which indicated the possibility of surprise attack .
 The role played by the upcoming Presidential election is difficult to assess, but undoubtedly restricted the freedom of movement available to the President . The role of the upcoming election is unclear, but it is likely to restrict the President's movement, according to the report .
 Kennedy was obviously concerned about opposition charges that he was soft on communism . Kennedy was concerned that opposition would accuse him of being soft on Communism . Kennedy: "I'm not going to be soft"
 He needed a clear political victory after the embarrassment of the Bay of Pigs defeat and the showdown with Khrushchev at Vienna at Vienna . The victory was seen as a political victory for President Nixon .
 The State Department continued to press its case concerning the dangers associated with the possible loss of a U-2 over Cuba . State Department continues to press the case .
 The Air Force said it would be better if a downed pilot were an Air Force pilot in uniform rather than a CIA agent . Air Force: It would be a better if the downed pilot was a uniformed Air Force officer rather than an agent .
 CIA's U-2's had COrjr i DCNTIAL CONFIDENT I AL been modified to give them an advantage over the Air Force . In averting Soviet SAM' 8.8, the U.2's were able to evade Soviet SAM 8 .
 Eventually, Air Force pilots were trained to fly CIA U-2's and a successful overflight did take place on 14 October . Eventually, the Air Force was able to fly the U.2 .
 State Department analysts, looking at American policy pragmatically, and the White House, under pressure from Jewish lobbying groups, detracted from a concerted consideration of the Middle East crisis . Differences of opinion .
 State Department analysts often referred to pejoratively as the ""Arabists" because of their background and leanings, found their influence diminished . Many State Dept. analysts, often known as the "Arabists," have lost their influence .
 Inevitable comparisons with the Cuban crisis and domestic pressures of the Watergate controversy may have constrained the exercise of policy options even further . The White House may have been constrained by Watergate pressures .
 Fears of an Anglo-American policy of encirclement against Japan in the Southern Pacific Ocean appear time and time again in official documents and memoirs .
 Such a perceived threat, whether real or imagined, was certain to be taken seriously by an insular power such as Japan . Japan is certain to take seriously by such a threat .
 President Kennedy felt that the Soviet Union sought to encircle the West by subverting the world's developing nations and controlling the entire southern half of the globe . The Soviet Union was believed to be trying to subvert the developing nations .
 Cuba was the primary Soviet base of subversion in Latin America . The area which was most critical to the United States. Cuba, of course, was the Soviet base .
 U.S. officials felt the Russians were reversing the old United States policy of containment adopted by the State Department after the Second World War . Perhaps American officials thought the Russians had reversed the old policy, which was reversed after World War II .
 The U.S. policy of containment sought to weaken the Soviet's viability as a world power . The policy sought to prevent the expansion of Russian influence to neighboring states . The United States sought to stop the spread of Soviet influence in neighboring countries .
 Greece, Turkey, and Iran were the focal points of U.S. efforts . The United States has been involved in the fight against Iran and Syria .
 Detente and increased Soviet sophistication and capabilities have allowed the Russians to leapfrog this ""line of defense"" and attempt to establish a power base in the Middle East .
 "Psychologically, militarily, and geopolitically, this was a natural move. Psychologically and politically, it was the right move. This was the best move. It was the most important move. I'm sure it was," he said .
 Previous false alarms and alerts served in each case to dull reaction, dull reaction and make the true nature of the crisis unrecognizable until its seriousness had escalated . Previous false alarm alerts and alerts and a numbness from facing repeated international crises served in .
 Adm. Kimmel and his forces in Hawaii checked out seven false reports of Japanese submarines in the vicinity of Pearl Harbor .
 They doubted chances of a Japanese attack and viewed such alarms as irritants to their normal pursuit of duties . They doubted chance of an attack on Japan .
 Cuban refugees had been reporting Russian missiles in Cuba for more than a year and a half prior to the first official sightings . Russian missiles were reported in Cuba by Cuban refugees for over a year .
 American analysts were skeptical of Cuban refugee groups and lessons learned from the Bay of Pigs invasion .
 Domestic political tactics of exaggeration regarding the Cuban threat in order to discredit the adminsitration were discounted by serious observers as self-serving .
 Warnings by John McCone were also suspect because of his conservative bias and the tendency of any organization such as the CIA to interpret evidence so as to justify its own existence . Warnings also suspect as to the fact that the CIA would interpret evidence to justify itself .
 The Israelis had received various signals forecasting an imminent Arab attack for more than six months prior to the October War . The Israeli government had been warned of an imminent attack by Arab forces .
 Every time such a signal was received, the government had to make a decision on mobilization of reserves . The government has to make such a decision to mobilize reserves .
 The tenseness of the situation in general made all predicted attacks suspect to both the U.S. and Israel . All predicted attacks were likely to be in response to the situation .
 Prior to Pearl Harbor, the Japanese imposed a radio blackout, gave shore leave to a number of Japanese sailors, issued false war plans to Japanese commanders . The Japanese used other methods of deception to hide their true intentions .
 In Cuba the Soviets used trees, tarpaulins, camouflage nets, paint and mud to alter the natural shape of the missiles . In Cuba, the Soviet Union used trees and camouflage nets to disguise the shape .
 As late as September the Soviet Union insisted that she had no real need for offensive bases in Cuba since her nuclear arsenal possessed sufficient forces to destroy any foe . The Soviet Union continued to insist in September that it had sufficient forces in Cuba to destroy anyone .
 They expected that the publicized defensive buildup would . serve to shroud the introduction of strategic weapons into the Caribbean .
 President Sadat of Egypt seemed to have embarked upon a new campaign of moderation . The latest outbreak of fighting follows the fall of Sadat's Egypt .
 Soviet advisers were expelled, the Egyptian-Libyan unification proposal abandoned, and new diplomatic initiatives were begun with Saudi Arabia and Jordan .
 A major policy speech by Sadat suggested surprising moderation toward the United States . A United States firm, the Bechtel Corporation, was awarded the concession to build the new Suez to the Mediterranean oil pipeline .
 This $354,400,000 agreement was the first major cooperative effort with the U.S. since Aswan Dam days . The agreement was first major cooperation effort since the dam days .
 Kissinger received indications from Kissinger that Arabs were ready to negotiate . Kissinger: 'Significant indications had been received by Secretary of State Kissinger that the Arabs were willing to negotiate'
 The Egyptians used sand colored netting to hide equipment from Israeli aircraft and observation posts on the east bank of the Suez Canal in an attempt to hide their aggressive plans .
 The MAGIC , the Kennedy-Khrushchev communications, and the Nixon-Breshnev exchanges, were closely guarded during the crises . The MAGICS . communications . and the Kennedy .-Krushchev . communications, including the Nixon and Breshnevs exchanges
 It is recognized that such sources must necessarily be read and interpreted swiftly, perhaps examination and comment by a wider range of experts might have proven beneficial .
 In each case, high level committees were directly supervising decisions and doing paperwork normally delegated to lower level commands and staffs .
 A credible argument can be made that the delay in analyzing the ""thousands of pictures"" was partially a result of the stringent secrecy imposed on all information concerning the missiles . In the case of Cuba, the delay was partially due to the strict secrecy .
 Decisionmaking in the three crises was conducted primarily in secret . Decisionmaking was also conducted in secret, according to the report .
 Roosevelt was unsure of the reaction of the U.S. public to war and sought to avoid the issue as long as possible . Roosevelt wanted to avoid war with the United States public for years .
 The Americans realized that events were becoming more serious, but this was only a vague impression before Pearl Harbor . Pearl Harbor was the first time the U.S. became aware of the threat .
 During the Cuban crisis the public began to reexamine Senator Keating' s explicit early warnings that Soviet longand mediumrange missiles and combat troops were in Cuba .
 President Kennedy continued to campaign on schedule in the Middle West days before the crisis .
 The Defense Department denied that the large concentration of military forces off Puerto Rico was linked with a crisis . On 21 October, the Department of Defense denied that it was linked to the crisis .
 Secretary of State Henry Kissinger stated in his news conference of 25 October that the complete extent of the Russian threat could not be revealed . Kissinger promised to disclose the full details at some later date .
 The press and the American public began to surmise that the crisis 4-5 CQNFIDENT l Ab CONFIDENTIA L might be politically inspired due to President Nixon's domestic troubles . The press surmised that the situation might be political due to the president's domestic
 Political science research, largely quantitative, has proven the operability of this tendency in crisis situations . Political science has proven that this tendency can be used in crises situations .
 In all three cases, the U.S. tended to downplay the seriousness of the situation in the interests of detente until overt action was taken by the aggressor .
 Roosevelt issued directives to avoid incidents with the Japanese at all costs . Roosevelt issued directive to avoid Japanese incidents with all costs at all times .
 He did not want a two-front war and refused to accept it as a possibility for a long time, he said . He said: "I didn't want it to be a possibility"
 The U.S. did not want to accept the actions they saw being taken by the Russians and the Arabs . Likewise, in Cuba and the Middle East, the United States didn't want to see the actions being taken .
 The tendency is great to ignore small bits of information which, when combined and tested in a conceptual framework, may prove significant . Under such conditions, the tendency is often to ignore little bits of data which, if combined, could prove significant.
 It has been said that in foreign affairs, preparation, judgment, and experience are important, but luck is essential . It is said in the world, preparation and judgment is important but luck must be luck .
 Prior to the Pearl Harbor attack, the U.S. stopped all traffic on the northwest passage to Russia .
 This made visual observation of the Pearl Harbor task force impossible . This made it impossible to observe the task force .
 The 7 December Hawaiian radio blackout may be ascribed to bad luck . The use of commercial wire for the last alert message rather than the scrambler telephone may be a mistake . The blackout may have been caused by bad luck.
 The crisis and its preceding events occurred during the hurricane season made intelligence all the more difficult . The fact that the crisis and . its . preceding events . occurred during . the . hurricane season . made intelligence . difficult .
 The United States intelligence community remembered all too well the political explosion surrounding the Soviet downing of an American U-2 flight on 1 May 1960 . The U.S. intelligence community remembers the political fallout surrounding the incident .
 They feared additional publicity would lead to world outcries which would force the abandonment of future U-2 flights . They feared further publicity would force them to abandon the flights .
 The practice of flying up one side of Cuba and down the other would be replaced by a policy of more peripheral observation . Based primarily on State Department fears of more political incidents, it was decided that the policy would be changed .
 The fact that the United States faced a serious fuel crisis even before the October War gave U.S. decisionmakers additional incentives to encourage moderation and compromise . The United States found itself faced with a serious . fuel crisis .
 The timing of certain events preceding the crisis which have been interpreted by the West as Arab deception may better be described as luck . It is better described as 'luck' rather than 'Arab deception'
 Research in decisionmaking theory and crisis diplomacy during recent years has made great strides toward explaining strategic surprise .
 Dulles and Russia"" in Enemies in Politics , 1967, ed. by Daniel J Finley, 30. -CnNFinFNTIA . .
 Knorr's definition may also be added to his definition of 'rational rationality' Knorr says an opponent acts with unexpected rationality .
 By late November 1941, United States policymakers had a firm conception of Japanese military plans . U.S. policymakers were aware of the Japanese plans .
 Evidence to the contrary given by an Army intelligence report in the fall of 1941 was dismissed by policymakers . Evidence to have been given by the U.S. Army intelligence in 1941 .
 Such a bold move by the Japanese was regarded as too radical a departure from normal behavior to be taken seriously . Such a radical move was seen as too bold a departure .
 Installation of offensive missiles in Cuba by the Soviet Union was likewise considered irrational and improbable . The Soviet Union also considered to be irrational and unlikely to install offensive missiles .
 The Stenriis Report on the crisis attributed the failure to predict Russia's moves to certain ""preconceptions"" of the intelligence community . The report was published by the National Institute of Security Studies .
 A ""substantial error"" was noted in the intelligence community to the view that it would be incompatible with Soviet policy to introduce strategic missiles in Cuba . The intelligence community believed it would not be compatible with the Soviet policy .
 An Analysis of Policy Formulation in Terms of Current Decision Making Theory in 1971, 1971, 393. 6us Congress, Senate, Committee on Armed Services, Preparedness Investigating Subcommittee, Investigation of the Prepriedness Program , Interim Report on Cuban Military Buildup , 1961
 The role of behavioral surprise was also important in the 1973 Middle East crisis . The crisis was the first of its kind in the Middle East .
 The Arabs were badly defeated in June 1967 and the U.S. and Israeli intelligence were convinced that no new attack would be launched in the near future . The Arabs had already been defeated in the Arab Spring, but Israel was convinced that they would not attack again .
 Stereotypes against the Arabs also led to mistaken conclusions about Egyptian fighting ability and the willingness of the Soviet Union to aid them .
 Individual Arab soldier was widely believed to be the weak link in the military organization . The individual Arab soldier is believed to have been a weak link to the organization .
 U.S. and Israeli planners perceived Arab weaknesses as a result of their previous inabilities to coordinate among themselves . Politically, they perceived Arab weakness as a . result of an Arab weakness, they said .
 We had fairly accurate information on Arab equipment, but we were surprised at their ability to use it . We were surprised by the ability of the Arab forces to use their equipment, especially in the field .
 "We felt the Arabs recognized this fact and would defer any future adventures until they were in a stronger position militarily. We felt the Arab forces would defer their future adventures"
 Without a sound understanding of motivation and strategy, even the most accurate intelligence data on industrial capacity, economic development, technological advances and military arsenals is useless .
 Analysts misread both the intentions of the adversary and his willingness to take risks . In all three crises, analysts and policymakers misread the intentions and risks of the adversaries .
 At Pearl Harbor, delays of up to 54 days were reported in decoding of Japanese diplomatic messages . At least 54 days of decoding of diplomatic messages were reported at Pearl Harbor . Japan's diplomatic decryption of messages was also reported to have been delayed .
 The delay in the final warning message sent by commercial wire rather than by scrambler telephone is infamous . Of course, the delay in this case is known as the delay .
 Visual observation reported missiles as early as 29 July, overflight delayed for one month . Overflight was delayed for overflight by one month.
 A flight on 14 October produced the first evidence of medium-range missiles . The flight was the first of its kind to take part in a test flight of the missile range .
 Navy photographs of crates containing IL-28 bombers taken on 28 September were not evaluated until 9 October .
 Khrushchev's strategy was to assure that antiaircraft rockets were capable of shooting down U-2's before any missiles were in place . One of the key elements was the ability to shoot down U.2's by using anti-aircraft rockets .
 A U-2 was downed on 27 October, the Soviet plot had been discovered two weeks earlier . The Soviet plot was discovered by the Soviets two weeks before .
 In the Middle East criticism has been directed at the government of Mrs. Hamid Mubarak .
 Meir argued that delays in response to the Arab threat resulted in increased Israeli casualties . Meir: Delays in response led to Israeli casualties increased in Israel .
 The effect of delays in the American resupply efforts was significant due to European policies forbidding the use of their territories in such efforts . European policy forbidding use of territories in resupplies was significant .
 At Pearl Harbor we failed to realize that the Japanese had put fins on their torpedoes, thus making attack in shallow harbors feasible . The Japanese had been able to put fin on their torpedo boats .
 The greatest military surprise the U.S. encountered in Cuba was the unexpected capability of the Soviets to establish missile sites at such a rapid pace . The United States encountered the surprise surprise in Cuba .
 This realization had a significant impact upon subsequent decisionmaking. This realization was a significant .
 The effective use of the SA-6 and other Soviet weapons was a surprise of comparable significance . The effective Egyptian use of these weapons was similar to that of Soviet weapons .
 We were impressed with Arab firepower and their seemingly unlimited supply of ammunition . We were also impressed with the Arab firepower .
 Egyptian jamming and ECM and nighttime and commando skills were also impressive . The Egyptian jam-jamming was also impressive.
 Surprises in tactics and toughness enabled Arab forces to make initial gains . Arab forces made their initial gains in the Arab Spring .
 The use of high pressure jets of water to remove the walls of sand which line the banks of the Suez Canal, for example, allowed tanks to penetrate the second Israeli defense line . High pressure jets removed the walls from the walls .
 Massive armor and artillery rather than tactical innovation was responsible for the initial Syrian successes in the Golan Heights . Massive armor, artillery and artillery were responsible for Syrian successes .
 Both the United States and the Israelis underestimated Arab capabilities . Both the U.S. and the Israeli government underestimated Arab capability . The U.N. and Israeli governments underestimated their capabilities .
 The Japanese strike at Pearl Harbor was directly influenced by increasingly stringent American embargoes of petroleum products, scrap iron, and other resources vital to Japan's economic growth . The strike was directly affected by the U.S. embargo on petroleum products .
 Pressure mounted for war before the oil gauges dropped even further . Since time was on the side of the U.S., pressures mounted for the war .
 US-British-Dutch boycotts of Japanese goods and embargoes of vital resources aimed at forcing a change in Japanese policies . They had the effect of challenging Japan to regain her honor and economic self-sufficiency in whatever manner necessary .
 It may be argued that U.S. use of a similar boycott aimed at Cuba prior to the crisis had a similar effect . It may also argue that similar boycotts aimed at the Cuban government had similar effects .
 Fidel Castro would be forced to accept total dependence on the Soviet Union . It served to evoke a challenge to Fidel Castro and to insure that he would be .
 The United States is in a distinctly different position in the Middle East, CNN's John Sutter says . Sutter: The U.S. has a very different relationship with the region .
 This time petropolitics is being used by the Arab nations against the West . The Arab nations are being used in a bid to undermine the West's influence in the region .
 "We miscalculated the ability and determination of the Arabs to carry out their threats," says Israel's prime minister .
 Initial U.S. reaction indicates that the embargo will be viewed as a challenge and few, if any, alterations in America's pro-Israel policy will result . It is too early yet to determine the final outcome, but initial reaction indicates little changes will be made .
 In future crises, historical analogies should preferably follow rather than precede analysis of the situation, says David Cameron . In the past, the crisis has led to a series of crises in which the world has been gripped by political turmoil .
 This is particularly true in a young nation such as the United States with a relatively short history in international politics and a tendency to be influenced largely by the relatively few events which have threatened its vital interests .
 The advantage falls to the actor initiating the surprise aggression in diplomacy as well._as in military strategy . The advantage is to initiate surprise aggression .
 Intra-alliance communication is subordinated to the national interest, says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Putin: In times of crisis, communication is subordinate to national interest .
 The importance of allies and alliances in times of crisis may be a significant but not the dominant consideration affecting decisions, says CNN.com .
 Direct communication between national leaders during times of crisis reduces the potential for war . Direct and constant communication between leaders during crisis reduces potential war risk .
 Ad hoc foreign policy decisionmaking is common during periods of crisis . Ad hoc decisions are common during times of crisis such as crisis .
 In such situations, the power of the President generally predominates over Congress . The President generally has the power to veto veto power over Congress.
 Formation of key groups and consolidation of decisionmaking in the hands of a few individuals is required to escape bureaucratic formalities and bottlenecks . The tendency to ignore expertise at lower levels in the government during periods of crisis should be avoided .
 In attempting to keep information from our adversaries, we should not also isolate ourselves. We should not isolate ourselves from each other. We need to be able to communicate with our adversaries.
 Reputation and experience of decisionmakers and government officials can be determining factors in the conduct of crisis diplomacy . Reputations and experience are key factors in conducting crisis diplomacy, experts say . Reputation is a key factor in crisis diplomacy in the United States .
 The tendency toward overspecialization among intelligence analysts should be avoided . Intelligence analysts should avoid overspecializing, says CNN's John Sutter .
 civilian analyses often find it difficult to predict unusual or changing behavior which does not fit a traditional pattern . This is particularly true of civilian analyses who have dealt exclusively with one country or region for many years .
 Flexibility is maximized by announcing a credible, limited objective with regard to the desired resolution of the crisis and employing a graduated, proportional reponse to achieve it . Flexibility maximizes by announcing credible and limited objectives, says CNN's John Defterios .
 It is probably better to be uncertain of enemy intentions rather than to be too certain of them, says the author .
 A sudden or unexpected recently shared interest with other actors leads to a tendency to overestimate the degree of actual common interest, says the author .
 Certain factors may be expected in crisis situations, such as surprise, deception, and careful timing .
 United States felt it would be incompatible with Soviet policy to Introduce strategic missiles into Cuba because of detente, a strategy of subversion rather than confrontation, and the fact that they had never put them in a satellite country before .
 The Soviets thought Kennedy was weak and would back down from a fait accompli. Kennedy thought that he was weak . The Soviets believed Kennedy was a weak man . Kennedy thought he would be weak .
 U.S. felt Israeli military superiority would preclude another Arab attack in the near future . United States felt Israel would prevent another Arab strike in near future. United States believed Israel would not attack again .
 There were signs that the Arabs were initiating a new era of moderation and that Soviet willingness to respond to Arab military needs was deceiving . The Arab Spring was beginning to be more moderate and more moderate .
 US-British-Dutch economic boycott, time factors, and strategic considerations made attack on United States the chosen Japanese alternative . U.S. economic boycott and time factors made time factors factor in Japanese attack .
 U.S. viewed Soviet action as a direct military threat which must be dealt with firmly . United States viewed Soviet actions as a military threat . Soviet action was viewed as a major military threat to the United States .
 Arab attack showed new military capabilities and a new degree of coordination, says CNN's John Sutter . Arab attack on Arab soil showed new capabilities and coordination, Sutter says .
 Soviet assistance was significant, even to the point of offering troops to enforce a ceasefire . The Soviet Union was involved in the fight against the Soviet Union in Afghanistan .
 The Japanese decided to launch a surprise attack on Hawaii to strike a blow at U.S. offensive capabilities in the Pacific .
 The Soviets, at a strategic disadvantage, chose to avoid military confrontation . The Soviets chose not to engage in a military confrontation with Russia .
 U.S. decided to supply Israel with needed weapons and oppose great power intervention in the area . United States decided to provide Israel with weapons .
 Peace was not restored until the military defeat of United States forced Soviet Union to withdraw offensive missiles from Cuba .
 Arabs gained psychological victory; United States forced Soviet Union to back down on threat to intervene . U.S. forced Soviet U.K. back down in response to threat of intervention; precarious ceasefire reinstated . Arab-U.S.-U.N. forces Arab-Arab victory;
 U.S. misperceived Japan's intentions and capabilities, says CNN.com . United States misperperceived Japanese intentions and capability .
 Analysis in Terms of ""Behavioral Surprise -GeNPrDENTtAtr Military lessons. Analysis in terms of "Behavioural Surprise"
 The chances and consequences of misperception and erroneous information make nuclear retaliation very danRerous if based solely on advance strategic warning . The chances of mispreception and . erroneous information and the limited rime for analysis make nuclear . analysis very difficult for analysis .
 Military operations and strategy should be structured so as to provide opportunities for graduated options clearly identifiable to an opponent, says President Obama . Military operations must be structured to give opportunities to graduate options, says Obama .
 Actions should be avoided which might be incorrectly interpreted as a precursor to large-scale warfare . Actions should not be interpreted as an indication of a pre-emptive attack . Actions could be avoided as a preparation for large scale warfare .
 Restraint and limited use of force, requisites of a measured response, should be valued . Restraint should be a key component of the response to a terrorist attack, the author says .
 Military strategy should be coordinated and coupled with a complementary political, diplomatic, and economic strategy in an overall plan to achieve a limitation of crrsis escalation . The U.S. military should be able to limit the threat of military escalation, author says .
 The requirement for quick action to meet sudden danger is necessary to gain time, develop options, and retain the flexibility to utilize or cope with further pressures . The need to be quick action is necessary, says the author .
 Military actions should clearly demonstrate U.S. resolution to achieve whatever specific objective, says President Obama . Military action should demonstrate United States resolution, Obama says .
 A credible strategic deterrent is necessary if any superpower expects to exact improvement in its international political position under risk-taking situations against another superpower . The U.S. needs a credible military deterrent if it wants to improve its political position .
 The necessity of maintaining forward deployed forces and strategic mobility remains essential to the protection of military power, says U.S. President Obama .
 The importance of economic interdependence is demonstrated during periods of crisis . PONFinFNTbflrL -GONae-ENTtAfcr: The importance is demonstrated when periods are in crisis .
 Soviet pressure should be countered wherever it is met by approaching the brink of war and staring the Russians down, writes Peter Bergen . "One conclusion which may seem obvious should not be made," he says .
 In Cuba, and to a lesser degree in the Middle East, the U.S. held certain advantages . In Cuba and the Mideast, the United States had certain advantages, CNN's John Sutter says .
 This will undoubtedly not be true in all future crises, and the decision concerning the most appropriate action should be based upon each peculiar situation and the relative merits of the alternatives as they exist at that time . This is not the case of all crises, but the decision should be made based upon
 Diplomatic bluffs, official secrecy, and public silence invite strategic challenge . Public silence invites strategic challenge. Diplomacy bluffs and secrecy invite challenge .
 The analysts of these three crises points to an increasingly important role for international diplomacy in future crises . Analysts say the role of international diplomacy will be increasingly important in the future .
 The new emphasi9 on skilled statecraft has been precipitated by greater high level, personal diplomacy, the advent of the ""hot line"" and improved methods of communication . Henry Kissinger exercised by Henry Kissinger .
 The great powers continue to show an increased understanding and sophistication in the handling of crises . Great powers are showing an increased sophistication in dealing with crises .
 There appears to be a continuing distrust of military intelligence by political decisionmakers . Despite increasing dependence on intelligence estimates in selecting and implementing foreign policy .
 There is a tendency for great power rivalries to be played out by proxy . There is also a tendency to play out proxy wars in the world .
 The dangers of direct confrontation in a nuclear age are well recognized . The dangers are well known .
 The strength of the current Soviet-American detente appears to be capable of weathering serious crises . Russia and the U.S. seem to be able to weather crises like this .
 Both the U.S. and the USSR appear to be learning that they have more to gain by cooperation than by confrontation . The United States and the Soviet Union are learning that cooperation is better than confrontation .
 This appears to be true despite past failures of these techniques and the tendency to evoke a reaction opposite from that intended . This is true despite previous failures, these techniques have been unsuccessful .
 Political, economic, and military interdependence among nation-states is increasing . Political, political, economic inter-independence among nations is increasing. Political inter-relationships among nations are increasing .
 Time and chances of survival are much less and the decision to make a preemptive strike would be much more difficult . Time and chance of survival is much less .
 Strategic surprise short of nuclear attack, as experienced in Cuba and the Middle East, will undoubtedly occur in the future . The U.S. has been in the midst of a civil war with Russia and China .
 We must assemble seemingly irrelevant lists of intelligence within a viable conceptual framework . We must be able to act decisively to avoid escalation or to counter certain attack. We must also act decisively, to avoid escalating or counter certain attacks .
 There is a need to acquire greater diversity of viewpoints in the intelligence community, he says . The intelligence community needs to encourage intellectual debate with nongovernmental scholars and specialists .
 Facts which seem to contradict intelligence policy should not be dismissed or surpressed . Facts which contradict official intelligence policy or higher documents should not automatically be dismissed . Facts that contradict official policy should be treated as facts, not dismissed .
 The greatest danger to the effectiveness and utility of military planning documents is their tendency to inbreed . Military planning documents tend to breed, the author says .
 Overspecialization in strategic intelligence should be avoided to reduce the tendency for ""behavioral surprise."" l Roberta Wohlstetter, Pearl Harbor—Warning and Decision .
 Frequent rotations of duty and diversification of training should be encouraged . Frequent rotation of duty should therefore be encouraged, says Army spokesman .
 This is particularly important for civilian personnel who may not have the enforced mobility of their military counterparts . This is especially important for those in the armed forces .
 Personal and improvised methods of diplomacy and strategy formulation should be used to the greatest extent practicable . Diplomatic and strategic strategies should be utilized to the maximum extent practicable, says President Barack Obama .
 Although this information is basically correct and complete, it is frequently difficult to analyze . The information is sometimes incorrect and complete . It is often hard to analyze.
 It does not adequately inform decisionmakers of enemy strategy, perceptions, and intentions, it does not inform them .
 Data collected in this manner is particularly relevant to probable future crises which will involve proxies, which will be played out in precise, defined limits, and which will, during the period of detente, involve personalized, high-level diplomacy .
 Problems of context, bias, and special interest make analysis difficult . Dependence on second sources and information provided by the agencies of friendly governments may be useful, but problems of context and bias make it difficult .
 In such an environment, additional emphasis should be given to on the ground cloak and dagger intelligence gathering activities . The U.S. should focus more on intelligence gathering, says President Obama .
 Renewed emphasis should be given to the development of additional strategic airlift capabilities and troop mobility, says U.S. President Barack Obama .
 These capabilities are essential to the maintenance of a credible deterrent and the ability to exercise graduated responses, the U.S. State Department says .
 Analysis should be made to determine U.S. dependency on foreign sources of vital raw materials and the potential for conflict, shortages, and blackmail .
 A major effort should then be undertaken to develop substitutes for endangered products or to develop the capability for synthetic manufacture to satisfy future military requirements . The U.S. should also develop the ability to make synthetic manufacture .
 New fuel substitutes will undoubtedly result from the latest Middle East crisis . This was done with rubber after the Japanese aggression and important new fuel substitutes are likely to result .
 Anticipation of future needs and a major research and development program could give the U.S. a significant strategic advantage in future crises as well .
 "Intelligence processed and evaluated within framework of stereotypes and preconceived notions" Pearl Harbor, Cuba, and the Middle East are examples .
 Ttt.is would serve to increase training for leaders at the highest levels of government in the delicate art of crisis management .
 Misperception of U.S. will is often a result of a lack of public awareness . Increased attention should be given to avoiding unnecessary classification and official secrecy .
 U.S. Ambassador to Japan, Joseph C Grew, obtained information from the Peruvian Ambassador in Tokyo and from several Japanese sources . Japan was planning a possible surprise attack on Pearl Harbor .
 Foreign Minister Matsuoka was replaced by Admiral Toyoda, expected to be friendlier to the U.S. He is expected to become friendlier with the United States .
 Japan was forced to accept American demands for withdrawal from China and Indochina or obtain raw materials elsewhere . U.S. demanded withdrawal of China and Vietnam in order to get raw materials .
 The U.S. had to restore free trade with Japan, discontinue aid to China, press the Chinese to accept a treaty favorable to Japan, and recognize Japan's special interests in Indochina . The United States, however, had to stop aid to the Chinese, and stop
 The Imperial Conference decided on war if agreement with the United States was not reached by early October . Roosevelt rejected Prime Minister Konoye's proposal for a summit meeting by insisting that agreement on fundamental principles first be reached at the ambassadorial level .
 Admiral Isoruku Yamamoto had been in charge of the preparation of these plans . Admiral Yamamoto conceived the attack in January 1941 .
 30 to 50 Japanese ships transporting five divisions of troops had been sighted off Formosa . Washington received word that a fleet of 30 to . 50 ships had been spotted . Washington was alerted that the Japanese ships were carrying troops .
 Hull informed War Secretary Stimson that negotiations had probably ended . Roosevelt directed notification of Hawaiian commanders that negotiations with Japan had virtually collapsed . Further Japanese aggression was possible .
 Cuban refugees noted an ""unusual number"" of ships unloading cargo and passengers at the ports of Havana and Mariel . Unusual number of ships were unloading . Cuban refugees reported to have arrived in Havana .
 Soviet leaders, publicly and privately, had offered assurances for weeks that no missiles would go to Cuba . These officials were stunned since Soviet leaders had said no missile missiles would be sent .
 JCS and Dean Acheson called for immediate military action . JCS called for 'immediate military action'
 President Kennedy addressed the nation on the discovery of ""offensive"" military weapons in Cuba . Secretary Rusk called for an emergency meeting of the Council of the OAS .
 President Kennedy announced a ""quarantine"" around Cuba to interdict offensive weapons . Soviet submarines reportedly moving into the Caribbean . United States reserve units were mobilized .
 The Cuban military and the civilian population were placed under full mobilization . All Soviet and Warsaw Pact forces were put on alert .
 UN Soviet Ambassador Zorin charged United States photographs were false and stated that the Soviet Union had no offensive weapons stationed outside the USSR . 12 other Soviet ships reportedly altered course . White House press release reported new intelligence data showing that Soviet missile buildup was continuing at a rapid pace .
 The President ordered the State Department to devise plans for a civil occupation government in Cuba . Khrushchev indicated removal of the missiles might be arranged if the blockade were lifted and the United States assured there would be no Cuban invasion .
 Khrushchev proposed a swap of Cuban bases for NATO bases in Turkey . The proposal was rejected by the Soviet Union and the United States .
 This letter was much more ominous than the one received the previous day since it seemed to threaten a Russian invasion of Turkey if the U.S. attacked Cuba . This letter seemed to be more ominous since the one sent to Turkey the day before .
 The United States naval blockade and aerial surveillance was temporarily suspended while U. Thant discussed with Castro supervision of dismantling of the Soviet missile bases . The U.S. naval blockade was suspended .
 The Soviet Union proposed that a Red Cross group, or observers from the diplomatic corps in Cuba, might be used to supervise the dismantling and return of the missiles to the Soviet Union . Subsequently, the Red Cross suggested that a . Red Cross . group or observers might be . used
 Khrushchev announced that the 40 Soviet missiles emp laced in Cuba were now on their way back to the Soviet Union . The 40 missiles laced with Soviet missiles were now being sent back to Cuba .
 The United States rejected a joint Soviet-Cuban memorandum urging immediate U.S. guarantees not to invade Cuba . The memorandum was rejected by the United States .
 About 40 IL-28 bombers in Cuba were being returned to the Soviet Union . The U.S. refused to give such a pledge until there had been on-site inspection and verification in Cuba as Khrushchev had agreed .
 Nixon instructed Kissinger to request a meeting of the UN Security Council . Algeria also reported planes were being sent to aid the fight in Egypt . Nixon also ordered Kissinger to ask for a meeting .
 Egyptian commandos engaged Israeli troops at Sharm al-Shaykh . The United States asked the UN Security Council to halt the fighting and restore the ceasefire lines that existed on 6 October .
 Sudan announced several armed units were being sent to the battlefront . USSR expressed support for Egypt and Syria by opposing the plan . Sudan said several armed forces would be sent to battlefront in Sudan .
 Egypt continued to send men and supplies across the Suez Canal . Israel reported Syria had launched 20 Soviet-built Frog rockets against Israeli civilian settlements . Six Russians were reportedly killed in the bombing .
 The United States said the Soviet Union was resupplying Syria and Kgypt . This would put a ""new face"" on the conflict, the U.S. said . The Soviet Union said this would put "a new face" on the Syrian conflict .
 A White House spokesman said it would create ""serious difficulties" between the U.S. and the USSR if continued . The White House said the move would create 'serious difficulties'
 25 F-4 Phantoms and 50 A-4 Skyhawks are being rushed to Israel to replace losses . US officials said 25 F.4 Phantom and 50 . Skyhawks were being rushed .
 Eleven Arab oil-producing countries meeting in Kuwait announced that oil exports to countries ""unfriendly"" to the Arab cause would be reduced by 5 percent each month until the land occupied by Israel since 1967 is evacuated . Soviet Premier Aleksei Kosygin arrived in Cairo for talks with Sad
 Abu Dhabi announced a halt in all oil exports to the United States . Abu Dhabi oil exports have been halted in recent months . Abu Abu Dhabi has been a major oil exporter to the U.S.
 Saudi Arabia says it is immediately cutting oil production by 10 percent to pressure the United States . Saudi Arabia warns that all oil exports would be cut if the U.S. continued to aid Israel . The kingdom says it will immediately cut oil production .
 Nixon asked Congress for $2.2 billion for emergency aid to Israel . Libya ordered a ban on all exports to the U.S. and raised the price of oil from $4.90 to $8.92 per barrel .
 Kissinger arrived in Israel from Moscow for talks with Israeli leaders . Israel accepted the ceasefire proposal . The ceasefire went into effect on the Egyptian front at 6:52 pra, but fighting continued in Syria .
 Jordan announced acceptance of acceptance, but added that its troops in Syria were subject to Syrian command . Jordan said acceptance was conditional, but said it would be subject to Syria's authority .
 Heavy fighting resumed on the Egyptian front with both sides accusing the other of violating the ceasefire . Dayan proposed a new ceasefire . USSR accused Israel of violating ceasefire and warned of ""gravest consequences"" if fighting continued .
 UN Security Council passed Resolution #339 calling for a ceasefire and assignment of UN observers to supervise the ceasefire line . The statement called on Israel to pull back to the ceasefire lines of 22 October .
 Sadat appealed to the United States and the USSR to send troops to police the ceasefire . He added that Israel would enter negotiations with the position that ""everything is negotiable."" — Sadat .
 The United States rejected the appeal and expressed the hope that other outside powers would not send troops to the Middle East . The U.S. rejected the request and expressed hope that the U.K. would not be sending troops .
 Egyptian spokesman denies there were any Soviet troops in Egypt to enforce the ceasefire . The Security Council voted 14 to to establish an emergency peace force to insure the ceasefire.
 Israeli General Aharon Yariv met with an Egyptian general under UN auspices on the Cairo-Suez road . Yariv arranged for a convoy of Egyptian trucks to take non-military supplies to the trapped Egyptian 3rd Army . One hour later, Israeli general Yariv and Egyptian general
 The Israelis stated they had agreed to the resupply only at American insistence . The Israeli government said it was only at the request of the U.S.
 Israel agreed to allow nonmilitary supplies to pass tnrough its lines to Egyptian troops isolated east of the Suez Canal . In addition to military supplies, Israel also agreed to let supplies pass through its lines . Egypt has been isolated from the region since 1967 .
 Jagan and obtain required natural resourcea. 5lgnl.*i<*«Soviet, •ought to alter world strategic balance and significant. Significant. significant. significant . Soviet Union, .ought to . alter world . strategic balance . Significant. Significant .
 Sovleta is expected to expand Influence in HE but her lntereat in IMPACT OF ALLIES' INTERESTS Minimal. Sovlet a 'ought to expand influence'
 Both U.S. and baali of national concerned acted primarily Limited. Both United States and . national concerned . acted primarily .
 Data good, perceived Arab li perceived United States pi ALTERNATIVES Limited only obtain ty through S After DECISIONMAKING PROCESS re left to determine ing.
 Bruce M Russett. Prentice Hall, Inc., 1969, 127: ""Refining Deterrence Theory: The Japanese Attack on Pearl Harbor"
 An Ana lysis of Policy Formulation in Terms of Current Decision Making Theory . An Ana-Lysis of policy formulation in terms of current decision-making theory. An Ana Ana-lysis of the Theory.
 88th Congress, 1st Session, 1963. Investigations of the Preparedness Program, Interim Report on Cuban Military Build-up . Interim report on Cuban military build-up was published by the U.S. Congress .
 U.S. Army War College Strategic Studies Institute, Carlisle Barracks, Pa. Performing or performing at the War College .
 Political, military, intelligence, economic and sociological factors, long-range strategic planning . M4* II II iwmmr: "* U-Mt, *r Mm* mmHrj" M4 II: "M4 II"
 M 1473 COITION OP < NOV M IS OBSOLETE . SECURITY CLASSIFICATION OF this PAG. is confidential .
 This study attempts to validate and expand these conclusions, to examine reasons for the successes and failures of diplomacy and to identify relevant trends and commonalities in these three crises . It is hoped that this study will provide useful recommendations for improved strategy formulation .
 In each case, it was found that the actors responded on the basis of their own national interest, within the constraints of a short timeframe, and with a rather limited choice of alternatives .
 Each crisis was preceded by numerous indicators which were incorrectly analyzed by U.S. officials because of preconceived notions, stereotypes, and personal biases . Each crisis is preceded by indicators which are incorrectly analyzed .
 Enemy analysts misperceived U.S. national and popular will to resist their strategic challenge, analysts say . Enemy analysts also misperperceived United States national and . popular will resist their . challenge .
 Researchers in the area decisionmaking have long held that analysts seldom review incoming information objective mation Is usually unconsciously fitted into preexisting intelligence positions and precc or else simply disregarded as irrelevant or erroneous .
 This study attempts to examine reasons for the successes and failures of diplomacy, and to identify issile Crisis . Instead, such laforiceived behavior patterns ind expand these conclu.lalities in these three crises upon which to base useful recommendations for Improved strategy formulation .
 Enemy analysts also mlsperceived United States national and popular will to resist their strategic challenge . Enemy analysts believe the U.S. will resist their challenge .
 January 1941-October 1973 was a period of political, military, intelligence, e-mails . The book was published in October 1973 .
 Researchers in the areas of belief systems and decisionmaking have long held that analysts seldom review incoming information objectively . Analysts often fail to make decisions based on an objective basis .
 This article attempts to examine reasons for the successes and failures of diplomacy, and to identify relevant trends and commonalities in these three crises . It also attempts to identify common themes in these crises .
 In each case, it was found that the actors responded on the basis of their own national Interest, U) within a short timeframe, and with a limited choice of alternatives .
 November 1973 Completion Date : January 1974 J preceded by numerous indicators which stereotypes, and personal biases, were used in the construction of the first phase of the project .
 Political, military, intelligence, intelligence and long-range strategic planning . Political and social factors, sociological factors, long-term strategic planning. Long-range planning .