 It has been accepted for inclusion in International Social Science Review by an authorized editor of Nighthawks Open Institutional Repository . The article has been published by the National Institute of Social Studies .
 The 13 days of the crisis took place during the latter half of October, 1962 . The crisis marked the pacifying, diplomatic intentions of the American and Soviet heads of state .
 By offering an analysis of the events of the crisis, this paper will demonstrate that cooperation between capitalists and communists could occur in the interests of the preservation of their respective systems and states . This paper will show that cooperation could occur .
 Both superpowers publicized the progress of the situation to their citizens, with frequent updates via newspapers, radio broadcasts and television features .
 The diffusion of tensions around Cuban shores was not won precisely the way either country’s public media announced . However, the diffusion of the Soviet-American tensions around Cuba was not exactly the way it was announced .
 Negotiations focusing on nuclear missiles stationed by NATO in Turkey were central to the rise of the crisis . They were an important bargaining chip in American President John F Kennedy’s and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev's diplomatic strategy, a secret which was held by both parties for
 Sputnik’s 1957 success is renowned for bringing the U.S. and Soviet Union into the Space Race . Neil Armstrong famously said it was a “giant leap” into the future .
 In October 1959, the U.S. arranged to place fifteen Jupiter IRBMs in Turkey, with the Turkish government agreeing to keep the armaments sovereign to the United States and to keep them secret .
 He believed the Soviets would use the Turkish IRBMs to justify arming Cuba . Three months before the crisis, he urged U.S. officials to see what needed to be done to remove missiles .
 State Department officials decided to not try to remove missiles so as to preserve US-Turkish relations . Ball, after discussing the issue with the Turkish ambassador, allied with other State Dept. officials and other State Department. officials .
 Fearing encirclement, Soviet leaders criticized NATO missile installations, with special emphasis on the project in Turkey . The Soviet leaders also criticized the missile installations in Turkey as a result .
 The installation process of the Jupiter missiles in the subsequent years furthered Khrushchev’s concerns about American encirclement . The Soviet Union covertly installed their own intermediate-range nuclear missiles in Cuba .
 The Kremlin felt great pride in Cuba becoming communist without the help of the Red Army . Khrushchev had also placed missiles in Cuba because of ‘honor,” according to historian Martin Walker .
 To maintain their beloved system in the Western Hemisphere, the Soviets felt duty-bound to defend Cuba against future American invasion . To maintain the system, the Soviet Union felt duty to protect Cuba .
 The threat of nuclear retaliation from Cuban bases would be a sufficient deterrent for the current U.S. president and his successors should they ever consider another assault on Cuba .
 The way for it to create balance in the nuclear field was to place its IRBMs more strategically, which meant locating them closer to the American homeland . The USSR had an inferior set of Inter-Continental Ballistic Missiles .
 Cuba was prime real estate to host intermediate-range Soviet missiles . Cuba was only ninety-three miles from the tip of Florida that had just survived a U.S. military incursion .
 Both sides concluded that if the Cold War went hot, it would probably also go nuclear . The Cold War would probably go nuclear, both sides concluded .
 At the time of the Cuban missile crisis, the United States possessed approximately 27,000 nuclear weapons . The Soviet Union had approximately 3,000, which is the same number of nuclear armaments the U.S. had prepared to launch .
 Three bases at Guanajay were erected to house IRBMs with a range up to 2,200 miles that granted them access to most of the continental U.S. bases . Three bases were erected in the 1980s to house the IRBM with range of 2,000 miles
 To the Brink gathered over the proceeding thirteen days to resolve the crisis in the way which best preserved the interests of America, NATO, and the world . The United States, NATO and the U.K. gathered over 13 days to solve the crisis .
 The group analyzed the situation but were not able to reach consensus on the strategic effect the Soviet missiles in Cuba would have if war broke out . The group, which consisted of both civilian and military men, was unable to agree on the situation .
 Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara believed that they held zero net effect, as the USSR already possessed ICBMs which could, from Soviet territory, already assault the U.S.
 McNamara believed that the Soviet missiles in Cuba did not further jeopardize the United States . President Kennedy and National Security Advisor Bundy agreed with McNamara .
 Military leaders disagreed that Soviet missiles so close to the U.S. enhanced their rival’s power . Soviet strategies depended on bombing campaigns that featured traditionally difficult paths to the United States.
 ExComm unanimously made the non-negotiable decision that the Soviet weapons must go . Regardless of the opposing views as to the military significance of the missiles, ExComm made the decision .
 Robert Kennedy, the advisor with the most influence over the President, did call it preferable to an air strike . Kennedy believed a bombing campaign to be short-sighted as the destruction of the current bases would not prevent further installations .
 In secret, Soviet forces on the island island were equipped with tactical nuclear weapons of which the Americans were unaware .
 Local officers who were expected to not have enough time to contact Moscow while defending against a surprise assault were granted authority to use these armaments at their discretion . Local officers were granted permission to use the armaments .
 On October 22, President Kennedy addressed the nation explaining the Cuban missile crisis . President Kennedy spoke to the nation, explaining the American leaders' decision .
 To the Brink of the iron curtain believed they were experiencing their last few days . They were believed to be in the midst of their last days .
 Fyodor Burlatsky, one of Khrushchev’s advisors, had telephoned his wife, pleading with her to leave everything and flee Moscow before American bombers could strike . Khrushchchev's wife was forced to flee Moscow to escape the U.S
 Accepting exclusively these terms meant ignoring the final term that arrived on the morning of the twenty-seventh which demanded the U.S. withdraw their Jupiter missiles from Turkey . Accepting these terms would have been a violation of the terms .
 Kennedy publicly accepted the first deal, agreeing not to condone further American or US-related invasions of Cuba . Kennedy accepted the deal, but it was never publicly accepted .
 He then sent his brother to consolidate the second part of the deal in private . He then agreed to remove the fifteen Jupiter missiles from Turkey .
 Publicly, this final term went unanswered, so long as the Soviet Union did not announce its acceptance . The Soviet Union would not have to announce it had accepted .
 Only about half of the agreement was made with Khrushchev .
 The United States would remove its Jupiter missiles and promise not to invade Cuba . In return, the Soviet Union would withdraw its own missiles from the island . The U.S. would remove the missiles, and promise to not invade Cuba, in return .
 Dean Acheson was a guest at the ExComm session on Black Saturday . He said that if the Soviets did not accept the naval quarantine, they would likely “knock out missiles in Turkey” with the United States likely responding by ‘knocking out a missile base
 Instead of the Soviets responding to the blockade with an attack on Turkey, the two countries had agreed to a mutual withdrawal of overextended missiles . Despite all of the Soviet anxieties that surrounded the IRBMs placed in Turkey, their effectiveness had been under heavy criticism from Western officials .
 To the Brink armaments, including two new types of self-propelled warheads and nuclear mines, were designed specifically to overwhelm the Soviet’s vast tank army should a land invasion occur .
 Jupiter missiles stationed in Turkey were stationed above-ground and were not enclosed . They were unprotected to environmental hazards, easily identifiable, and vulnerable to enemy assault . The Jupiter missiles were positioned above ground and not enclosed; they were unprotected .
 The missiles were dependent on highly volatile liquid fuels that rendered the missiles “too slow in alert reaction,” as painstaking and dangerous procedures needed to be made in preparing the missiles for launch .
 Far-reaching ICBMs like the Atlas and Titan missiles and fast, solid-fueled armaments like the Minuteman and Polaris quickly overshadowed the Jupiter IRBM program . Military and political leaders favored them over NATO installments sanctioned by Eisenhower administration .
 Turkish foreign minister Selim Sarper said if the installations were canceled before Polaris submarine substitutes were available, Turkish morale and faith in NATO and the United States would be undermined .
 The Jupiter missiles may have been a mutual win for both the American and Soviet heads of state . Because of this, removing potentially first-strike nuclear weapons from a country that could readily be capricious became a foreign policy concern for Kennedy's cabinet .
 The peaceful resolution of the crisis fostered a stronger relationship between the President and Premier . It was facilitated in part by the mutual withdrawal of overextended missiles from the region .
 Nikita Khrushchev sent an auspicious letter of praise to John Kennedy, expressing his “great appreciation” toward the young president for having sent Robert Kennedy to negotiate the Jupiter missiles’ removal .
 Turkey felt it was “being informed rather than consulted” about its national security and foreign policy matters . The removal of the Jupiter missiles did not cause any serious discord in the Turkish-American relationship .
 The Turks agreed with NATO in 1959 to receive the Jupiter missiles . Ankara and Washington shared desires to establish the nuclear bases .
 Kennedy four years later, however, experienced a Turkish government very reluctant to remove its new armaments, and negotiations were much tougher .
 The removal of the Jupiter missiles brought benefits to Turkey as well . Despite Ankara’s reluctance to concur at first, the removal of Jupiter missiles was beneficial .
 More than two thousand sorely needed Turkish technicians were freed for other projects . More than 2,000 Turkish technicians freed from Turkish technicians .
 With the removal of the IRBMs from Turkey one year after the final missile became operational, “The Jupiter phase-out proved to be as mysterious as its deployment,” but the missiles’ importance during the crisis in Cuban has, through the slow declassification process,
 The missiles’ presence in Turkey, so close to the Soviet Union, furthered Nikita Khrushchev’s paranoia about American encirclement, helped motivate his decision to place Soviet missiles in Cuba .
 The tension this reciprocation caused was palpable, often considered the closest the world has ever come to a nuclear holocaust . The tension between the two nations was palpable .
 Two deals were brokered between the two superpowers, each leader’s demands having been met . Fortunately the situation never escalated that far, and two deals were brokenred .
 The Jupiter missiles— like many other events in the Cold War—manifested reciprocity . The Jupiter missile launch was a Cold War show of reciprocity, the author says .
 The presence of American missiles in Turkey caused Soviet missiles to arise in Cuba, so too did their removal cause a mutual withdrawal of Soviet armaments . The removal of U.S. missiles from Turkey caused the Soviet withdrawal from Cuba .
 President Nixon scrambled together a plan to install missiles in either Turkey or the Black Sea to give the United States some “trading stock” which could help negotiate the base’s cancellation . Two administrations after its resolution, President Richard Nixon, upon discovering that the Soviets were constructing
 Nixon never resolved the issue, but this incident suggests that the Jupiter missiles had maintained some presence in official memory well after Kennedy administration removed them .
 The Cuban missile crisis surprisingly benefitted the different states involved in the crisis . It was the first time the crisis had occurred in Cuba .
 To the Brink mutual understanding between the two leaders, both states had been willing to grant concessions in favor of the other . Perhaps opening a new doorway to the mollification of American-Soviet relations .
 President John F Kennedy’s assassination 13 months after the Cuban missile crisis, and Premier Nikita Khrushchev's removal the following year, this new passage of understanding was transient at best .
 After the crisis in Cuba, there would be another quarter of a century until the Cold War would end, and tensions between these two bodies have yet to fully diffuse . Such thought experiments cannot rewrite history, and after the crisis, there was another quarter a century to end .
 13 International Social Science Review, Vol. 13, Iss. , Iss. Art. Art, Art . Art .
 To the Brink 41 Jacob Neufeld, The Development of Ballistic Missiles in the United States Air Force, 19451960 , 232 .