 1962 was a common year starting on Monday of the Gregorian calendar . 1962 was the 1962nd year of the Common Era and Anno Domini designations . 1962 is the 962nd year in the 2nd millennium, the 62nd year the 20th century and the 3rd
 Stena Line was established as a ferry operator, by Sten A Olsson in Gothenburg, Sweden . Buddhist 2506 calendar Burmese 1324 calendar . Chinese calendar 4658 or 4598 January . January .
 Navy Seal 1 is commissioned in the Pacific Fleet, and SEAL Team Two is in the Atlantic Fleet . SEAL Team 2 is in both the Pacific and the Atlantic . SEAL 1 is in charge of Seal 1 and SEAL 2 are in operation .
 The United States embargo against Cuba is announced . February 3: The U.S. embargo is announced. February 4: Cuba is the first country to announce an embargo against the island nation .
 A t otal solar e clipse is visible in Asia, Australia and the Pacific Ocean . The 49th solar eclipse of Solar Saros 130 will be visible in the Pacific .
 Carol Cox becomes the first woman allowed to race at a Natio nal Hot Rod Association national event; she wins in the Super Stock class . Cox wins Super Stock in Super Stock .
 John Glenn becomes the first American to orbit the Earth, three times in 4 hours, 55 minutes . John Glenn is the first man to orbit Earth . Glenn was aboard Friendship 7 when Friendship 7 was launched in 1961 .
 Kresge Company opens its first Kmart discount store in Garden City, Michigan . The store is the first of its kind in the state .
 France and Algeria sign an agreement in Evian-les-Bains, ending the Algerian War . The French-Algerian war ended in 1953 . Algeria and France signed an agreement to end the war .
 The United States Supreme Court rules that federal courts can order state legislatures to reapportion seats . The decision was made by the U.S. Supreme Court .
 Jawaharlal Nehru is elected de facto Prime Minister of India . April 3 is the third anniversary of Nehru's election to India's independence .
 Larry Allen Abshier defects to North Korea, becoming the first of six American defectors to the country . He is one of six Americans to defect to the North Korea .
 Benfica beat FC Barcelona 5-3 at the Olympic Stadium to win the 1961-62 European Cup in association football . The Portuguese side won the trophy at the end of the season at the age of 31 .
 Scott Carpenter orbits the Earth 3 times, in the Aurora 7 space capsule . Scott Carpenter is the first person to orbit the Earth three times in the space capsule.
 The United States Supreme Court rules that mandatory prayers in public schools are unconstitutional . The U.S. Supreme Court ruled that prayer prayers are unconstitutional in the United States .
 Supporters of Algerian independence win a 99% majority in a referendum . Supporters of Algeria's independence vote for independence in Algeria's first referendum .
 Byrne presents the show for 37 years, the longest period through which any individual hosts a televised talk show anywhere in the world . Byrne is the world's second longest-running talk show, with the show itself itself becoming the second longest in existence .
 The ""Small Boy" test shot Little Feller I becomes the last atmospheric test detonation, at the Nevada Test Site .
 The Mariner 1 spacecraft flies erratically several minutes after launch, and has to be destroyed . The spacecraft was launched in 1961 .
 The International Agreement on the Neutrality of Laos is signed in Geneva . Laos is one of the most isolated countries in the world . Laos has a history of peaceful relations with the West .
 A referendum in Singapore supports the Malayan Federation . September ■ September 1 ■ A referendum is held in Singapore on September 1 . September 1: Singapore voters will vote on whether or not to support the federation .
 Mercury-Atlas 8 Walter Schirra orbits the Earth six times, in the Sigma 7 s pace capsule . The Sigma 7s pace capsule orbits the earth six times at a time .
 No, the first James Bond film, premieres at the London Pavilion, featuring Sean Connery as the hero . The film premieres in the UK at the end of the year .
 Pope John XXIII convenes the first ecumenical council of the Roman Catholic Church in 92 years . The council is the first of its kind in the history of the church .
 Pictures of Soviet missile silos in Cuba, taken by U.S. spy planes . Pictures were taken by United States spy planes in Cuba . Pictures show silos being used by Soviet missiles .
 A U-2 flight over Cuba in the Caribbean photographs Soviet nucl ear weapons being installed . The weapons were installed by Soviet forces in Cuba .
 President Kennedy is told of the pictures, between the United States and the Soviet Union, threatening the world with nuclear war . A stand-off then ensues for another 12 days, after President Kennedy tells of the threat .
 U.S. President John F Kennedy announces to the nation the existence of Soviet missiles in Cuba . President Kennedy made the announcement in a televised address to the public .
 The first confrontation occurs between the U.S. Navy and the Soviet cargo vessel . The vessel changes course .
 Nikita Khrushchev ordered the removal of Soviet missile bases in Cuba . The move was ordered by the Soviet Union leader in 1959 .
 Kennedy agrees to withdrawal of U.S. missiles from Turkey . Deal was secret deal between Kennedy and Khrushchev . Kennedy agreed to pull missiles out of Turkey in secret .
 The fact that this deal has not been made public makes it look as though the Soviets have backed down . The deal is not made public, making it look like it's backing down .
 Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn's novella One Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovich is published in Novy Mir . It is in an unprecedented acknowledgement of the Soviet Union's Stalinist past .
 The United Nations General Assembly condemns South Africa's racist apartheid policies . The resolution calls for all UN member states to cease military and economic relations with the nation .
 In response to the Soviet Union agreeing to remove its missiles from Cuba, President John F Kennedy ends the blockade of the island .
 U.S. Senate Majority Leader Mike Mansfield becomes the first American official to make a pessimistic public comment on the war's progress . Mansfield made the comments in Vietnam at the request of United States President John F Kennedy .
 The Louvre, its owner, chooses to spend the money that would have been spent on the insurance premium on security instead . However, the Louvre does not want to spend that money .
 Belgian pirate radio station Radio Uylenspiegel is knocked off the airwaves, never to operate again . The station is never to be heard on Belgian radio again .
 The ""Big Freeze"" begins; there are no frost-free nights until March 5, 1963 . The "Big Freeze" begins . There are no frost-free nights until March 5, 1963.
 The same day, also, the Netherlands are covered with several feet of snow . The Netherlands is also covered in snow .
 American advertising man Martin K Speckter invents the interrobang, a new English-language punctuation mark . Date unknown .
 November 29 Erik Scavenius, 12th Prime Minister of Denmark, was Denmark's 12th PM . November 30 Joseph Lade Pawsey, Australian radio astronomer, (b. Dey, Indian singer, composer, actor and teacher ■ Queen Wilhelmina of the Netherlands ■