 This was one of the earliest day-by-day accounts of the Cuban missile crisis . This is a look at the events leading up to the crisis in Cuba .
 A few moments of relatively positive attention have been given to the film's details .
 Absher summarizes the familiar events of the crisis, emphasizing the mind-sets of key players as they struggled to correlate reports, incomplete U-2 coverage, and political variables as they prepared their estimates . Absher: "I'm glad to be able to get back in the process of
 This scholarly work continues to offer a unique theoretical perspective on the crisis . It offers a unique theory of the crisis.
 I recommend it for people seriously interested in developing their analytical skills . The book is published by Simon Cowell, a professor at the University of Cambridge .
 Many of the substantive details of the crisis have been enhanced since Allison's work . However, many of the details have been substantially enhanced since his work .
 Allison's classic work has been substantially revised to take into account comments similar to those above about the availability of new substantive material on the Missile Crisis . Allison: In a move carrying some risk, Allison's work carries some risk .
 The authors seek to both extend and add depth to the theoretical framework that was the centerpiece of the original . Additionally, the authors also seek to add depth and . add depth .
 The author warns that this article is based on his own experiences, rather than on research in original source materials .
 This account will have to stand until the documentary record on the Cuban side is fleshed out . Given the lack of the latter, this account will not be published until documentary record is released .
 The author relates the analytic effort to determine what the cargo of a Soviet merchant ship in October 1962 might have been . The cargo of the Soviet ship in that month's Soviet ship may have been a mystery .
 A presumptive answer of nuclear warheads was reached, although there was no assurance that such was the case . The presumptive answer was that nuclear warheads were found .
 According to Sexton, the author covers the German Ardennes offensive of 1944, the Chinese intervention in Korea in 1950, and the Soviet deployment of missiles in Cuba in 1961 .
 For Coffey, Studies 57. , it is unfortunate that the authors "treat the failure to discover the photo gap as something of a cold case"
 McCone's internal assessment of missile crisis coverage, CIA Inspector General investigation, review board report, and congressional hearings . They focus on internal assessment .
 This work ""provides a fine account of the behind-the-scenes maneuvers,"" contains ""superb portraits of KGB agents and heads of state,"" and is ""splendidly written,""