 Timelineclaver.gprep.org/sjochs/cuban_missile_crisis time-line chronicle .
 Khrushchev proposes public trade of Soviet missiles in Cuba for U.S. missile in Turkey . U.K. would trade missiles for missiles from Cuba for missiles in Turkey, Russia . The deal was rejected by the United States .
 McGeorge Bundy informs President Kennedy that evidence shows Soviet medium-range ballistic missiles in Cuba . Bundy: Evidence shows Soviet missiles were in Cuba. Bundy: "Evidence is overwhelming evidence that missiles are in Cuba"
 Kennedy immediately gathers a group that becomes known as "ExComm,"" the Executive Committee of the National Security Council . ExComm is known as ExComm, a group known as the "National Security Council Executive Committee"
 Castro allowed installation of Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba which would shorten the time it took for the missiles to reach American targets . Castro allowed the installation of the missiles which would be able to reach targets .
 The crisis happened during the period known as the Cold War between the U.S. and the Soviet Union . The crisis took place in the early 1950s .
 When the Soviet Union placed missiles on the island of Cuba, the two major countries came to the brink of nuclear war . The two countries were at risk of a nuclear war when the Soviets placed the missiles on Cuba .
 President Kennedy discusses what he should do about the ICBM's in Cuba . President Kennedy also discusses the threat posed by the Cuban ICBM .
 CIA photo interpreter shows evidence of missiles sites on Cuba taken by a U-2 spy plane . October 16, 1962 at the EXCOMM meeting .
 Discussions continue about how to handle the possible threat in Cuba . October 17 Discussions are continuing about dealing with a possible threat .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots of CNN Travel next week at CNN Travel .
 Due to the age and poor quality of some of the PDF images, a screen reader may not be able to process the images into word documents . The age and quality of the images may be the result of the poor quality .
 October 14 th 1962, a U-2 spy plane spots the missiles . October 14th, 1962, the U.S. launches the first missile strike in the Soviet Union .
 As the situation escalates, the sense of percieved failure is going to be enormously high . The sense of failure will be enormous high in the U.S. as it escalates .
 Charles Multsby, an American driver, is lost by flying a mission in Alaska and ends up in Soviet airspace . He is lost in the Soviet Union in the early hours of the day .
 The tension almost drove the three nations to the first absolute nuclear war . The tension and secrecy almost drove them to an absolute war .
 What if u/AP246 was literally Hitler? I present to you my greatest alternate history scenario, maybe the best in the world .
 For 13 days, the Soviet Union and the United States were on the brink of nuclear war . Cesar Sarmiento is the author of "COLD WAR and the CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS"