 Khrushchev began secretly deploying medium range ballistic missiles and intermediate range missiles to Fidel Castro's Cuba . The Soviet Premier began deploying the missiles to Cuba to correct a strategic imbalance with the U.S.
 Once operational, these nuclear-armed weapons could have been used cities and military targets in most of the continental U.S. Once operational they could have used cities, military targets .
 U.S. intelligence discovered Khrushchev's brash maneuver before it was discovered . The United States intelligence discovered the move .
 The U.S. Navy played a pivotal role in this crisis, demonstrating the critical importance of naval forces to the national defense . The United States Navy is a vital part of the nation's national security, President Obama says .
 The Navy's operations were in keeping with its strategic doctrine, which is as valid today as it was in late 1962 . The Navy says the Navy's strategic doctrine is still relevant today as well .
 The Navy employed military power in such a way that the president did not have to resort to war to protect vital Western interests . The Navy, in cooperation with the other U.S. armed forces and with America's allies, employed military force .
 Khrushchev realized that his missile and bomber forces were no match for the Navy's powerful Polaris ballistic missile-firing submarines and the Air Force's land-based nuclear delivery systems . The U.S. Navy's Polaris missiles and Air Force submarines were powerful enough to defeat Khrush
 U.S. naval forces intercepted Soviet submarines operating in the area of Cuba . The United States Atlantic Command was headed by Admiral Robert L Dennison . Soviet submarines were also operating there .
 United States destroyers and frigates, kept on station through underway replenishment by oilers and stores ships, maintained a month-long naval ""quarantine"" of Cuba .
 Radar picket ships supported by Navy fighters and airborne early warning planes . U.S. Air Force's Air Defense Command prepared to defend American airspace from Soviet forces .
 U.S. Navy aerial photographic and patrol aircraft played a vital part in observing the deployment of Soviet offensive weapons into Cuba . They also monitored their withdrawal by sea from Cuba .
 Admiral Dennison was the unified commander for the Caribbean . He was responsible for readying Army, Air Force, Marine, and Navy assault forces .
 He also served as the Commander in Chief of the United States Atlantic Fleet . He was also the Commander of the U.S. Atlantic Fleet.
 Second Fleet, under Vice Admiral Alfred G Ward, was poised to launch air, naval gunfire, and amphibious strikes from the sea against Soviet and Cuban forces ashore .
 With speed and efficiency, other fleet units reinforced the Marine garrison at Guantanamo on Cuba's southeastern tip . U.S. civilians evacuated from Guantanamo, Cuba, were evacuated .
 Dennison coordinated maritime support operations carried out by Canadian, British, Argentine, and Venezuelan forces . He also coordinated the maritime support operation .
 Khrushchev faced with the armed might of the United States and its allies, had little choice but to find some way out of the difficult situation in which he had placed himself and his country in a difficult situation .
 President Kennedy did not press the advantage that the strength of U.S. and allied naval and military forces gave him . President Kennedy died at the age of 92 .
 The Soviet leader was able to peacefully disengage his nation from this most serious of Cold War confrontations . Thus, the Soviet leader disengaged his nation .