 "His voice and witness are indispensable in our efforts to enhance the wretched of the earth," says Pope Francis . His voice is indispensable in efforts to improve the world's wretchedness, he says .
 Bob Avakian’s delivery and timing is ‘inspiring’, says Juan Gomez Quinonez, historian and writer, UCLA .
 "The only thing more inspiring is the vision and message he presents to us," says President Obama . "He is inspiring. The only thing is more inspiring," says Obama .
 Bob Avakian convincingly argues that morality has to be tied to a vision of a good society, a society free of exploitation and domination . He says morality must also be linked to the vision of the good society .
 Even more does morality have to do with the struggle to create such a society, he says . The struggle to build a society is the result of morality .
 Avakian points the way toward what some doubt is possible, a materialist ethics . He points out that materialism is possible in a materialistic way .
 Avakian takes apart the saints of liberal democratic theory: he guts Stuart Mill and shreds John Locke . Political and Social Hermeneutics is the work of political and social Hermeneutic .
 Ross Gandy, author of Marx and History From Ike to Mao and Beyond My Journey from Mainstream America to Revolutionaty Communist A Memoir by Bob Avakian, is published by V Insight Press .
 No part of this book may be used or reproduced in any manner whatsoever without written permission . The author of this article has not been allowed to reproduce any of the book's contents .
 Photo section follows page 242. Perseverance, and Inspiration About Bob Avakian, follows page 241 .
 Bob raised the idea to me and a few other people. thought it would be a good way to introduce this revolutionary leader and thinker to a new audience, and so I strongly urged him to take this on, as did others . Bob said it was a good idea to introduce Bob to
 He heard us out and agreed, and before too long a few of us got together with a tape recorder and he set about telling the story of his life . "I was not prepared for what I would learn," he said .
 "There are sides to people that you only learn about when they start peeling back a lifetime of experience for recounting and examination," says Bob Greene .
 There is history, drama, drama and plenty of humor over a life that spans more than 60 years . There is no small amount of tragedy, tragedy or humor over the years .
 Bob Avakian's insights and body of work to be on the level of a Lenin or a Mao, a Lenin, a Maoist, a Marxist, a communist revolutionary, says Julian Zelizer . "I found incredible value in meeting this leader in a very personal way," says
 Avakian is someone who never gave up his dreams, while he has continued to critically and unsparingly interrogate himself as well as the movement he is part of and has contributed so much to .
 Bob is someone who came out the other side of that process with the vision intact, but greatly deepened in complexity and tempered with what can only be called science . Bob says he's someone who has a "living, critical, creative approach to that science"
 I helped to interview Bob for this work, and we then corresponded on the editing of the material from the transcripts . added a few footnotes to help contextualize things. As I mentioned, I . helped to . interview Bob .
 Lenny Wolff's life has spanned more than six decades . Wolff: It is difficult to decide which events, encounters and relationships are the most important and appropriate to mention .
 I have tried to select some which are particularly significant in terms of having had a formative or major influence in shaping my life and my view of things . I have been in touch with some of the world's most famous artists .
 I have also included things that may seem of lesser significance but that I recall fondly and still find humorous or in some other way interesting . This too may provide some insight into what I am like and what my life has been, and continues to be, all about .
 It is difficult to recall with complete accuracy all the people, events and circumstances which are mentioned here, I have done my best and I hope and believe that 1 have succeeded in this, at least with regard to the essentials .
 In a number of instances, 1 have given only part of a person’s name or I have actually changed the name. In some cases, I have given part of the name or changed it .
 Despite the limitations, I believe that I have been able to convey, at times indirectly and wherever possible directly, a sense of people who have been important in my life, on a personal level and in terms of shaping my view .
 For those who are not directly mentioned, but whom I hold in my heart, you know who you are .
 For the ways in which many people have played a positive role in helping me come to the understanding and commitment that has characterized, and will continue to characterize, my life and life’s work, I am very grateful . For many of the ways people have helped him come to an
 All of a sudden contractions had started but she was “holding me in” until we got to the hospital, she said . "She was ‘holding me” in the hospital. She was holding her in, until she was ready to give birth to her daughter
 "I was actually born in Washington, D.C. but lived my first three years in Arlington, Virginia, across the Potomac . So I was actually . born in . Washington, DC, but lived in Arlington for three years .
 My mother, Ruth, was originally from Berkeley, California, and my dad, Spurgeon, is originally from Fresno, California . My mom and dad are originally from California .
 My father had become a lawyer by then, and had gotten a job working for the Justice Department as a tax evasion prosecutor . My father worked for the Department of Justice in the 1980s .
 My dad went to Fresno State for his undergraduate college, then to law school at Boalt Hall in Berkeley, California . He went to Armenia to Fresno before moving to Berkeley for law school .
 He'd gotten a lot of offers for jobs from private firms if he would change his name so it didn't sound Armenian . He refused to do that out of pride and because it just seemed unprincipled and unjust for him to have to .
 My dads parents emigrated from Armenia, before the massacre of a million and a half Armenians by the Turkish authorities in World War 1 . The massacre took place in Turkey during the First World War .
 Turkish government had carried out and encouraged brutal pogroms against Armenians for many years . Even before the war, the Turkish government carried out . The Turkish government was responsible for pograms against Armenian Armenians .
 My grandmother's and grandfather’s families had both suffered from that, and they had left Armenia and come to the United States when they were young, where they met each other and married . My grandparents had both moved to the U.S. when my grandparents were young .
 Armenians' father was born in the U.S. in Fresno, where his parents’ families had settled as farmers . The climate and the kind of crops you could grow were similar to Armenia, his father says .
 "By the time I was a kid my grandparents’ farm was very small, and they sort of eked out an existence with that plus the income that my grandfather earned by washing windows . By the time he was a . kid, he says, "They sort of . e
 "They grew grapes, walnuts, almonds, maybe a few orange trees, apricots," she says . "They grow grapes and walnuts," she adds .
 The grapes would have taken the most acreage, but the whole farm was only nine acres . The whole farm would have been nine acres.
 My dad worked on the farm when he was growing up, as did his two brothers . His two brothers also worked in the farm .
 The former farm kid became a sort of recreation for him when he had to do it for economic reasons . Later, when he didn’t have to do the things he’d done as a farm kid, he used to do as a recreation .
 He came back to Fresno and opened a small business as an auto mechanic . He now runs a small auto mechanic business .
 This was all during the Great Depression of the 1930s and nobody in my dad’s circles had a lot of money . My dad went to Fresno State because he could live at home, and then went on to Berkeley for law school .
 When I was growing up we would often go to Fresno to be with my father’s relatives for Thanksgiving, and then we’d stay at home for Christmas, and a lot of my mom's relatives would come over for that . We'd stay with my mom’
 The main thing I remember about holidays with my dad’s relatives, to be Mom and Dad 3 honest, is a lot of the food . "A lot of food is the food. It's the food that I remember," she says .
 I remember the smell of my grandfather barbecuing shish kebab on the farm . The smell of shish kabab is reminiscent of his grandfather's barbecques .
 Armenian pilal, rich with butter, is rich in butter . The chicken was so tender it would just fall away from the bone when my fork got to it, he says .
 A lot of the relatives in Fresno spoke Armenian, at least among themselves, more than they spoke English . The relatives in the Fresno area spoke Armenian among themselves .
 My father spoke Armenian, especially to his parents and to other Armenians, when they were in that cultural scene . My father was Armenian, and his parents spoke Armenian to his family .
 "I learned just a few phrases from being around my father, but neither 1 nor my two sisters really learned how to speak the language," she says . "Neither 1 nor her two sisters ever learned how they did," she adds .
 "We did imbibe, so to speak, some of the culture just from being around," she says . Yet we did not imbibe some of that culture, she adds .
 "My grandparents were very good-hearted, generous people, and some of my other Armenian relatives were as well," she says . "Some of my Armenian relatives are as well as my other relatives," she adds .
 Many of them were petty property owners and proprietors, with the corresponding outlook . But many of them also had a petty property owner and proprietor outlook .
 "Many of them were very narrowminded and conservative, or even reactionary, on a lot of social and political issues," she says . "I was fond of them, because they were relatives and many of them ... but, at the same time, many were narrowminded"
 "There was a lot of tension, which sometimes broke out kind of sharply. And from a very early age, because 1 was raised differently than that," she says . "1 was raised very different than that, and there was always tension"
 On one side of the freeway lived all of the white people . "On one side, there were essentially only white people living there," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Armenians, who were not actually European in origin, in the context of America were assimilated as white people, even though they faced some discrimination . Ironically, the Armenians were actually not actually Europeans in origin . The Armenians faced discrimination in the United States .
 By the time I was growing up, if you were Armenian you were accepted among the while people, by and large, you were . Armenians were accepted as being white, the way other immigrants, like Italians, might have gone through some discrimination . Italians, like Armenians, might
 The Blacks and the Latinos and Asians lived on the other side of the 4 From Ike to Mao and Beyond freeway in Fresno, California . The conditions were markedly and dramatically much worse .
 Fresno relatives never ventured across the freeway . And none of my Fresno relatives ever ventured, at least if they could help it .
 "This was emblematic and representative of a lot of the conflict that came up," she says . "This is emblematic," she adds. "It's emblematic, representative of ... conflict"
 For these reasons, I have acutely contradictory feelings about Fresno and my Armenian relatives . For the first time I have been in the U.S. for more than a decade, I was in the midst of a crisis in Fresno, California .
 My dad was very aware of the discrimination against Armenians, and this had a big effect on how he looked at things more broadly . My dad, who was Armenian, is proud of his achievements in Armenia .
 Many people offered him jobs if he would change his name if he changed his name . He ended up setting up his own practice, and practiced law with a couple of partners, partly because he couldn't get hired by other firms .
 CNN.com's John Sutter: "I remember his telling a story about when he was on the college debating team. I remember his . story about being on the debating team."
 The debate team went to the house of one of the debating team members for dinner before the debate . They were traveling to a debate in Oregon, 1 think .
 The debate team got a look on their faces, and the parents realized they must have committed a faux pas, and then someone told them what the deal was with my dad . Then all the members of the debating team got this look of their faces .
 "Those kinds of incidents stamped the question of discrimination very acutely into my father’s consciousness," she says . "I’m sure that discrimination will never be tolerated in the United States"
 "It made him very acutely aware of the whole question of discrimination and the injustice of it," she says . "He has talked about the big impact this had on him and how it made him acutely aware"
 The struggle around civil rights and the oppression of Black people broke open in American society in the 1950s and ’60s . This would carry over importantly into his life, when the struggle around Civil rights and oppression of black people broke .
 I remember running around what seemed like a huge courtyard when I was maybe two years old . I remember . running around . when 1 was maybe 2 years old. "I remember running . around"
 "At the time it seemed pretty big to me. I went back and saw it as a teenager and it turned out to be a tiny little space," he says . "I'm not surprised at the size of the space I thought it was," he adds .
 My dad got polio and was paralyzed when he was paralyzed . My dad was paralyzed by the disease, but I have a very strong memory of his father's illness .
 This was pretty traumatic for me—to see someone so strong in my life in such suffering. "I'm not sure how long it will be for me," she says .
 'A lot of the other parents didn’t want their kids to play with me or my sister any more. On top of this, a lot of other parents wanted their kids out of the house any more,' she said . 'I don't want to see my sister play
 My mother nursed my dad back Mom and Dad 5 to health while she was pregnant with my younger sister . She had to keep two boisterous kids indoors because other parents didn’t want to risk getting their kids exposed to polio .
 My dad was determined to regain his ability to walk and even to run and to play sports . He was determined he would be able to walk again, even if he couldn't .
 She came running in and his leg was just microscopically off the bed, but he was so excited, because that was the first time, since he got polio, that he’d been able to lift his leg on his own, she said .
 It look him quite a while to get back to walking but eventually, with a lot of determination and help from my mom, he got back all of his abilities to do things . His stomach muscles were permanently weakened .
 My mother was both compassionate and generous on the one hand, and very determined if she made up her mind about something . She was both generous and determined on the other hand .
 "There was no other way for my father to recover, other than for her to essentially nurse him back to health and assist him with his exercises . 1 don’t remember exactly how long a period that was -- it wasn”t years, but it was months, but
 My parents were very fond of each other and very good to each other — they were married for over sixty years . "They were very affectionate and good friends," she said .
 "There was also this sort of classical post-World War 2 division of labor where mainly my mom took care of the kids and my dad worked," she says . "But there was also some sort of traditional post-WWII division of . labor," she adds .
 "I can remember, for example, when my younger sister, Mary-Lou, was born, just before we left Washington, D.C., in 1946 . I can remember when I was in the U.S. in the early days of my life, when we left D
 My older sister and 1 both had the chicken pox while my mom was in the hospital having my sister . My mom was having a baby while she was having her older sister .
 "My dad had to go out of town for work, so they had to get a baby sitter," she says . "I'm so proud of my daughter that I can't wait for her to be born," she adds .
 At that point, my sister and 1 were at the totally unmanageable stage ol just getting over the chicken pox, and the baby sitter could only take a few hours of us before 6 From Ike to Mao and Beyond . She was calling up my dad and threatening to quit
 Dad prevailed on her to stay, but that gives you a feel for how it was in those days, with the classical postWW2 division of labor . Eventually, as I recall, my dad prevailed on my dad to stay .
 My mother’s family name was Welch, Welch, and she came from a long line of families from Great Britain, both her mother's and father's . That's a very different background than my dad's, and that's very different .
 A lot of the religious side of her was this spirit of “Christian giving” and the golden rule and doing for the less fortunate . But a lot of her religious side, she said, was this .
 "Even some of the things that could have been tokenistic were more than that with my mom," she says . "I'm not going to be able to do anything that could be tokenistic"
 We used to have “sacrifice night” on Sundays during Lent, when instead of having a regular meal, we would have a very sparse meal, and not eat anything for the rest of the night . We would have very sparse meals, not eating anything else for rest of
 We would lake the money that we would have spent on having a regular meal and contribute it to a church charity . Then we would then contribute the money to the church charity. We would then donate it to the local church .
 "Obviously, we weren’t sharing the conditions of the oppressed or of the really impoverished people in the world," he said .
 "Some of us kids kind of dreaded it, but it also had a good effect on us, even though it was in the context of “Christian charity” and so on. To be honest, some of us . Some of us ... dreaded it. But it had a
 "She wasn’t self-effacing, but she was very selfsacrificing and generous," she said . "She was self-sacrificeful and generous. She was very generous"
 "My parents weren’t just together for over sixty years, they were extremely fond of each other the whole time. Now, my parents weren't just . just together . They were extremely affectionate, the entire time . Now, I'm very proud of my parents .
 "I always recognized and appreciated her compassion and generosity and self-sacrificing qualities. This was something that I always recognized," she said. "This was something I always recognize and appreciated, and especially with my mom," she added .
 Growing up as a boy in the ’40s and ’50s, in the more middle class stratum that I was from, in a lot of ways I kind of kind of took my mother for granted . But growing up in the '40s, '50s
 "She was always there, she was always supportive, helpful, and she was so compassionate and sympathetic," she said . She was always sacrificing for other people in the family or for others beyond the family .
 "As an adult I actually learned a lot of things about my mother, and learned to appreciate her much more fully, than I did as a kid. But as an adult, I actually learn to appreciate my mother more fully," he says .
 Mom and Dad 7 was still pretty young, back in the 1930s . She drove her family across the country at one point, which was not that common for a woman to do then .
 When she was Leaching high school, there was one student there who needed to get certain credits for college . She needed to take Latin, but there was no Latin class there . Another lime, when she was . She was a student at Leaching High School .
 "I've come to see how I’ve taken many of her values and made them my own," she says . "Even more than those incidents, she’s come to . see how she has made many of those values her own"
 "My mother had a great love of the outdoors that she’d gotten from her family, in particular her father," she said . "Also, my mother had had a lot of fun with the outdoors," she added . "She had a very strong love of outdoor living,"
 "She liked taking us to the mountains and out into nature, to all these beautiful places that 1 learned to love," she says .
 Merced is a little way from Fresno, California, and a little ways from Fresno . The town is a small, dreary town just a few miles from the city of Fresno .
 "It was getting to be about lunchtime, and Merced was about an hour away, and my mother was very determined that we were going to eat in the beautiful setting of the mountains," she says .
 The rest of us wanted to have ice cream or something, down in Merced, California . We wanted ice cream .
 "My father ended up voting with us two kids to eat in Merced. Finally after a long discussion, we decided to have a vote," she says . "We decided to go to Merced, California, to eat there," she writes .
 She said the latter with such disdain that you would’ve thought we were going to be eating in a garbage dump, she said . She said it was the kind of thing she said she was going to eat in the dump .
 Her way of stacking the argument didn’t lead to her winning out in that case, but it did become a sort of family metaphor for indicating a strong preference while posing as neutral . Unfortunately, even her .
 "She was completely right, of course, and now I would have no hesitation to side with her if she were here," she says . "I would have been completely right," she adds .
 "My dad grew up on a farm, and later on he very much loved a home that my parents had in the Santa Cruz mountains," he says . "As far as roughing it, that wasn’t really his thing so much," he adds .
 As I said, my dad grew up in very modest cir8 From Ike to Mao and Beyond cumstances, so it wasn’t that he was spoiled . As a child, he had a very modest upbringing .
 "roughing it in nature" wasn't his idea of an ideal vacation the way it was for his mom . But "roughting it out in nature wasn’t his ideal vacation," he says .
 My mom was a student at Cal, which was somewhat unusual for a woman at that time, and then because of the Depression and because my dad was still in law school, they couldn’t afford to get married . They couldn't afford to have a marriage .
 After she graduated from Cal and after a year of looking for work, my mom got a job teaching school in a small town a couple of hours from Berkeley, California . She taught high school there for two years .
 She could not say that she was engaged while she was leaching, because then they would think she would leave once she was married and would fire her . She could also not say she would be engaged, as it would be thought she would not be able to do so .
 'She had to hide the fact that she was engaged, and a number of the guys who were teaching at the school were trying to ask her out,' she said . 'So she had to . hide the . fact that . she is engaged, she said. So she hid the
 After a couple of years, when my dad finished law school, my mom and dad got married . After a few years, they got married. But after a few more years, their marriage broke out .
 Neither of their families resisted their marriage . Neither of the parents were from different backgrounds, neither of them resisted marriage .
 Despite a lot of insularity among the Armenian relatives, my father’s parents felt the important thing was what kind of person you marry, not whether they were an Armenian . My father's parents felt it was important that you marry a good person, not a good Armenian, not
 "My mother was pretty readily accepted both because of the altitude of my father’s parents, but also because she was a very likeable person," she says . "She was very readily accepted"
 "My mother learned how to cook some of the Armenian foods, and picked up some other cultural things," she says . "And my mother learned ... how to eat some Armenian foods," she adds .
 She was accepted into the U.S. College of Medicine in New York City . She has been accepted by the University of New York .
 "My father, having graduated from law school, was someone who had a certain amount of stature when my parents got married . They were nice people generally, although they too were pretty conservative in a lot of ways, and also, to be honest, my father, had a . large
 Despite the conservative atmosphere in which she was raised, my mother was very far from being narrow and exclusive in how she related to people. Despite the fairly conservative atmosphere, she was not exclusive in her life, she said .
 If she came in contact with you, unless you did something to really turn her off or make her think that you were a bad person, she would welcome and embrace you . If you turned her off, you would never be able to turn her down again .
 Jack Nicholson "adopts" a kid from Africa in Jack Nicholson movie About Schmidt . His parents would do other “Christian charMom and Dad 9 ity” things, like sending money to Africa .
 "They actually tried to go and visit some of the kids or even the people as grown-ups" with whom they had had this kind of relationship . "They not only paid a certain amount of money, they took an active interest ... they corresponded, they actually visited some of
 "My mother had a very big heart and very big arms, if you want to put it that way," she says of her mother . "She was a very strong woman," she adds .
 She was not the kind of person who would reject people out of hand or for superficial reasons, she said . She said: "She would not be the type of person ... she would not reject people ... for superficial or superficial reasons"
 "I remember when I was about four or five years old and somehow from the kids that 1 was playing with. I remember when . I remember being about . 4 or 5 years old." "I was about . four or . five years ago and somehow . somehow from . the kids
 I’d picked up this racist variation on a nursery rhyme, so 1 was saying, “eeny, meeny, miny moe, catch a nigger by the toe.” 1 didn’t even know what “nigger”
 She explained to me further, the way you could to a fouror five-year-old, why that wasn’t a good thing to say. And she explained to her daughter, who was four, why it was a bad thing for her to say to her mother.
 It's one of those things that even as a kid makes you stop in your tracks. It’s one of the things that makes you feel like a kid. It was one of many things that made you stop .
 She didn't come down on me in a heavy way, she just calmly explained to me that this was not a nice thing to say, and why it wasn’t a good thing to do .
 "That was very typical of my mother and it obviously made a lasting impression on me," he says of his mother . "I was very proud to be able to do that," he adds .
 One thing 1 learned from my mother is to look at people all-sidedly, to see their different qualities and not just dismiss them because of certain negative or superficial qualities . One thing she learned from her mother was to look all sides and not dismiss people because of superficial qualities, she
 "I also learned from my mother what kind of person to be yourself," she says . "Try to be giving and outgoing and compassionate and generous, and not narrow and petty"
 "I had a sorl of typical American boyhood lor the 1950s," says author . "A lot of sports, a lot of good times with my sisters, and cutting up in school"
 We moved to Berkeley when I was three, and I have a few very sharp memories of those days . We moved in Berkeley when we were three, but I have some sharp memories and some impressions .
 I remember when 1 was told there was no Santa Claus, when I was five years old. I remember . I remember being told there were no Santa Clauses, when . I was told Santa Claus when I . was five .
 We used to have Christmas presents on Christmas eve, and my father or one of my uncles would dress up as Santa Claus . We would have presents on the eve of Christmas Eve, and we would have a Santa Claus present .
 There’s always someone missing every Christmas eve when you’re passing out presents . After you get to be a little bit more of a thinking person, you realize that there’ll always be someone missing .
 "I remember that this led to some tension with some of the other kids in kindergarten," she says . "When you’re a kid that age, you may not have that much awareness of or respect for how other kids’ families are handling this"
 A '50s Boyhood 11 some of ihe kids still believed there was. So you just start saying, ‘oh there’s no Santa Claus,” but 10 One Nation Under God .
 Another kid and 1 disappeared and never showed up for school . "To give you a sense of the kind of little kid 1 was, one lime I got the idea that instead of going to school it would be fun to go off and do something else"
 My parents were panicking, and in particular my mom was trying to find me, and eventually they found us somewhere . "We just thought it would be fun to go off and do something else that day," she says .
 "Some teenager in the area was trying to gel me to jump out of a second-story window, promising to catch me. was just about ready to do it, but my mother came along and just caught it in the nick of time," he says .
 She was furious. remember little things like that, crazy things that happened but you somehow survive . You somehow survive—or usually people survive them. remember . remember little little things . remember .
 Sports has been a big part of my life since I was very, very young. think 1 started playing football and basketball and baseball when I was about five, think 1 . I started playing sports at about five and now I'm a pro golfer . I love to play football and
 "True to his word when he had polio, my dad took me out and taught me how to play all these things," he says . "I'm not going to be afraid to play again. True to my dad's word," he adds .
 "This was more of a thing with me, being the boy. It's not like my sisters were explicitly excluded from this," she says . "It’s not like sister was explicitly excluded," she adds .
 My dad started taking me to Cal football games and basketball games from the time I was four or five years old, he says . He says he's been going to Cal games since he was just 4 or 5 years old .
 The Berkeley parade was one of the highlights of my year. I remember every year ihere’d be a parade through downtown Berkeley before the start of the football season, and this was one .
 Our elementary school was small, but we did have organized teams in baseball, basketball and football . We had organized sports teams in the school .
 "We even had a young kids’ team for first and second graders, and I played on that when I was six and seven. We played other schools and had city championships," she says .
 "Whenever he could take off from work, my dad would always come to my games from the lime I was really little. Whenever he could come to his games, he would come to watch," he said .
 You’d always see him with his little eight-millimeter camera taking pictures on the sidelines . You'd always be with him with a little eight millimeter camera .
 When 1 got a little older and I'd throw a pass that was a pretty long pass for a fifth or sixth grader, you’d see my dad pacing down the sidelines trying 12 From Ike to Mao and Beyond to measure how many yards long the pass was .
 "My dad used to write to him all the lime in these deliberately exaggerated terms, bragging about my sports exploits. My dad had this friend—1 think he was a lawyer who worked with him as a government lawyer when we were back in D.C.—and my dad used
 He’d write about it as though it were professional teams playing, sort of in a self-consciously exaggerated way, and then his friend would write back . He would write to his friend, who then write back to him .
 In her own way, my mom also shared in my enthusiasm for sports, but my dad was just full of passion for it, she says . "He had a lot of pride in whatever I was doing," she says of her dad .
 "It wasn’t that sort of disgusting thing where you put pressure on your kid and you have no appreciation for other kids," she said . But it wasn't that kind of disgusting, she added .
 He wouldn't yell at me when things didn't go well, and when we lost the city elementary school championship game in football, my parents consoled me, they didn't act like I’d let them down . He wouldn’t yell at her, and his parents
 I just loved sports, and whenever I got a chance I tried to play, I didn’t care if the other kids playing were a lot older than me. "I just loved sport. I just wanted to play," he said. "Whenever I got the chance, I
 "I started hanging around kids who were older, playing sports," he says . "Even young teenagers, or tenor eleven-year-old guys," he adds .
 "There’s this whole macho element to it, and one part of that is you swear a lot. And, of course, one of the big things when you get into sports, in this kind of society, is that there's this whole Macho element . And
 "Now my parents came from the kind of a background where you didn’t say things like that, especially in public," she says . "Now I’m not going to say that. Now my parents come from a background," she adds .
 They didn't gel too angry, but they told me that what 1 had said wasn’t a very good thing to say and I shouldn't do that . They told me what I had said was a very bad thing, and I should not do that. They didn’
 "Hubba hubba" is a phrase used to refer to a term used by older kids playing sports . "I looked up at them and said, “Well, okay then, but is it all right to say ‘hubba”"
 "My life was kind of seasonal in that way, and I loved all those sports in their turn, in their season," she says . "I loved all of the sports in turn, and that's what I loved," she adds .
 When I was six we moved into a new house and it was about equidistant between two schools that were in the Berkeley hills . We moved to a new home in Berkeley, California, when we were just six years old . We were in a new school that was in the hills
 Oxford was chosen because of the basketball courts on the school's playground . "1 picked Oxford because, when we drove by it, I could see it," she says .
 He was a student at Cal and took care of the playground in summer and on the weekends and after school . He was also a student in the summer and weekends .
 "I remember him fairly fondly—he was a nice guy, not like a military drill sergeant," he says . "He was quite fondly," he adds .
 The former NFL star throws a pass for a touchdown on the last play of a football game, and we won the game . "To give you the contrast between him and some of what you often see, we had an incident when I was in fourth grade," he says .
 Nobody showed up to referee the game, so the coach of the other team was refereeing, and his own team was offsides on this play . Nobody had showed up for the game to referee, and the coach was refereeing the play .
 He was thinking this coach/ref was talking about the touchdown, so he said “Okay, we’ll take it,” and then this . Coach/ref insisted that “it” meant the offside penalty, so we were forced to run the play
 "We ran the play again, I threw the pass again, but this time it was incomplete and we lost the game," he said . "This time, it's not the first time I've thrown a pass," he added .
 That coach/referee should not have put that kind of pressure on an eleven-year-old kid, he should have tricked him in that way . That should not be put on the boy, he shouldn't have put pressure on him too much .
 There should not have been that kind of atmosphere, where winning was that important . There should be no more of that atmosphere where winning is that important, says Mourinho .
 Our coach was not like that—he was actually a fairly decent guy as 1 remember, and he didn't make us feel like we’d failed the universe, or him, if we didn’t win a game, or even a championship game . The coach was actually
 "I was pretty regularly playing sports with teenage kids, and they inculcated in me the idea that you had to win," he says . But from the time 1 was nine or ten, losing was a disgrace, he adds .
 "It just kind of rubbed off on me, along with a lot of macho stuff," he says . "They had had this drummed into them, and it’s not so much that they sat me down and said, “this is the way it is,
 It was generally very pronounced in the ’50s, but especially boys who were deeply into sports got a heavy dose of this . It's generally very noticeable in the '50s and '60s .
 "That was kind of the negative side of it. Those are the kinds of things that more came from hanging 14 From Ike to Mao and Beyond around with older kids playing sports," she says .
 "There were a lot of positive things that came out of it because of the particular times," she says . "I was able to experience with kids from completely different backgrounds," she adds .
 At the same time, there was the negative side -- the sort of macho, militaristic, win-at-any-cost kind of stuff . At the end of the day, there were also the positive side: "Macho-Macho"
 I didn't get that from my own coach in grammar school, and 1 didn’t get it from my parents . But I didn‘t get that . from my . own coach, and I’m not sure what I was doing, but I got it from
 "My sisters had to do things like iron clothes — they even had to iron my clothes," she says . But, it was kind of a classical situation where she says, "I don't want to see my sisters ironing clothes"
 When I got into high school I had friends who were from poorer backgrounds who ironed their own clothes . When I was in high school, I ironed my own clothes. I'm proud to be able to iron my clothes, and I'm not ashamed of it .
 "Even though I loved my sister, I just assumed that driving the car is what a guy does. So there was tension that resulted not just from being siblings, but also from the sort of gender socialization and male domination which I just grew up with," she says .
 A girl gets a guy to drive her around in a car, girls don't drive cars, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "Girls don't get cars. They don't have cars. Girls don't want to drive cars"
 "There was tension just because I was always kind of a prankster. But even earlier, there was tension," he says . "I was always a pranker," he adds .
 For example, my father would often say, “okay gang” and then start telling us about the latest case he was involved in as a lawyer . He would often tell his children about his latest case, which he had been involved in .
 "1 was always sort of a prankster," he says . "I used it just for the nasty fun of it. All of us got it, but one of the ways in which I used it was, just for fun"
 Mary-Lou had to sign contracts to turn over her favorite toys to her mother . She would then hand over the ownership of the toys to me .
 Mary-Lou and 1 were very close in a lot of ways, so I don’t want to give a one-sided impression, but these were pranks I liked to play, and then my dad would have to come down and invalidate them . "These were pr
 When Sunday nights came around, I would not want to go to school the next day, so I would start calculatingly coughing about eight o’clock at night on Sunday . After I went to bed, I’d wake myself up and have these “coughing
 "When my younger sister got a little older, I’d try to get her to do the same thing, and sometimes she would, and we had all kinds of games," he says . "When I was younger, I'd try to play with my sister. We had
 "1 used to tie a rope to the rollaway bed and tie the other end to a door handle" "We could pull ourselves around, and get rides on it and things like that," says one of the riders .
 Jackie Jensen was a big star football player at Cal, so my dad and 1 were always playing catch and talking about him . "I also remember when I was about six, I guess, the big star footballer at Cal was a guy named Jackie Jensen," he says .
 Mary-Lou, who was just three, picked up a football and ran around the backyard saying “me Jackie Jensen, me Jackie Jensen” because she was trying to get in on things Loo, she didn’t want to be left out, she said .
 My older sister Marjorie would be in charge of us when my parents would go out sometimes . She would take care of us during their parents' time off .
 "We'd gel into a lot of fracases. So then there would be conflict between my older sister and the two others of us," she says . "We’d gel," she adds .
 "We were really good friends. But, while I’m talking about a lot of the conflicts we had, we were also good friends," he says .
 We would confide in each other a lot, the way kids 16 From Ike to Mao and Beyond do, and conspire against our parents, or complain about their parents, about what they wouldn't let us do, or what they made us do .
 I remember one time my parents went on a trip lor a week and they left us in the charge of this college student who was a friend of the family’s . I remember being in charge of a college student . My parents left me in the care of the college student
 He, of course, didn't know anything about how to raise kids anyway, and he particularly didn’t know how to deal with us. He, the son of a man who died in a car crash, said, “He didn”t know anything. He
 "We had all these grievances that had accumulated against this guy, who we thought was a tyrant. And so we had all . grievances, we thought . He was a dictator. We thought he would be a tyrant," she says .
 We would get together and conspire against him, and try to give him a hard time . "We thought he was just absolutely unbearable. We thought he would be just unbearable," she said .
 "I remember we’d do a lot of conspiring together like that, or just getting together and talking about things, the way kids do," he says .
 "There was the usual tension between siblings, and then there was the tension that came from the larger societal roles that expressed themselves within our family," she says . "There were the usual tensions between siblings," she adds .
 Still, gender conditioning went on from an early age and was pervasive . Still, the gender conditioning was pervasive. Still, it was pervasive, and it was still pervasive.
 "The girls pretty much played with the girls and the boys with the boys," she says . "I would interact with girls in school ... sometimes maybe we'd work on projects together"
 There were the usual grammar school flirtations that went on, but friendships were not really developed that much across gender lines . "Friendships were not developed much of the time," she said .
 "I really loved my sisters a lot, we were very close in a lot of ways, and I did some things with them. With my sisters, it was again a contradictory thing," she says . "I did some of the things with my sisters. I really loved them a
 "In some ways, I was the good big brother, and the jerk big brother," he says . He says he was the jerk brother, or little brother, depending on which sister it was . "It's not easy to say goodbye to your sister," he writes .
 "When we got older, when we started really getting interested in the opposite sex, we’d talk about that with each other and get advice," the pair says .
 "Our worlds overlapped, especially in the family context, but they were also very different," she says . "We were both very different. We were very different."
 There were all kinds of ads on TV at that point and, in retrospect, you see that in addition to the products, they were selling ideology, loo. Loo. For instance, there were all sorts of ads that were on TV .
 You had One Nation Under God A '50s Boyhood 1 7 . Lorraine Day, for instance, was a spokesperson for Amana, a religious group that financed themselves through making household appliances .
 She’d demonstrate a refrigerator and show you what a great freezer compartment it had, and so on. She'd show you a refrigerator with a freezer compartment . She'd also show you how easy it was to buy a refrigerator .
 The Lorraine Day thing was directed toward women as housewives, all the latest appliances that they needed to have. Lorraine's Day was aimed at housewives who needed to be housewives .
 "There was a lot more to her than that. Although my mother was cast somewhat in the role of the . classical wife and mother at that lime, there was more to . than that," she says .
 She did a lot of substitute teaching, and sometimes assignments turned into long term substitute teaching . She was a teacher in the 1970s and 1980s .
 There were a few Asian kids, and in the sports that 1 watched things were changing, so if you include those kinds of influences, the world 1 lived in was not entirely white . There were Asian kids .
 The immediate neighborhood and the school I went to were just about entirely while. But the neighborhood and school I attended was just about a while. It was a good neighborhood .
 "I liked school alright, but to be honest, if someone asked me what was your favorite part of school when you were a kid. And so were the teachers and the principal and all that," she said . "I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to say
 Even for that lime, a lot of my teachers seemed like fuddy-duddies— old-fashioned, strict, kind of narrow-minded people—and this was from the time I started first grade, back in 1949 . When I was in first grade we had the alphabet
 You learned how to print the letters and how to write in script, which is necessary, but you can only do that for so many limes until it starts getting to be a bit boring .
 From Ike to Mao and Beyond sports page includes photos from Ike and Mao . Mainly, a lot of what 1 learned, even reading, was from reading the 18 pages of the book .
 "I remember, even before that, around the time 1 was just starting first grade, my dad starting bragging about what a bright kid I was or something. I remember, around . I remember ... I remember how I was going to be a good kid," he said .
 The sports pages were the way I got my introduction to arithmetic and reading . When I got a little older, maybe in second, third grade, I started reading other things, like the Hardy Boys mystery stories . The way I learned to read was through sports pages .
 In California at that time you could start school not only in September, but also in February . Just to give an example of how mechanical teaching was,
 School year would run from February to February, and you’d graduate in February rather than in June . Then your school year would be February, instead of June, and your graduation would be January .
 When 1 went into the fourth grade, there were also the kids who’d been in the . fourth grade for a half year already, who were in the same class . So, because of that, and because the school . went to was small, there . was also the
 Fourth grade teacher had all the kids write multiplication tables on cards on cards . "I remember this fourth grade teacher having all the children write the multiplication tables," she says .
 Jenny would get up and go 6X1 is 6, 6X2 is 12 and 6X3 is 18, like that. Then she'd call on someone and they'd have to stand up, and the teacher would say, “Jenny, do your 6’
 "I was just about one week in this class, having come in at the mid-term, and I already knew my multiplication tables. I was just one week into this class," she says .
 1 didn't know that you were supposed to have cards with these tables written down on them . But 1 didn’t know that . You were meant to have . cards with this table written down . The tables are supposed to be written down, but you have to have them written
 A little later my turn came -- the teacher called on me to do your 8’s. "Do your 8's," she said. "A little later it came—the teacher called upon me and said do your eight's," the author said .
 In anticipation of this, 1 had taken a piece of paper and just scribbled some things on it, and folded it up so it looked like 1 had my multiplication tables written on it . 1 got up and looked at this card that just had scribble on it and went 8X
 The teacher nodded approvingly, and 1 sat down with a great sigh of relief . The teacher nods approvingly and 1 sits down .
 One Nation Under God A '50s Boyhood 19' is One Nation under God . The teacher couldn't really do anything, because after all I had gotten them right .
 1 was notorious for playing pranks in school, and drove a lot of teachers crazy, including maybe some who didn’t deserve it . By the time I got into junior high, and even before that, 1 was known for playing .
 Andy Devine was this old, somewhat over-the-hill actor, and he had this kids’ show . They used to advertise Buster Brown Shoes and some other things . Devine had a children's show .
 Froggy the Gremlin puppet was a puppet named Froggy . The main thing 1 remember about it was the puppets of the late 1960s . Froggy was the puppet puppet .
 "All the kids would get excited and start cheering, because they knew what was coming," she says . "They knew what they were coming. And all the kids got excited and started cheering," she adds .
 Pillsbury would say, “That’s right, you pour it on your head”—and she’d pour it all over her head .
 You had to be there as a nine-year-old kid at the lime, 1 guess, but to me it was hilarious . looked forward to that every Saturday morning. looked back to that .
 Every kid, at least the ones I knew, wanted to be like Froggy the Gremlin . "Froggy" is a classic classic of the classic classic .
 1.20 From Ike to Mao and Beyond ally carried lhai more into practice than some other kids . But 1 think 1 actu20 acted more like an ally than some others .
 When 1 got into junior high school, I developed this unique voice of my own, which was kind of like the Froggy the Gremlin voice but a little different . 1 would cut up in class and disrupt the class in this voice whenever the teacher would turn his or her back .
 Sunday school and church were required for children in the U.S. for many of their lives . Their parents were religious, and their mother was very religious .
 'To me it was another occasion where you would have friends and you’d see other kids. To me it would be another occasion,' he says . 'I’m glad I’ve been able to get back in touch with my friends,' he adds .
 We’d kind of cut up in Sunday school the way we did in regular school, but going to church was another matter . We'd cut up, but went to church, but not Sunday school, the author says .
 "Some of the hymns I didn’t actually mind singing, even as a kid. My mother was really into music and she’d given us a lot of that love for music," she says .
 Listening to the prayers and then silling through the sermon was just something you did until you could get out of there and go enjoy the rest of your Sunday, before you had to go back to school the next day .
 It's not that I wasn't religious, or didn't believe in those things—1 more or less did. It’s not that he wasn’t religious, he said. He said it was not that .
 1 wasn't the kind of person who looked forward to going to church or Sunday school . But on the other hand, 1 wasn’t looking forward to sitting in church all day, he says .
 So 1 remember sitting in church thinking about the shrimp cocktail I’d be eating when the church service got over, or how I was going to be able to go home and watch some sports with my friends in the afternoon, or just go out and play . 1 remember thinking about
 I didn't know anybody who was an atheist, or who openly expressed even agnostic views . I didn’t know anybody in my life who was agnostic or atheist,’s author says .
 A '50s Boyhood 21 States, in the middle class and white, then you went to church, and that’s just the way it was . Those were times when if you were in the United One Nation Under God . know that there were exceptions to that. know
 "In the world that I was in, and overwhelmingly among that section of the people, that’s the way it was," he says . "But in the world . I’m not sure what happened to me, but in the . world," he said .
 "I did in high school especially, especially, and maybe a little bit beginning in junior high," she says . "I'm not a little kid, but I'm a good guy," she adds .
 In high school, there were a lot of people whose parents were intellectuals and academics, and they were agnostics or outright atheists, and some were even communists . Some of the parents of those people were atheists .
 "People were just religious. But that was more in high school, and mainly in the social setting of my childhood," she says . "That was mainly in high . school, but that was mainly high school."
 "I think they even called it Hyde Park. One day he had to go off to a meeting or something, so l went downtown to an area modeled after Hyde Park in London," he says .
 Some people were giving talks refuting the existence of god and putting forward atheism . Anybody could get up and talk, and some people were refuting god . Some of the talkers were atheists .
 I think that’s the first time I heard somebody put forward a coherent atheist position publicly like that, and even though the people were adults, 1 got up and argued in refutation, or attempted refutation of their atheism, of their .
 I wasn’t one of these religious fundamentalist reactionaries, but I was raised to be fairly strongly and fervently religious, he says . He says he wasn't one of those .
 "This was like hitting me. And while it wasn’t a big deal to me on a day-to-day basis, when it was hit at, I would hit back," he says .
 One time, when he was about 12,1 met a Jewish kid while he was taking swimming classes . One time he was 12, he met the Jewish kid in a swimming class .
 This was the first time I talked with a Jewish person about what we believed and didn’t believe, she says . "I'm glad to be able to talk about what I believe and what I don't believe," she says of Jews .
 "That was the first time that I’d heard someone put forward, face to face, in a personal conversation, that they didn’t believe in the Christian religion that I'd been raised with," she says . "I was shocked to hear that someone didn't believe
 I wasn't outraged, I was just taken aback, I just sort of didn't believe it. I wasn’t outraged, he said . I was sort of taken aback. I was shocked, I sort of thought it was an accident .
 In elementary school we used to say the pledge of allegiance, and I 22 From Ike to Mao and Beyond didn’t question it. actually remember, when I was something like nine or ten years old, thinking to myself .
 1 used to say things like ‘f***’ to myself to see what god would do, then I’d pray for forgiveness because I'd said something awful . And talk about being religious, I remember 1 would tempt god—1 would say things . 1 would say
 A few minutes later, or the next day, I'd say ‘shit,” because I’d already heard all these words from the older kids I was playing sports with. A few . years later, I would say “shit” as a few minutes
 "It was middle class America in the ’50s. So, yes, it was very patriotic, very strait-laced," she says . "So, yes," she said .
 It went along with the whole anti-communist thing, the drills to duck under your desk to save you from a nuclear bomb . The drills were meant to get people into the psychology of maybe we’re going to have a nuclear war with the Soviet Union .
 We not only had the whole usual patriotic drill, but we literally were drilled in the fourth, fifth and sixth grades as traffic boys . We were told to be 'traffic boys' in fourth and sixth grade .
 We didn’t have adult traffic guards at Oxford elementary school, it was the kids themselves . The boys were organized into squads who would get to school early and go out before school, then at the beginning of lunch, at the end of lunch and at end of school .
 "We had a cop who came from the Berkeley police force, who was assigned to train us. We had to learn from him," says police chief . "We're going to have a lot of fun," he says. "It's been a great experience," he adds .
 We had this whole routine where we had traffic signs we'd hold, and whistles. We had whistles, traffic signs, and traffic signs . We had a whole routine of holding traffic signs and whistling .
 You were supposed to march out when the whistle blew and stand at attention, and you’d hold your sign out to the front and side; and when the . whistle blew again you .” When the whistle . blew again, you”d twirl your sign and
 "They used to have parents’ nights, when we would go through these marching formations. They used to be parents' nights," she says .
 "We wore uniforms and caps, and we’d go through these marching routines. Oh, we wore uniforms," she says . "Oh, we would do these marches," she recalls .
 "I remember that when I was in the fourth grade, they had a drilling contest. I remember ... they had to drill," he says . "They had to be drilling," he adds .
 There were maybe forty traffic One Nation Under God . A '50s Boyhood 23 boys. 23 boys .
 "If you did the wrong command or if you didn’t do it at the right time, then you got eliminated," he says . "You got eliminated. And if you did it wrong command ... then you get eliminated," the president says .
 "I was in the fourth grade, first year as a traffic boy, and I'd hung in there all the way to the end, me and two “upper class” guys, fifth and sixth graders . I was so proud, because my parents were there, because
 The cop ran all these commands on us, trying to gel one of us to mess up, so he could finish the thing . Then the cop ran them on us. Then he ran them all over . Then he tried to run them over again .
 4th grader was determined to win this contest, as a fourth grader, because that would have really been a big deal, so 1 was bitterly disappointed .
 "Lop sergeant" was the head traffic boy, who ran all squads of traffic boys . Head traffic boy ran squads under the direction of school officials, of course . The head traffic sergeant was the school officials' "lop sergeant,"" who ran squads .
 It was always a sixth grader—the boys in the fifth grade would vole for who should be the top sergeant the next year . "It was always always a six-grader," the author says .
 I remember one time that the kid who was voted to be the top sergeant had to be put through the paces before they would officially allow him to be it . The kid who is voted the most popular sergeant in the U.S. had to undergo a physical test before he was
 "We all got on our uniforms, and we went out in the yard, and the cop who was assigned to us from the Berkeley police was there, and then he turned us over to the kid who was supposed to be lop sergeant . So, during school, we all got
 A girl came down from the principal’s office to tell this kid who was going to be the top sergeant that his mother was very sick . And then, all of a sudden, a girl came . She said, "All of the kids' mother is very sick. And
 He was an eleven-year-old kid, so he just look off running to the principal’s office to find out more about his mom . Now he was eleven, he just looked off running off to the school to get more information .
 He was reprimanded severely, because he hadn't put his troops in proper order before he’d gone running off, he said .
 "I’ve reflected on that a lot of times, how similar it is to the bourgeois military," he says . "I've reflected on how similar I’m not sure what I think of the military. It’s like a bourgeois military. How similar it
 The principal, this cop from the Berkeley police force, and the fifth grade teacher who ran the traffic boys—they were all part of this conspiracy, the author says . The principal and the police officer who ran traffic boys were all involved in this conspiracy .
 The "good guys," as they like to call themselves, are the “good guys,” as they call themselves . And it all seemed like this prim and proper and righteous stuff, but it's not so .
 When my turn came, even though that had disgusted me, 1 still wanted to be top sergeant, because it was an honor . The teacher who was in charge of the traffic boys, the principal, and this cop all thought that 1 was not fit material for top sergeant. was too
 "They had to go along with the vote, but they were continually looking for ways to say 1 was messing up," says CNN.com's John Sutter . "I'm not sure what's going on," he says .
 He really fell in love with this puppy, and so did I, and we used to go every day after school and during lunch to play with “Mutt” "Mutt" "We'd come back before school started again," she says .
 1 had to leave class a little early, and get all the traffic squads out, and then wait until about ten after twelve when they all came back in and turned in their equipment . 1 ran up to Ray’s house. Because I was the Lop sergeant of the traffic
 We’d play with the puppy, and then 1 had to get back about a quarter to one so I could get all the squads out . We'd play with a puppy, then 1 would get back a quarter of one so we could get out .
 "I did this day after day, and there were never any problems, until one lime, 1 was coming back from outside the school about twenty minutes to one, and the principal and the teacher who was in charge of the traffic boys saw me coming in . The principal and teacher who
 "They weren’t going to get away with that one. That was my father’s training in particular," he said .
 'They just really didn’t like me as top sergeant. They just had to shut up and walk off with a chagrined look, but the fact was that they just didn't like me,' he said .
 One Nation Under God A '50s Boyhood 25 I Liked Ike . I first started getting interested in the presidential elections and all that in 1952, when 1 was nine .
 "My parents were going to support Eisenhower that year instead of Stevenson," says Stevenson . "I was going to vote for Eisenhower, but my parents didn't want to support him"
 They usually voted for Democrats, but decided to support Eisenhower . Eisenhower had promised to go to Korea and end the Korean War . The Korean War ended in 1953 .
 "I remember that on occasion, after church service, usually, usually the adults would stand around and talk about all these things going on in the world," she says .
 "This was especially the circle that my dad was most involved in at the church. This was especially in the circle," says daughter . "This is especially especially for my dad," she says of her father .
 In 1952, I was listening to them talk about the Korean War and what do we do, and then at the end of the conversation I came up with my plan . And one lime, I think it was the same year, 1952,1 was listening .
 "I remember starling to get really interested in these things at that time. So I remember starlings getting really interested," she said .
 "I don’t really remember my plan, although I’m sure it was totally unrealistic," he says . "I'm sure it’s totally unrealistic. I don't really remember ... my plan," he adds .
 By the time the Republican and Democratic conventions came around that year, my parents had quit supporting Eisenhower . Eisenhower refused to denounce and dissociate himself from McCarthy .
 "I was nine years old and they had already gotten me into supporting Eisenhower, so I stuck with Eisenhower, even though my parents went over to Stevenson . But I was nine . I was 9 years old, and they . had already supported Eisenhower . "I stuck with . Eisenhower,
 The Republican convention came on in one month and then the Democratic convention the next month, and for those weeks I would not budge from the house . "For those weeks, the house would be quiet," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 I was glued in front of the TV all day and all evening, watching these political conventions, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says he was glued to the TV during the convention .
 CNN.com: "Mr Chairman, the great slate of Ohio casts twenty-seven votes 1.1.1" "Ohio votes 1"
 McCarthy was a senator from Wisconsin who acted as the spear point of the anti-communist crusade of the late ’40s and early ’50s in the United States . Hundreds of people were imprisoned and tens of thousands were harassed and deprived of their jobs on suspicion of being
 McCarthy was notorious for the recklessness of his accusations and calls to purge ruling class institutions like the State Department and Army . McCarthy was known for his calls for the Army and State Department to purge .
 McCarthy's recklessness ran him into serious trouble when he began to target the army . McCarthy himself was discredited and lost most of his power as a result .
 This overall anti-communist crusade occurred in the context where the World War 2 alliance between the U.S. and the then-socialist Soviet Union had given way to open antagonism between the two countries .
 Every day 1 would get up in the morning and leave the house by nine o’clock, go down to my grammar school where there was a playground, and just stay down there all day, playing ball . Now, usually during the summers when I was young, every day 1
 "I’d be down there just playing baseball or sometimes football, all day long," he says . He says he'd be down on the field playing baseball, football or baseball .
 "My parents usually had to drive down there about six or six thirty and pull me off the playground to come home and eat dinner," she says . Her parents had to pull her from the playground at 6:30 a.m. for dinner .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots at CNN iReport.com photos of CNN Travel .
 'I went back to the playground, the way I had before. Then after that week was over, I went back,' she says .
 "My parents would discuss the paper, or the evening news when it was on television," she says . Her parents would talk about the paper or evening news on television .
 I was still an Eisenhower supporter in ’56, though as I remember I didn’t like Nixon even at that lime—I used to read the newspaper when the campaigns were going on, the political conventions, and stuff like that . I used to be a Nixon supporter,
 "I was fascinated with aspects of it, but 1 didn’t really understand the issues very deeply," he says . "I just stuck with it, you know. had a loyalty to Eisenhower that I'd developed," he adds .
 I couldn’t give you then or now any kind of deep analysis of what I thought was good about Eisenhower, he says . I couldn't give you a deep analysis, now or now .
 It was just that my parents had liked him and, even though they changed their mind because of McCarthyism, it wasn’t enough to make me stop supporting Eisenhower . It wasn't enough to change my parents' mind, it was that they liked Eisenhower, he said .
 I remember there was this Black woman who was brought up before the McCarthy hearings, and they ruined her life. I remember this woman's life. It was a woman who had been brought up by McCarthy hearings .
 She wasn't even the person that they were supposedly going after, she just had a similar name . She wasn’t even the one they were supposed to be going after . Instead, she was just a name .
 Whenever they had the “right person’s” it was just a witch-hunt anyway, anyway . Leaving aside the fact that whenever they had . the . right person, the . “Right person” would be the right person. The right person would be
 "In my house and among the people that I knew, to be a communist was a bad thing. In my house ... to be communist was bad thing," she says . "To be a Communist was a very bad thing."
 McCarthy was falsely accusing a lot of people, ruining them and persecuting them, conducting witchhunts, spreading the net way too widely . But, as we saw it then, McCarthy was unfairly accused of ruining people . McCarthy was accused of spreading net too widely and getting people to testify
 "That was the whole thing that disturbed my parents and the circles that they were part of, and that’s what 1 kind of picked up," she said . "That's what I picked up."
 McCarthy only got into trouble when he started going after the people in the army . McCarthy only really got in trouble with the army when he went after people who he targeted . McCarthy's career spanned more than 40 years .
 The powers-thal-be joined ranks and said, “No, no, you can’t do that,” and they pretty much put him down . Then the powers-thai-be said, "No, No, You can't do that," and
 Edward Teller’s 2 son was in one of his classes in high school in Berkeley, California . That was the ugly side of Berkeley, because of the Livermore Lab and research to serve nuclear weapons development and that kind of thing .
 In grammar school, we were constantly put through drills that were said to be part of preparing for a possible nuclear war . The drills had an effect on us psychologically psychologically in a lot of ways to be continually put through such drills .
 I don't remember my childhood having a heavy mushroom cloud over it. Still, I don’t remember my . childhood had a heavy . mushroom cloud .
 The Lime that I do remember really feeling that, and 1 think everybody did, was the time of the Cuban missile crisis . The Lime was the first time I've seen a politician in a political crisis .
 1 really thought the world was going to end, or that there was a good chance of it—and that fear was not unfounded . At that time 1 thought that the world would end .
 Edward Teller was “the father of the hydrogen bomb” and a right-wing ideologue . He played a very active role in the anti-communist witch-hunts . Teller played an active part in the witch-hunt .
 Even in Berkeley, the atmosphere was very heavily repressive and any kind of protests didn’t really break through until the late ’50s . The atmosphere was heavily repressive, even in Berkeley .
 Even after McCarthy got slapped down, things were still pretty repressive, he says . "You didn’t feel like your door was going to be kicked in by the secret police or something," he adds .
 1 was in the last years of grammar school and the first years of junior high school, in the mid-1950s . There was also a lot of “keeping up with the Joneses”—all this consumerism that came off the victory of the United States in World
 You didn't step out of line, you didn’t get yourself branded. More generally, you’re not getting yourself branded . You’ve got yourself branded, but you're not being branded .
 There would be a lot of debate about the Korean War, and there would be different occasions when I’d hear adults in particular debating social and political issues . But I do remember a . lot of debates about the war and social issues .
 When I was nine years old or so, 1 began to become aware of segregation . When I began to be nine, I was 9 years old .
 The YMCA in Berkeley was very unusual, especially for that time, in that it was integrated . There were a number of Black people, including kids, who belonged to “the Y.” 1 went to "Y camp" for about five years, beginning when I
 Camp in general integrated, including cabins, kids' cabins . Camp was integrated, says author .
 Each year the same kids would Lend to come back, so there were about three or four Black kids that were in the same cabin 1 was in, year after year . Each year, the same children would come back to the cabin .
 I remember one time, for example, we were hiking up the side of a hill that seemed to me very sleep and high at the time, though I’m Mom and Dad 29 sure it wasn’t really . I remember hiking up a hill, though it seemed to
 I got halfway up and 1 got stuck -- one of those situations where, if you try to go ahead, you can't get secure footing and you can’t go back . "I got stuck. I got stuck," he said. "One of those things where you can
 These two Black kids, who 1 think were a year older than me, had already made it to the top . They came charging back down to save me, because it was clear 1 was stuck and I was getting more and more freaked out .
 One of the kids broke down crying on my bunk, even though they didn't like me very much . One of them was homesick and 1 knew some of these kids didn’t like me, and 1 just broke down .
 One of these Black kids came in and started talking to me and told me that 1 wasn’t so bad after all, and comforted me . Well, one of these black kids came to me, and said that 1 was not so bad . I was comforted by one
 It was a contradictory experience, because 1 was still coming from where I was coming from and these kids picked up on that and there was a lot of tension . But on the other hand 1 learned a lot out of it, and not just in some academic sense—these experiences touched me
 As I was only nine or ten years old, 1 wasn’t very aware of these things, but 1 knew these Black kids came from a different part of town than me .
 Fritz would slap his thighs and then his chest, pop his mouth and make noise with it . Fritz was able to do this thing they called the hambone, where he would slap thighs and chest, then his mouth . Fritz used to be really good at it, and Fritz was really
 'I don’t remember seeing anybody do it as well as Fritz. I’ve seen adults do it, and maybe it’s my distortion from being a nineor ten-year-old, but maybe it's my distortion, but I don't remember seeing
 On the surface and in their principles, the camp wasn’t run on a segregated basis . But on the surface, it wasn't run on an entirely separate basis .
 From Ike to Mao and Beyond had a lot of staff who were Black, but I don’t think there were as many Black counselors as staff as staff . They had some counselors who were black, some of them were counselors .
 Some of the high school kids who were paid staff would also come out and play ping pong, or tether ball or stuff like that . The high school staff would play tether ball and ping-pong with paid staff .
 "You got to see some of these Black guys who were a little older and they had a little different perspective, so you learned" "You learned. You got to learn a little bit of what you needed to know," she says .
 I remember one guy, I think his name was James, who was about 17 and worked in the kitchen staff . I remember him as a 17-year-old boy who worked at the kitchen .
 All the kids really loved it when he came out and played letherball with us, because he was a really nice guy, but he was also hilarious . He was also a really good guy .
 He'd let you hit the ball for a while, like you're almost going to wrap it around the pole . Then he'd grab the pole and start shaking it, so you couldn’t hit it, he'd say . He’d let it hit him for a
 'I remember being really endeared to someone like that, like an older brother. And I remember being very endeared ... like a brother," she said .
 "I'm sure if I'd been a little older and talked to those guys like James, they could have told me a lot of stories," he says . But while there wasn’t a . lot of overt segregation, he says, there wasn't a lot . of overt
 "I didn’t perceive a lot of it, because what I was aware of was integrated," she says . "Not only things like the dining hall, but the cabins, were integrated"
 The people who ran the camp were consciously trying to do something against segregation . The campers were conscious of segregation, the campers said .
 The way I lived in the regular school year was segregated, so you didn’t notice the segregation as much, if you were while. The way you lived in a segregated school year, you didn't notice it as much. You were while while .
 From about the fourth grade, we’d play basketball, football, and baseball against other grammar schools in the city . However, once again because of sports, we'd play basketball and football .
 We went to west Berkeley and south Berkeley and played against the Black kids who went to schools like Columbus, Washington, and Lincoln . We played against Black kids in Berkeley, Berkeley, and played at Berkeley schools .
 "I remember one guy named Earl, who played basketball for Washington —he was about 10 years old and really a great dribbler," he says . "Earl" was a 10-year-old who played for Washington, he says. "He was really good dribbler.
 I used to pride myself on being able to really dribble the ball well, so there was very intense competition between us when we played Washington. Washington. It was a very intense rivalry between the two sides, so I was very excited to see him play for the U.S.
 When you'd go to these schools to play against these kids, you’d see this school was not of the quality of your school, and the playground was not . The playgrounds at these schools were not of this school’s quality, the school said .
 "It was only later that I put some of these things together more consciously," he said . "But it was later later that ... I'm not sure what I was doing," he added. "But I'm sure I'm doing what I want to do"
 I remember my parents talking about discrimination from the time 1 was very young. I remember . I remember her parents talking to me about discrimination, she said . She said: "I'm not going to let it slide down, I'm going to do it"
 "It didn't depend on my asking them, they were already talking about this," he says . "They were already talked about this, so I was aware of these things," he adds .
 "I’d go to play a basketball One Nation Under God A '50s Boyhood 31 game at one of these schools in west Berkeley or south Berkeley, or one of the kids would come up to our playground and maybe you'd talk to him a little bit. But
 You’d go to ‘Y camp’ and get some sense of people’s lives from when you sat around and talk at night by the campfire or back in your cabin . Or you'd go to "Y camp" and you’'d get some
 The things that the kids from west and south Berkeley would talk about were often very different . "The things that we would discuss would often be very different," she says . "We were very different. We would talk to each other," she adds .
 In some ways they were the same, kids do a lot of the same things, but in some ways, they were very different in their experiences and how they saw certain things . "In some ways it was the same," says author .
 "Our family would have dinner table conversations, where we’d talk about segregation and how it was wrong," she says . "We’ve had dinner table discussions about segregation," she adds .
 The neighborhoods we lived in and the school we went to were virtually all white; but, at the same, it’s not like my parents wanted it to remain that way . The neighborhoods where we lived and schooled were virtually white .
 They became involved and very active in things like the Fair Housing Act and desegregating the schools . And it's not just that they talked about it, they became involved, it was very active .
 Berkeley High was segregated until you got to Berkeley High . At that time, the public schools in Berkeley were very segregated . At Berkeley High, the school was segregated .
 This was one of the great things about it — there was only one high school . "This is only one school. This was the best thing about it," she says . "It's a great thing about the town," she adds .
 At one point there was talk about splitting the city and having two high schools . There was also talk of splitting the high school into two schools .
 "I remember all my friends in high school and I were very vehemently opposed to this, for two reasons," she says . She says she and her friends were "very vehemently opposed" to the idea .
 "We knew it was a move to segregate the high schools. One, and I will say it was the main thing, we knew it . One of the main things, is that we knew, was the segregation of high schools," she said .
 "On the first ground mainly, but also on the second ground, we were vehemently opposed to this," says Daley . Daley: "We are vehemently opposed" to this. On the first and second ground mainly . On the other ground, he said .
 When I went to junior high school, I think there were about twenty-five Black kids, and there were some Mexicans and Chicanos and some Asians, but it was overwhelmingly white . When I was a junior high, there were only about 25 Black kids .
 "Everybody knew we were going to Berkeley High, which was essentially half Black," she says . Still, everybody knew that Berkeley High was "basically half Black"
 One junior high, Garfield, was mainly white; another, Willard, was about half Black; and the other, Burbank, was overwhelmingly Black with some Latino and Asian students and a very few while kids .
 "The anticipation of going to Berkeley High was a big deal. We interacted with them in sports and other school programs," she says . "We interacted with each other in sports," she adds .
 "Everybody talked about what was it going to mean when you went to Berkeley High. Everybody talked about how it would be going to be," says CNN.com senior author .
 There were a lot of episodes and incidents where things would break out between the different junior high schools, or they’d have programs where the ninth graders would go to the high school for a one-day orientation, to get them ready for next year .
 Among the boys it was often put in terms of “how you gonna fight with the niggers” when you get to Berkeley High . "There was a lot of that kind of talk," says the author .
 "Not so much among my circle of friends, but more broadly there was a lot of that," he says . "I'm not sure what happened to me, but I'm very proud of it," he adds .
 When 1 was three, when we moved to Berkeley, we took a long car ride across the country and 1 liked that a lot . 1 liked it a lot. When we moved in Berkeley, when 1 was 3, when . moved to . Berkeley, California .
 1 really wanted to take the train back, because 1 loved riding on trains . And, at the end of the trip, even though we’d driven down in the family car, 1 wanted to go back .
 "I guess my parents weighed it and decided I was old enough, because they let me take the train back," she says . "They let me go back. I guess I'm old enough," she said .
 "They made a point of talking to the conductor and some of the other people who worked on the train and asked them to keep an eye on me," she said . "But they made a statement of support for me, and they said they would be keeping an eye out," she
 "We struck up a friendship during the train ride. It was interesting, there was this kid whose father was a porter on the train, this Black kid named Lynn," she says .
 We ran all up and down the train, causing havoc, and he got free food because his father worked on the train . "We ran all over the train," says one of the passengers .
 "We were about the same age, we struck up a conversation, and pretty soon we were running all up and down the train having all kinds of fun. It was just a natural thing that kids do," she says .
 "That was a big deal to me, to be able to ride on the train, and the whole experience," she says . "I was able to go to school in New York City, New Jersey. That's a big thing to me"
 When I was around nine, we went in the summer to Ensenada in Mexico and spent a week or two there at a hotel on the beach . I was nine when I went to the beach in Mexico, and we spent a few weeks there in a hotel .
 There was this kid named Francisco who lived in the town but used to come down to the beach every day and play, so he and I struck up a friendship . He and Francisco were friends, but he and Francisco never met again .
 "I didn’t speak any Spanish at the time, except for maybe a few words, but somehow we managed," she says . "By the end of the vacation we’d become really good friends," she writes .
 "I would go down to the beach and wait every day for him to come, and he would show up every day," she says . She says she waited for him every day to arrive .
 The water was warm and you One Nation Under God A ’50s Boyhood 33 could go way, way out . It was great for kids, you could go something like a quarter mile out and it would still only be a little over your waist .
 'We just manage to communicate whatever way we did. So we’d swim and come back and build sand castles,’ says Simon Tisdall .
 "We got pul up in the hotel owned by his client. Another time, we took a trip to Reno, Nevada, to see his client's client . Another time we got to Reno to see him in a Reno hotel, he says .
 "We got these seats for the show in the main restaurant/theater of the hotel right down in the front, really great seats," says author . "It was a really great experience," she says of the show .
 I used to love to chew a whole bunch of pieces of gum all at the same lime, and by the time this guy came on to do his act, I think I had something like 10 pieces of . gum going in my mouth at the lime . I think it was something like
 He was going to do a ventriloquist routine when he got to this part in his act when he was doing the routine . Then he was getting ready to perform the routine, he said, 'I'm going to be doing it'
 Bob Matheny played for Cal at that time . "I thought for a while and then 1 said, “1 want to be a basketball player like Bob . Matheny," said .
 "I was actually taking this all seriously, so I stopped for minute and reflected, and then said, “No,” and the whole crowd just cracked up . "No," he said, "No" and the crowd cracked up. "I stopped for a minute and
 The author's mother was so mad at her daughter's gum that she had to take it out of her mouth . "I was in the middle of a conversation with my mom," she said .
 "I’m looking around desperately for a place to put it while he’s talking to me, but I can’t find any place, so I slick it in my pants pocket," she says . "I'm looking for a way to keep him talking to
 When he said “chomp real hard on your gum,” 1 realized I didn’t have my gum in my mouth anymore, so I reached down into my pocket to get the gum out, and of course there’s this big wad of gum that
 It's stuck to my 34 From Ike to Mao and Beyond pocket and I can’t get it out, and everybody’s just cracking up . I’m pulling at it, but it's stuck in my 34 from Ike to . Mao And Beyond pocket .
 Finally l get the gum freed from my pocket and 1 stick it back in my mouth . Finally l finally gets the gum back in his mouth .
 He does this whole routine, whenever he squeezes on my neck I chomp on my gum . He does a whole routine . He squeezes his neck . Whenever he squeeres on his neck he chomps on his gum .
 When we finish, he runs off the stage, and 1 run off behind him; he comes back on stage and takes a bow . Then, 1 come back and take a bow, and 2 come back . Then when we finish we run off, one runs off and one takes a
 The next day we were skiing, and 1 could see these two women looking at me. "I could see them looking at him," he said . "The next day, we were skiing and skiing again, and the next day they were skiing again."
 They kept eyeing me, and 1 looked around, wondering if I’d done something wrong . The group kept eyeing each other, and one looked around wondering if he'd done anything wrong . They kept looking at him, and he looked around .
 The Movies 1 didn’t really do that much reading outside of school until 1 got to high school . The Movies The Movies: The Movies is available on Blu-Ray and Blu-ray .
 Before that 1 read things like the Hardy Boys mysteries and some sports fiction, and sometimes 1 read the Collier’s Encyclopedias we had in the house . Before that, 1 read books like The Hardy Boys and Sports Illustrated magazines .
 There used to be a theater in Berkeley where they had kids’ movies on Saturday afternoons . It would always be double features, especially when the weather wasn’t so good .
 "I’d slay through the first movie again until it got back to the point where I came in," he says . "The movie could be two thirds over and I’ll go in and watch the end of that movie, then I would stay through the next movie
 Movie about Cochise made an impression of Cochise when he was 13 . Cochise is Cochise, a Native American Native American tribe .
 The movie made a big impression on me at that lime because it presented Indians in a very different way than the whole “cowboys and Indians” stereotype that was all over the TV and movies . That movie was one of the most memorable moments of my life .
 The movie presented Cochise as a dignified person who wasn’t just doing crude stereotypical stuff they had the Indians doing in the average “cowboy and Indian” movies . Cochise was conciliating with the white expansionists .
 There was always stuff “I had to have”—nothing really fancy, just toys, sports equipment, stuff like that . One Nation Under God is a '50s Boyhood 35 The Baseball Hat .
 When 1 was in junior high school it was really cool to have a Pendleton shirt . There’d be certain kinds of clothes you had to have if you were cool to be cool .
 When I was a younger kid, they didn’t have any major league teams yet in the Bay Area, they had yet to have any . Major league teams were still being played in Bay Area when he was a kid .
 The Dodgers and the Giants came to L.A. and San Francisco when they were in high school . They came when they came to San Francisco and Los Angeles . "They came when I was in . high school, the Dodgers and . Giants came ... and San . Francisco came to
 In the Bay Area they had minor league Triple-A baseball teams . Triple-A was the rung just below the major leagues .
 "I used to go to Oakland As baseball games all the time — if you were a kid and you sat way out in the bleachers in center field, where you could hardly see anything, you could get in for nine cents in those days . You could get into the game for
 "I used to go and sit in the nine-cent seats on Saturday a lot," he says . "I’d go with my parents, or sometimes just with my friends. Sometimes just with friends," he adds .
 One year for Christmas, my mom gave me a baseball hat for the San Francisco Seals, which was a big rival of the Oakland As . She got confused and gave him a hat for San Francisco, the Seals . The Seals were a big rivals of the As .
 "So I traded that hat with one of my relatives or friends for something else," says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter says he traded his hat with a friend or family for something new .
 "It really made a big impression on me when my dad told me how upset she was," she said . "But my mom didn’t gel hurt that often or that easily," she added .
 If someone got 36 From Ike to Mao and Beyond me a present, 1 kept it, because the incident with my mother was strongly, indelibly burned into my consciousness . After that, 1 learned to see things more from someone else's perspective, to think more about their feelings .
 In high school, "a lot of things were breaking out into the open much more, the civil rights movement, things in the intellectual sphere, civil liberties things things things"
 In high school, I was very much conscious of that, and proud of being from Berkeley, California . I was proud of Berkeley— the sort of place that wasn’t typical, he says .
 "I probably just thought of myself as an American. Really, insofar as 1 thought about it, 1 probably thought of himself as a . American," she said .
 Junior high school was a big transition lor me. The World Begins to Open is the first chapter of this series .
 I went from a small school to this junior high school which had about fifteen hundred students in three grades — seventh, eighth, and ninth grade . The school had about 15 hundred students, including seventh and eighth graders .
 It was not just a change in size, but it was an open campus, almost like a high school . It was a change of size, as well as size, and it was a new campus .
 Instead of being with one teacher the whole time you went from class to class like in high school, you had to go to class with different teachers . Instead of one teacher, you would have to go from one to one teacher to one in class .
 "When you’re a guy and a new kid, you're almost forced to fight your way through some situations," he says . And then there’s this whole thing—at least in the ’50s, and from what I know it still goes on --
 In junior high, older guys would pick on you and you’d have to stand up for yourself, so you got in fights . I don't want to exaggerate, because it wasn’t anything like being in jail in an overall sense .
 Even people who used to be your friends would pick fights with you to prove themselves to their new friends . And even people who once were your friends picked fights with .
 Ray was a very close friend of mine during most of my grammar school years . Ray is now a very good friend of the author of this article . Ray will be remembered for his work at the University of Cambridge .
 'He lived down the street and we used to spend a lot of lime at each other’s houses. He lived down his street,' he said . 'He used to be a friend of mine,' he added .
 His mom had a stroke when he was slill in grammar school and, while she didn’t die, she also never recovered from it . His mom never recovered, and she never recovered .
 "His life became very, very difficult and I think that’s maybe why this stray dog he found was so important to him," she says . "I think that's maybe why ... this stray animal he found is so important"
 1 ended up getting in a fight with 1 in junior high school, at one point . "We kind of went into different worlds and he was in a crowd that didn’t like the crowd that 1 was in," he says .
 "It was just a whole bigger world, and you had to deal with a whole new set of conflicts and contradictions that you didn’t have to . deal with in the grammar school that I went to in the Berkeley hills," he says .
 At the junior high 1 went to, to a large degree there were the same kind of people, from the same strata and groups in society, as at my grammar school . Out of fifteen hundred kids at that junior high, there were maybe twenty-five or thirty Black kids,
 It was slill overwhelmingly white, although some of the kids were from more working class families . Some of the children were from working-class families .
 One of the Black kids in my class became my best friend at one point, but that didn’t happen until ninth grade . I'm not sure what happened to me when I was in ninth grade, but I'm glad to have had a good friend .
 "You were swimming in a much bigger pool and it felt like there were more dangerous fish in the water," he says . "But overall it was a different dynamic," he adds . "It was a very different dynamic, but it was the bigger pool"
 It wasn't quite so innocent or so safe, even though things weren’t as ‘raw” as in the other junior highs in the city . So it was not as “raw’d’s’ most junior highs .
 "There was a lot of social pressure to start acting like a “man,” to prove you’re tough," she says . And there was social pressure, she says. "To prove you're tough. You’ve got to act like a man,
 1 spent 8th grade carrying a switchblade knife around with me . 1 spent eighth grade carrying switchblade knives around with him .
 "I didn’t really know what to do with it exactly, and really 1 didn't want to do anything with it. Fortunately, I never really had to do something with it," he says .
 I suppose I could have gotten into a situation where the logic of it could have taken over, and I would have been forced to do something terrible, or have something terrible done to me . But I carried it around, he said, "I suppose I . could have got into a
 There was a lot of posturing—and that was what you were expected to do in a certain way . "There was a little posturing," says the author of the book .
 It was almost like a ritual, a rite of passage that you were going through, to prove you were tough, that you could handle yourself . "It was almost a ritual," a rite-of-the-passion," she says . "To prove that you're tough,
 "You developed a certain swagger, you know, you tried to convey a certain image of yourself," he says . "You tried to communicate a certain message of yourself"
 It was a very difficult time—I felt alienated from things, but I couldn't quite exactly say why, even to myself . It was the time I felt alienated, and I couldn’t quite explain it to myself, she says .
 I had a few brushes with the police, but nothing serious . The social stratum that 1 came from meant that I didn't get in the same kind of trouble as somebody else would have . The World Begins to Open 39 police were a few times in the past .
 1 had a lot of run-ins and “friction” with teachers and other school authorities . Parents didn’t like the influence 1 was having on their kids, parents said .
 Sometimes parents didn't know what their own kids were into -- or if they did, they wanted to blame somebody else . Sometimes these parents didn’t know what they were into . Sometimes they blame somebody other than their own children or themselves .
 Don't know how the grapevine of the parents worked, but they knew about me. Anyway, the word would get around. don’t know how . The word would be around, he says . Don’s parents knew about him .
 "I was not into big trouble, but always on the border of big trouble," says the former footballer . "Always on the brink of getting into something bad," he says of his career .
 When my thirteenth birthday came, nobody came for my parly or anything. was all by myself on my birthday— which was, of course, very upsetting to me. So a lot of parents didn’t want their kids hanging around me, and when a lot .
 Tournament of Champions is a high school basketball tournament going on at Cal, the Tournament of Champion . But one good thing that came out of that was when my father said, “You know, there’s this high school . There’ll be a basketball tournament at Cal
 El Cerrito beat McClymonds by one point at the buzzer at the end of the night before . The place was packed with high school students from all these different schools, along with other people .
 McClymonds was this school in west Oakland that always had these great teams . They won sixty-eight games in a row, and they won this Tournament of Champions something like six years in a .
 McClymonds were playing for third place in the tournament, and they had all these players on their team that 1 still remember . I’d missed that game .
 Cleveland “Pete” McKinney could really shoot the ball outside and considered himself open for a shot as soon as he crossed half court . Cleveland "Pete" McKinney was a great outside shooter, shooting expert .
 Joe Gardere, who was only about 5’9” tall, was a tremendous leaper for McClymonds that year . Gardere could just about jump out of the gym. Gardere was a great leaper .
 All these schools would bring their rooting sections to the Tournament of Champions . The tournament is held in New York City .
 Students from McClymonds in the Cal gym were invited to the gym . "So all of a sudden, here you had a whole lot of students ... in the gym," coach says . "It's a big honor for the students," he says .
 There would also be these all-white schools from the suburbs, there would be Catholic schools which were almost all while at that lime . There would be schools like Richmond High, which was a real proletarian high school . Richmond High was the 'proletic high school', according to the
 Berkeley High was in the same athletic league with Richmond High in high school's athletic league . If Berkeley High didn't make it to the Tournament of Champions, Richmond High did .
 The first year I went to the TOC was a completely new and different experience for me. But that first year was a totally different experience, she says . She says she hopes to return to the event next year .
 It was a three-day tournament, Thursday, Friday and Saturday, early in March every year . The first game used to start at 4:30 on Thursday. would always be one of the first three or four people to be there when they’d open the doors for the
 This was just a wonderful thing, not just the athletics, but the whole social experience . This was a wonderful experience, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Going to the TOC "completely turned things around for me on my thirteenth birthday" "It became an important part of my life from then on," she says .
 Cutting Up I had all kinds of friction with my parents in eighth grade . Cutting Up: "I'm not going to lie to my parents. I'm going to tell them I'm sorry"
 Usually I got good grades and, while I might cut up in class and cause all kinds of chaos, I didn’t get in big trouble, with the police or with the school authorities . I didn't get in trouble with school authorities or police .
 In eighth grade I was going through all these changes, and for a good part of one semester, 1 let my grades go . But in eighth grade, I was struggling to find a way to cope with the changes .
 I had this one English teacher and we just The World Begins to Open 41 clashed all the lime. The World begins to open 41 clashed with all the limes. I'm not sure if I'm going to be the same teacher .
 For example, we were reading a Dickens novel (I believe it was Tale of Two Cities) and I fell way behind . I fell behind in the Dickens novel, but I'm not sure why .
 As part of a test, we had to identify a character named Pryor Edwards . Pryor Edwards is Pryor Edwards, a character in the series .
 This was a four-point question, and she gave me two points for creativity . This was the first question, "This is a four point question," she said .
 This eighth grade English teacher was also the ‘victim’ of this unusual “froggy” type voice 1 had developed . "Froggy" type of voice 1 developed .
 "That kind of stuff, and other things 1 did, would really disrupt her class," she said . "I'm not going to be able to do that again," she added .
 She kept me after class, so I’d have detention after detention, and I wanted to be at the playground or off with my friends . She kept her after class so she could be off with her friends .
 "I wrote this manifesto, some fiveor six-page thing declaring this dictatorial system of detention and the teacher’s word being law to be totally unjust," he said .
 "She wasn’t really a bad person, but she was new to teaching, and I was going through this difficult period, so we just locked horns all the time," he says .
 "They got me to sort of pull in my horns and gel through this semester because of a track meet coming up," she says . "I'm going to have to "behave" and "pull in the horns"
 My dad had taken me to my first track meet at Cal earlier that year, 1956 . My dad took me to a track meet in 1956 .
 On the Cal track team was this great Black sprinter named Leamon King, who had this beautiful running style, which I really just fell in love with .
 My parents told me that if they didn’t get a ‘seal of approval” from this teacher, say42 From Ike to Mao and Beyond ing lhal I was straightening out in class, they would not let me go to these Olympic trials . My parents
 Even though I did this whole traffic boy thing in grammar school, 1 had also internalized the idea that arbitrary authority wasn’t deserving of respect . The drill sergeant or the military dictator being the embodiment of that.
 1 remember we had this math teacher in junior high who kept three of us after class one lime, because we were joking around in class . I don't know if they ever articulated it exactly that way, but that was sort of a general value .
 "He started reading us the riot act, and one of the kids started laughing out of nervousness," says the author . "One of the children started laughing because of the nervousness. He started reading him the . riot act," she says .
 He grabbed the kid by the throat and started choking him and almost pushed him out of a second story window . The man almost pushed the boy out of the window, police say .
 "I hated from early on. So that kind of arbitrary, dictatorial authority was something that 1 hated," says President Obama .
 "It was against everything that 1 thought was worth anything and should be respected," says one of the victims .
 "I had also internalized from my parents and from my father ... that the Constitution provided you with certain rights, and you should stand up for them," she says .
 "In my own mind, with a lot of these teachers, that's what I was doing," he says . "I was doing. So, in my own . mind, that was doing"
 They were exercising arbitrary authority, insisting on their way in the classroom, and not willing to be flexible or to bend . The students were exercising 'arrogant authority'
 Thai’s overwhelmingly the way the teachers taught in the '50s, so I had a lot of conflict with them. Thai's overwhelmingly the . way the . teachers . taught in . the . 50s, "Thai's" way of teaching was the way teachers taught
 When I was 13, I applied what I had learned from my dad—and got in big trouble with my parents for doing so . But one time, when I was thirteen, I used what I'd learned from his dad, and got in trouble .
 The World Begins to Open 4 was set up on a public sidewalk next to the school . It wasn’t actually on the school property, it was a kind of a paved path .
 A couple of my friends were hanging around my old grammar school, so 1 stopped and started messing around with them . 1 of them was hanging around with a couple of his friends at the time .
 "One of the things we liked to do was to climb up on the roof of the cafeteria of the grammar school," says the schoolgirl .
 "We knew that you weren’t supposed to do that, that you’d get chased off of it," he says . "But we knew that we weren't supposed to . That’s what we knew," he adds . "You’ll get chased
 We took our shoes off and threw them up on the roof, and then climbed up to retrieve them . So we took them up and climbed up—ostensibly to retrieve our shoes . We then took their shoes off, threw them and climbed to the roof .
 "He was freaked out that we were up on the roof. Understandably, as 1 look back on it now, he was freaking out," he said .
 "The more he insisted that we come down, the more we refused to come down," says David Cameron . Cameron: "We refuse to go down. The more he insists that we must come down. He refused to."
 "I’m gonna call the police if you don’t come down right away,” he said . Finally he said, “I'm gonna call 911.” and at that point we did come down off the roof, he says .
 By that time, my friends had split, but I had decided to stand my ground . By the time I had split from my friends, I'd decided to do it, and I did it anyway .
 "I was standing on this pathway, which was adjacent to the school grounds but was not technically school property," said the author . "I'm standing on the school property, which is adjacent to school grounds," she said . "It's not school property. I was standing in this
 1 didn't have my shoes on, and he said, “What’s the matter with you, you don’t even wear shoes?” —and he started insulting me and told me to go home. Then he noticed that he noticed he didn’
 At that point I started riding my bike home. was about halfway home when I see my dad driving down toward me. At that time I was riding home. I was going to get back on my bike .
 "All the neighbors must have figured out that something like that was happening," she says . "And all the neighbors ... must have," she adds .
 "Here was my dad, with his stature as a lawyer, having a policeman come to his door to tell him his son was doing something wrong," his son says . "Here is my father, having to have his stature come to him having to defend himself," he says .
 "Instead of standing up for me, my parents were embarrassed and actually coerced me into writing a letter of apology to this cop," she says . "Instead, my family forced me to write a letter to apologize," she writes .
 I held out and held out, but it was gonna be hell for me in the house if I didn’t, he says . "I held out," he says, "but it was going to be hell" for him if he didn't, he adds .
 At that point I frankly had pride in being associated with kids from west Berkeley, because I felt that they must know how to stand up for their rights then . "I felt like 1 was being cast into good company," she says .
 "I knew that from my parents, and . my dad, all the legal training that I'd gotten, just by listening to him tell stories, but also talking with him about the constitution and everything," she says .
 On the other hand, it was an experience that stood me in good stead for the rest of my life, really, really . The experience was a good thing for me, but I'm not sure what happened to me .
 "For a while this really dropped my parents in my estimation. As a . for a while, for a . while this dropped my . parents in . estimation."
 "I will give them credit that later on they recognized they were wrong and criticized themselves," she said . "They were wrong," she added . "But they were right to criticize themselves"
 My dad would always tell this story from the point of view of how screwed up he was in taking this position . My dad, with great chagrin but also with a certain amount of pride in having learned better, would always say this .
 It was years before they finally recognized that I was right and they were wrong, but they did finally recognize it . "I was right, but I was wrong, and I was always trying to do it again," he says .
 The World Begins to Open 45 Live Oak Park in Berkeley, California . The world begins to open its first major park in the United States .
 My dad told me that the people around there were afraid that if they built an indoor gym it would attract a lot of the Black people from the ghettos of the city and from Oakland and they didn't want that—so they didn’t build a new gym . My
 "Black kids who went to El Cerrito High School, which was between Berkeley and Richmond, started coming over there to Live Oak Park around the time when I was in eighth grade," he says . "Kids from other parts of Berkeley started coming and Black kids went to . El Cer
 I’d get out of junior high school around three o’clock, and I would go and hang out at Live Oak from say three thirty until my parents came and found me or I got hungry and went home . I would hang out there from say 3:30 until
 "I would go back and hang out in the evening. Later in the spring and summer, when it would be light in the . evening," she says . "It was a great place to hang out," she recalls .
 "I was starling to have a lot of new experiences and different influences on me," she says . She says she was "starling to develop different interests, too"
 Basketball was my favorite sport when I played on the football team in high school . I still played basketball on the weekends, and I played it all year round. By that time basketball was his favorite sport .
 Teams formed up from McClymonds, Richmond and other schools and would come over to play in the summer leagues .
 "Big changes were beginning to happen, and of course there was a lot of tension," says President Obama . "There was a big amount of tension. Big changes were happening," he says .
 The McClymonds team was “skins” that night . They were playing an all white team . The team was "skins" that night, and they were playing all white .
 "For a brief moment nobody said anything, then kind of cautiously people acknowledged the joke with a ripple of laughter, and the tension eased" "The tension eased. For a bit of a moment nobody ... said anything," then "kind of cautiously ... people acknowledge the joke"
 There were a lot of things that were going on like that. White Port and Lemon Juice was created in the 1930s .
 My older sister, Marjorie, went to the same junior high school school I did, three years ahead of me . My sister went the same school as her sister, but she was just three years older .
 "They had a yearbook they put out, and they had all these things like favorite movie, favorite song, favorite food, and so on," she says . "I'm glad they're doing it, and I'm doing it," she said .
 "It was really improbable for this song to be the favorite song of this kind of a junior high, but that just showed how this culture was beginning to make its way into the larger society," the author says .
 "My mom played the piano and liked to sing and she got us all involved in music in one way or another," she says .
 I played the clarinet from age nine until I was 14, when it began to take too much time from other things I wanted to do . wished that I’d kept going with it and branched out and learned to play the saxophone, but I never did .
 1 liked listening to music, and I loved singing—all that I got mainly from my mother, 1 said . Nevertheless, 1 still liked listening, and singing, 1 liked music .
 They had a regular stable of singers who would sing these mainstream, while-bread type of songs, and they’d count down the hits to number one .
 I actually enjoyed singing some religious music, and I even went caroling at Christmas a few times, when I was a teenager . I actually went caroling at Christmas at Christmas, and went carolling at home .
 About the only part of church that 1 could stand was singing hymns, just because I liked to sing . The only thing that I could stand from church was singing . I love to sing.
 Bui now, as 1 was introduced to R&B, it was like a curtain lilting on a whole new world for me . The World Begins to Open 47 Bui .
 It was just an old warehouse-type building in Oakland, Oakland, but we’d heard all these disc jockeys on the radio, so to us it was this magical place . It was a warehouse-style building in an old Oakland warehouse, but to us, it
 We went down there and walked through the studio and listened to them on the air, and we almost felt as if we were in some holy presence . We went to the studio to hear them on air and almost felt like they were in a holy presence.
 "A lot of things were just getting turned very sharply upside down for me, and 1 loved it," she said . "I love it. It was a very special moment," she added .
 There were all these vocal doo-wop groups who were on the radio and had records out . There were also vocal groups who had records that were out .
 There were the Heartbeats (with James “Shep” Shepherd singing lead), “Pooky” Hudson and “Speedoo” Carroll and the Cadillacs . There were also "Pooky" Hudson and the Spaniels, "Speedoo"
 Arlene Smith was only about 13 or 14 at the time, but she could really sing with a lot of power and beauty . Chantels were among the "girl groups"
 There was a proliferation of singing groups in high school . Then, of course, there was the proliferation of high school singing groups .
 Jimmy Reed, a blues singer, played the harmonica as well as the guitar . Reed was a big influence in the doowop vocal groups . The blues singer's beat was a characteristic beat .
 There were songs like “Guided Missiles,” which was a reflection of the larger world out there . The singer died at the age of 50 at the end of his career .
 It was using this metaphor about how your love is like a guided missile which shot me down, he said . It was a love song, but it was using . this metaphor, he added .
 It wasn't just one particular doo-wop group or R&B artist that I liked, it was the whole thing. But it wasn’t just one . It was the entire thing, says the singer .
 When I was 13 or 14, Marjorie took me to San Francisco 48 From Ike to Mao and Beyond to see Chuck Berry in concert . When he was thirteen or 14 he was taken to see him in concert in San Francisco .
 She dropped me off and snuck out with her boyfriend, and came back and picked me up when the concert was over . She told her parents that she was taking me to this concert, but then she dropped her off . She came back to pick her up from the concert when it
 "Everything about my tastes in music very radically and dramatically changed. Once my older sister kind of lifted this veil from me and turned me on to what was playing on KWBR, everything about his tastes changed"
 "It also struck a chord with my own feeling of alienation and my shifting values," she says of the film .
 In ninth grade, best friend John, one of the few few Black kids in the school, got together with me and another white kid to form a doo-wop group for a talent show .
 John had a very low bass voice when he was just 14 or 15 years old . He had this very low voice, he says .
 This Coasters song was kind of a novelty song . John came in with the bass part, and this guy Randy did back-up singing on it . Randy was the other while kid, John came into the bass .
 There was a flowering of singing groups on a whole other level in high school, says author . "I’m sure this was also happening at the other junior highs in the city," she says .
 James Dean Generation: "My sisters and I had these contradictory relationships, mainly because of the larger societal relations which figured into our family" "They had to do a lot of things that girls traditionally had to be do, and some of the privileges I had being a boy"
 "Marjorie turned me on to this music. On the positive side, we were close," he says .
 It wasn’t just somebody telling me about music, it was more intimate—like she was sharing with me something important that she had discovered . It wasn't just somebody talking about music . It was like she was talking about something important .
 When she was about fifteen, my older sister really started butting heads with my parents . But when she was just 15, she really got into trouble with her parents, she started to get involved .
 Girls were restricted in a lot of ways, a ‘proper girl” didn’t do this and that, a "proper" girl’s . Especially as this applied to the girls, it was very acute—they were restricted .
 My parents were part of that 1930s Depression/WW2 generation, and while they were very sweet and compassionate and generous people, they were also strait-laced at that point .
 So Marjorie came into a lot of “rebel-wilhout-a-cause” conflict with them, she says . She says she's been in a "rebel" conflict with the family .
 "There were causes, there were reasons, but it hadn’t really formed itself into a conscious rebellion," she says . "It was against certain things, but not very consciously," she adds .
 Some of the things she did were kind of stupid, frankly, frankly. So it would take a lot of different forms, she says . She says it would be hard to imagine how she would react to the situation .
 "You can see the larger thing that was going on, regardless of particular forms it look with her," she said . Nevertheless, stepping back and looking at it with perspective, you can see a larger thing happening .
 The author's parents were down on smoking, but not just because it was unhealthy . "The whole thing about cigarettes and cancer was really just being discovered," she says .
 It was more like it wasn’t proper to be smoking, especially if you were a kid, and more especially if a girl . It wasn't like it was proper to have a cigarette, especially for a girl, it was more .
 This was the grinding of gears of different social forces and generations in conflict, so to speak. This was a battle of social forces against each other . This was not the first time this has happened in the U.S. history .
 "There was a lot of that kind of conflict, and it became pretty acute at that time," she says . "So there was ... conflict, which was pretty acute," she adds .
 Marjorie would do things like volunteer to Lake me to a concert so she could sneak off and see her boyfriend . She couldn't just tell her parents she was taking the car and going somewhere with her boyfriend, she says .
 "The tectonic plates in society were moving and changing and coming into conflict with each other," he says . "I think you can see that it wasn’t just a matter of my parents as individuals and my older sister as an individual," he writes .
 Later on, when 1 rebelled against my parents, it was a more conscious rejecting of a whole set of social and political ideas that was the negative side of what they believed, their acceptance of a lot of the mainstream American values .
 With her older sister it was more inchoate, more formless, more beginning, and more beginning . "I didn't really have a clearcut stance exactly, except butting up against the constraints and the restraints and the suffocation," she says .
 Later on Marjorie was sympathetic to a lot of those social causes and struggles that did arise, at least up to a certain point in a pretty general way .
 The author's sister's age-group was just three years older than him . He says the difference was a very compressed difference, with his sister’s age group three years younger .
 This difference between her generation and mine gives you a sense of just how rapidly things were changing . This difference just between her “generation” and mine .
 The civil rights struggle broke out in the mid-’50s, but it really became a big phenomenon and had an impact on the whole country in a sustained way by the late l 50s and early ’60s .
 "That was more my coming of age time, whereas my older sister was a little bit ahead of that time," she says . "I was more mature than my sister," she adds . "That's more my sister's time, but I'm not sure what I was going on
 "She was sympathetic with those changes, and that’s reflected in the music that she turned me on to and things like that," she says .
 In junior high 1 stopped playing baseball and, although I would still go to baseball games sometimes, I didn’t have the same enthusiasm for it that I did as a younger kid . I didn't have the enthusiasm for playing baseball anymore .
 "I just didn’t think it was as exciting as basketball and football and track," she said . She said she didn't think it would be exciting enough to play .
 A baseball game involving a baseball game has a larger social significance . But I remember very starkly a . story involving a . baseball game which has a . larger social . significance . The game was played in New York City .
 "Even in seventh grade, I was known to kids in my school, including older kids, as being really knowledgeable about sports," she says . "I was known as a really good sports player," she adds .
 The game was between Garfield and Burbank Junior High, which was overwhelmingly Black, with some Latinos . Garfield's junior high, Garfield, was predominantly Black and Latino . Garfield was a junior high student at the time .
 Burbank team showed up for the game after school, all ready to play, but there was no umpire so it looked like they would have to cancel the game . Burbank's team was all set to play but the umpire wasn't there .
 Usually, even in these junior high school games, you had at least two or three umpires . Usually you had to have at least one umpire at every game .
 "I had to run around with them and say safe or out. Then if somebody was running the bases, I had to . Then if . somebody . was running bases, they had to say safe, out or out," he said .
 Garfield team was ahead by two runs in the last inning of the game . Garfield was ahead of the Garfield team when the game ended up going into the final inning . Garfield team won the game 2-2 .
 The batter hit the ball to left field, way past the fielder, and these Burbank guys started running around the bases . Burbank players ran around the outfield on their way to victory .
 One guy scored, another guy scored . Then there was a question whether the guy who hit the ball was going to get all the way around home .
 Garfield outfielder finally catches up with the ball, throws it in to an infielder . The infielder then turns around and throws it to the catcher at home plate . Garfield outfielder catches up and tosses it to home plate at home .
 There's this cloud of dust coming up from the dirt as he slides, the game is literally in the balance, I'm standing there and there’s like a little delay—and everybody looks up at me. There’�s this cloud . There was a cloud of
 "It was really close. But 1 made the right call, because if you're in doubt or it's a Lie, you’re supposed to say safe," she says . "There was so much dust and everything that I couldn’t really see, and it was
 "All these kids in my junior high accused me of being intimidated by these guys from Burbank," he says . "None of them would talk to me for a long time. But, of course, all these kids ... would be intimidated," he adds .
 Mcirques Haynes Style 1 played basketball in the seventh, eighth, and ninth grades . He was coached by McHaynes in the eighth and ninth grade .
 "We played Burbank and the other junior high school, Willard, which was about half Black," says Burbank . Burbank is about half black, but Willard is about black .
 These games were not only a lot of fun but also formative experiences, especially given everything that was going on in the larger society, the author says .
 Schools in Berkeley, Berkeley, up through junior high, were still very segregated, as I’ve been describing . Schools were still segregated, up until junior high .
 Every year there would be a fight, every year the kids from Garfield would run from the gym onto the bus to try to get away, and every year some of them would get their asses kicked trying to run away after the game at Burbank .
 "From the time you were in seventh grade you knew this was going to happen," he says . "It was like a ritual and an institution, and from the time . You knew from the start of seventh grade, you knew something," he adds .
 He could dribble behind his back, between his legs, and lying on the floor and roll over and dribble the ball, and 1 just thought this was unbelievably great . He was able to dribble in between his back and behind his legs . He could lie on the ground and
 1 practiced, practiced and practiced, learning how to do these things . So 1 practiced and . practiced, learned how to perform these things. 1 practiced .
 There was less than a minute to go when we finally pulled ahead by about eight points . We pulled ahead eight points in the final minute of the game .
 "I’d been practicing and practicing and . practicing my dribbling and thinking about the Globetrotters," he says . "I'd been practicing ... thinking about Globetrophy," he adds .
 When the game got down to about forty seconds and we were just trying to hang on to the ball, I started dribbling and all of a sudden I went down on one knee, and then went on my back while still dribbling . So when the game was down to forty seconds
 "Everybody thought it was just a mistake, like I’d fallen down. And at first everybody thought it wasn’t a mistake," she says . "I’m not sure what happened to me," she adds .
 1 dribbled around for a few more seconds and then did it again . So 1 got up, dribbled . Around for a minute . 1 dribbles around for the second time .
 'By that time, my eyes had been opened enough that I knew exactly what he meant. was being influenced by a lot of Black culture. By that time he had opened up enough to know what he was influenced by, he said .
 "1 was becoming, as they say, sensitized to these things. My best friend, John, was Black and 1 was Black," she said . "I'm not going to be surprised, but I'm glad to be able to talk about it."
 "I knew exactly what the coach meant, and of course, that pissed me off all the more. So, I knew exactly . I knew what he was saying, and it was that he was talking to me," she says .
 "I took an “I don’t give a fuck” attitude because we’d won the game and I got to do my thing," he said . "But then, on the other hand, I took an "I don't give a f***"
 The irony was that I was doing this out of admiration for Marques Haynes, he says . "I had modeled myself after him and his ability to dribble," he says of Haynes . The irony is that he modeled himself after him .
 It wasn't really that I wanted to show up the Burbank kids, it could have been anybody we were playing against. It wasn’t really that . I wanted it to show them up, it was anybody else, it wasn't .
 The Burbank kids of course took it as an insult, and as an affront and as a challenge . That carried over to when we went down The World Begins to Open 53 to the game in their gym .
 Langston Tabor became a friend of mine in high school . Langston was assigned himself to guard me, and he was a good friend of me .
 The game was slopped because there were shoving matches and fights started to break out . But this was still our last year of junior high, and all the way down the court, he would push me and bump me .
 Going into the game, a number of us had decided that we were not going to have this thing happen that had happened every year, where you'd be chased out of the gym. Going into this year, we decided not to have it happen again, and that we didn't have
 With some kids, there may have been some racism in it, but actually for some of us in a certain way, it was the opposite of that . With some of the kids in the film, there was some racism, but with some of it, it wasn't that .
 They were angry at us not just because we'd beaten them in our gym, but because of what I’d done, because they took it as showing them up . But anyway, they were angry, even though that wasn’t my intention .
 One of the officials from their school came down out of the stands and said, “Either you guys are gonna play this game or you're not.” Another official told the players to play the game or they're not .
 The match finished without a fight, but with a lot of tension . The two teams then went through through the rest of the game without a win .
 "There was no fight. We ended up winning the game, and after the game we didn’t run," he said . "There were no fights," he added .
 When I was 14, 1 started really gelling interested in girls and 1 had my first real girlfriend, Nancy . Nancy. 1 started gelling . 1 had a real girlfriend . Nancy .
 At that lime, you didn’t see this phenomenon that’s interesting to observe now, he says . "You have boys and girls just being friends and hanging around in a group together as friends"
 If you were interested in a girl, maybe you would develop a friendship with her friends, because if they liked you they would help you gel together . Mainly it would be the form where sometimes, if you wanted to date, you would actually develop a relationship with a girl's friends
 "On that level, you’d kind of become friends and share some intimate secrets about your feelings and things like that," she says . "So, on that level of friendship, you'd kind of share some secrets about yourself," she adds .
 "I was 54 from Ike to Mao and Beyond spending way too much time with her. My parents didn’t like this so much. They felt I was 54 From Ike to . Mao, she was 54 .
 "They may have had a point, but there was no way they were going to break us up," she said . "We're not going to be broken up. We're not breaking up. They may have a point," she added .
 'They tried to limit how much time 1 could spend with her, but I found ways to get around that,' she said . 'I found ways of getting around that. In fact, they tried to . limit how long 1 could . spend with 1,000 people, they said
 Nancy lived about exactly a mile from my house, which is if you knew how to take shortcuts, which of course . For example, Nancy lived exactly exactly one mile from me .
 "I would tell my parents I was going out to hang out with the other kids, and then after a little while I would lake off running the mile to my girlfriend’s house," she says . "So, especially in the spring, summer and early fall, when the
 "After a few hours at her house, I would run the mile back to my neighborhood, and then go in my house," she says . "I would run back to her neighborhood, then go into my house. Then, after she would run, she would go in her house
 There was one thing that I was really proud of in graduating from junior high. I was proud of my junior high graduation, I said .
 In our yearbook, besides things like favorite movie, favorite song, favorite food, etc., they also had categories like “most likely to succeed,” ‘most popular,’ and so on . The yearbook includes categories such as ‘favorite movie,�
 "I got voted “teacher’s trial,” which meant the kid who gave the most trouble to the teachers . And I got voted "teacher's trial," which meant “the kid who’d most trouble” to teachers .
 "I didn’t strategically give in on my basic orientation of challenging authority," she says . "I had to make certain compromises and pull in my horns somewhat in the eighth grade," she said .
 A lot of teachers regarded themselves as unchallengeable authority that had to be unquestioningly followed . That just really rubbed me the wrong way. I'm not a teacher, I'm a teacher. I want to be a teacher again, I think .
 "1 took a lot of delight in finding ways to disrupt the classroom and challenge them," she said .
 There was a lot of tension because I didn’t like their exercise of arbitrary authority and I enjoyed disrupting that. But there was a very high level of tension, he says . He says he enjoyed disrupting the exercise of authority .
 In my last year in junior high 1 ran for election to this “entertainment coordinator” type post . In junior high, 1 ran . election to be an entertainment coordinator .
 "You had to put up posters and things like that to get people to vote for you. You had to do that," she said . "You didn't have to have a lot of people to get them to vote"
 "I had a few friends who were helping me, but I also wanted to get some help from my family," she says . She says she wanted to help her family . "I wanted to be able to get help from some of my family members," she adds .
 I asked my older sister if she would help me come up with some slogans and make some posters, because she was pretty good at that kind of stuff . So I asked her to help me make posters, and she agreed .
 By this time Marjorie was already married and had been out of the house and had a very young baby . She had already had a young baby and was already in the house .
 The World Begins to Open 55 was at sea somewhere. But her husband was in the navy, he was away from home . He was away at sea .
 "That poor guy used to come over to our house and he’d have to pul up with a lot of my antics," he says . "I'd get ahold of his sailor’s hat and do “magic tricks” with it, which weren�
 They got married and at this lime she was living back in my parents' house . Anyway, they got married . She was still living with her parents .
 Marjorie made a deal with me that she would help me come up with slogans and make posters if I would get up at night and feed her baby a couple of times during the week . So she made it a deal .
 It seemed like a good deal to me to say, but 1 found out it was harder work than I thought . It was a good thing to me, but I found it hard work to do, he said .
 "We did make that deal and carried it out, and she came up with a number of slogans," she says . But we did make it out and carried out, she says. "But we did ... carry it out," she adds .
 "I made posters with that slogan, and pul them up all over the halls of the junior high school," she says . So I made posters and pulked them up .
 John and Randy and 1, with our little group, were the big hit of the talent show that year . But although I won the election, the much bigger charge was when John and Randy and 1 were together, he says .
 Federal troops were called out in Little Rock, Arkansas, to protect nine Black teenagers who enrolled in a previously segregated allwhite high school . I started high school at the beginning of 1958 .
 Berkeley might seem to be on the opposite end of the spectrum from Little Rock, but it was in many ways it was . Berkeley is a small city in Little Rock .
 The same issues would play themselves out—in different ways—in my high school years . But Berkeley was nonetheless still part of America, and the same issues played themselves out in different ways . When 1 started high school, 1 was mostly just a 14-year-old kid trying to
 We were starting in February, so there was only a one-week break, at the end of 4.5 weeks . We had a 4.6 week break at the beginning of the new season .
 Nine Black students attempted to enroll in Little Rock’s Central High School in 1957 . In the fall of 1957, nine Black students tried to enroll at the high school .
 The Arkansas National Guard with drawn bayonets forced one of the nine away from the school entrance and back into an angry mob of white racists that threatened to lynch her . On September 4, the Arkansas National Guards with . drawn bayonetets forced a white woman from a school entrance
 Eisenhower ordered troops in to protect students after mobs attacked students and supporters . It took a full three weeks for Eisenhower to order troops to protect the students .
 Orville Faubus closed all the schools in Little Rock for a full year in order to resist integration . A year later, the governor of Arkansas closed the schools for a year . Orville Fauubus was the president of Arkansas .
 We'd agreed that the first day of school we’d hook up and kind of go through the experience together and continue to be tight as friends . We’ve agreed to hook up with each other for the first time since the school year .
 "But then when I got there, I looked all around for him and he wasn't there," he said . "I was looking for him. He was there. But then when he got there he was gone," he added .
 He wasn’t there all the next week, or the next month; and then 1 found out he’d been busted and been sent to juvenile hall . He wasn't there all that week, the next . The next month . He was there again .
 The second thing I remember is the orientation assembly for all the kids who’d just come into the tenth grade . The orientation assembly was for all those who'd just come in .
 The February group was a smaller class than the one that started in September . They had a program for all the new kids who’d come from three junior highs, Willard, Burbank, and Garfield .
 "I was walking around, trying to find a place to sit because I got there a little late, and a lot of the seats were taken," says the author . "I got there late. I was trying to sit," says author of the book, "I didn't want
 "There was this one Black kid who was leaning against the wall with his feet sticking out a little bit, just looking around," says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "He was looking around. Just looking around"
 As 1 went by him I very consciously made a point of walking around him so I wouldn’t bump into him or anything, because I was uptight . "Everybody in my junior high had always buzzed about how this was a big deal when you went to Berkeley High
 Odell was part of a singing group that I was also part of . Now by the lime I was a senior in high school, this guy, whose name was Odell, was . Odell .
 "On that first day, though, he was just messing with me as part of the general thing that was going on," he said .
 Even though John had been my best friend in junior high, he wasn’t there, he was there, and in any case that was a somewhat more limited experience . John was not there, but he wasn't there, as was his best friend .
 Although he went to the same school I did, he lived in a different part of town . He lived in the same part of the town as me, but he was a different person .
 "We didn’t go to each other’s houses," she says . "Outside of school, our contact was just mainly on the phone," she adds . "I didn't go to other friends' houses, I didn't even go to school with my friends,"
 "All of a sudden you were going to a school 58 From Ike to Mao and Beyond that was about half Black" "There was a lot of cohesion among the Black students as well, so they had a big influence," she says .
 Black people were becoming much more self-assertive—proud of being Black and not putting up with shit any more . Black people are becoming more proud of being black and proud of it any more than ever .
 As 1 said, there were battles about desegregating schools beginning to go on all over the country at that time . Even in Berkeley, where the schools had been segregated, it was still segregated .
 During the time 1 was in high school my father got on the school board and was playing a leading role in the fight to desegregate the schools . 1 was raised by his father, who fought desegregation in the school .
 "This definitely had an effect where I was. So this was the larger context at that time," she says . "So this was a larger context"
 I was quite nervous—I didn’t react in the way I know some of the kids from Garfield did, with pretty traditional straight-up racist kind of garbage, but 1 was still very uptight about the whole thing . "I didn't know what was going to happen
 High School football season was a time to connect with people of all different races, or nationalities, including a lot of Black people . "I started having closer interconnections and relations with people ... including Black people"
 "Some things happened even in my first semester that started taking me down a certain path, you might say. But some things happened ... that started to take me down, I might say."
 "I’d already started to make friends with people that I knew were going to be on the football team," he says . "People who’ve gone to Burbank or Willard that 1 played against in sports. They’ll play against each other in sports
 We were now in gym class together, all the guys who played a sport were put in the same gym classes . "We started to break down some of these barriers. We were able to get to the gym together," she says .
 I got to know and started becoming friends with Langston Tabor, with whom I’d been in these shoving matches and near-fights during that basketball game at Burbank, California . Langston became friends with Tabor after the incident .
 Langston was just kind of hanging out nearby as he swam in the pool . Langston is now a member of the world's oldest swim team .
 "All of a sudden, I looked up and there was this guy kind of looming over me," he says . "I looked up ... and there were this guys looming over us," he adds .
 I'm trying to figure High School 59 out where all this is going . I said “Yeah”—and now I’ve tried to figure it out. Again, I said .
 "I really didn’t know what was going on, but I just gave him a straightforward answer, because I was sort of naive," she says . "Now I really didn't know what happened, but ... I really gave him the straightforward answer," she adds .
 "He just kept that look for what seemed like minutes to me, but was probably only 10 or 15 seconds. So then then this big grin came over his face, almost like a leer or a smirk," he said .
 Jack McRay played basketball against McRay in high school and after high school, he says . He says he learned about McRay a little bit more from high school . McRay: "It was all cool. Even played basketball again, at a rec center in southwest Berkeley"
 Berkeley resident: "I believe he’s still sort of a legendary figure in the Sacramento Street section of Berkeley"
 Langston: "This was a very dramatic experience for me, and afterwards Langston kind of joked around with me about it and schooled me in how I might handle this kind of situation better"
 This was a time when Black people were fighting for justice and equality in the civil rights movement . "They were asserting themselves more. Even in their personal interactions with people, they were asserting themselves more," she said . "This was a period of a time," she added .
 As part of this there was a lot of testing—to see how you are going to react, to see what kind of person you are, says Mark Knight . Knight: "As part of the testing, there was lots of testing"
 Berkeley High was integrated, in the sense that kids from all over the city went there . Within the school, within the school it was very segregated .
 There was tracking, and the classes were largely segregated—not entirely, but a large degree . The classes were mostly segregated, but not entirely, according to the historian .
 The lunchroom was very segregated and there would tend to be segregation even within the gym classes, where Black and 60 From Ike to Mao and Beyond were mixed together .
 People did not hang out together socially, and things were segregated on that level too . Things were segregated in the 1930s and 1940s, when people were separated socially .
 As I started to make more friends among the Black kids in school, and to hang out with them, many of my while friends—or former friends—were not accepting of that . Many of his while friends, or former friends, were not accepting that, he says .
 "Not only were things still pretty segregated within the school, the school was very stratified and very cliquish," she says . "It was still very cliqueish. Not only that were still segregated, things were still very segregated," she said .
 Among white students, social clubs were basically junior versions of sororities and fraternities . Among the white students you had these social clubs, it was basically junior version of sorority and frat .
 The clubs were exclusively white, with the exception of one Black female social club, and they were completely segregated . There were no integrated social clubs, and the clubs were white .
 Except for the Black sorority, they were preserves of privilege and bastions of segregation in the school . They exerted a lot of influence, and they were generally haled by everyone who wasn’t in them . They were preserves . of privilege, bastions . of segregation,
 The Black kids especially, with very good reason, hated these social clubs . The Black children especially, especially, hated the social clubs, especially for Black people .
 1 don’t think that making new friends, especially with Black kids, was any kind of conscious “statement,” or anything like that . And that was the end of that conversation, and of any friendship between us, he says .
 "I didn’t really think about it in what you might call “social” or “political” terms, except in situations like the lime challenge . Gary challenged me in this straight-up racist way, I said, "I'm not surprised"
 For a couple of semesters, 1 regularly sat with this group of Japanese-American kids, mainly girls, during lunch . They would talk about things that I hadn’t really had much experience with or understanding of before that .
 I really liked them—they were very interesting, very intellectual, but they weren't snobbish or stuck up . They were interesting, but weren't stuck up, she says . She says they were very intellectual and intellectual but not stuck up.
 Kayo was a white kid that I’d known ever since grammar school, even though he didn’t go to the same grammar school as me . Then there was my friend Kayo, who was white . Kayo's white friend was a friend that he’
 "He was a real sports nut like me, but he also had a lot High School 61 of other things going on," says Bob Greene .
 He was a couple of years ahead of me in school, but I think he was only there for one semester when I was at Berkeley High, and then he graduated .
 After school, 1 called him up to ask him where he’d been . So after school, that evening, he said, 'I’m going to visit him'
 He had this piece of paper with a drawing on it, one of those things where it would wind back on itself, like a moebius strip, or something like that . He had a drawing of a drawing that he had drawn on it .
 This was completely out of nowhere, but he’d been thinking about infinity . This was a surprise, he'd been thinking of infinity . He'd been looking at infinity .
 Another day he comes in talking about infinity, with this diagram to illustrate how he thought infinity was . Then another day he talks about infinity . Another day, he says infinity was infinity . He says infinity is not infinity, but infinity is infinity .
 "From the time I was 13, his family would go to track meets with me and my dad," he says . "Kayo, his two brothers, and his father" would go with him at track meets .
 He was a world class sprinter, but he was one of these guys who didn’t like to practice . He was one in a world-class sprinter but didn't like practice, he says .
 He’d run down the track a few limes in these old gym shoes, practice a few starts, and that was it . He'd run down a few . limes . In his old gym shoe, he'd run . down track .
 We’d go to the Cal track where he was “practicing,” and we'd talk to him . We'd ask him how he felt about the upcoming meets and things like that .
 The West Coast Relays is a track meet in Fresno, California, every spring . The event is called the West California Relays and is held in the spring .
 We would get in our car, Kayo’s family and his family, or at least his dad and his brothers . Kayo's family and my family would get together in the car, or Kayo and his brother and sister .
 They were known by everybody in the school—I mean Black, white, whatever—as being the kind of guys who were always causing shit . "They were known" by everybody, "Black or white," "whatever," "Black, white"
 "They had this whole routine they did. For example, when you would come out of the showers in gym class, they’d stand there and snap people with their towels, especially all the white guys,’s white guys . They had a whole routine .
 One day I came out of the shower and one of them snapped me in the butt with a towel . One of the girls snapped him in a towel with a shower curtain, he says .
 So they had this whole Lonnie-and-Clarence routine, they did all the time. So they would do it all over the world, he says .
 "Even there it had a little bit of a social meaning to it," she says . "I think even there was a little ... social meaning," she adds. "It was reflecting what was going on in society"
 "Now we had an open campus, where you could go out at lunchtime and gel snacks or go up to the stores a few blocks away" "There was one main street where people walked up and down and hung out," she says .
 Clarence and Lonnie were part of the football team's social club scene . They were walking down the street with friends from the team, who were also part of this whole social club . Clarence says he is proud of his achievements in his career .
 Clarence or Lonnie threw an ice cream cone and hit this white guy named John in the face . John was hit by the cone, Clarence and Lonnie were throwing ice cream cones at each other .
 John was wearing his social club jacket, so he was like a walking provocation . He was wearing the jacket, which he was wearing when he was in it .
 Clarence starts pretending he’s gonna restrain Lonnie, “Aw c’mon man...”—and all of a sudden he wheels and punches John in the face, he says . "Aw c'mon man,” he says. ‘Aw c
 The whole street immediately broke out into these opposing lines fighting up and down the street, Blacks against whites, as if it were choreographed . The street was filled with people who were hanging out with some kids .
 The fight became a big deal in the school, and we all got the usual lectures about it. But the fight went on for a while, it became a major deal in school .
 The footHigh School 63 ball team got lectures about how we all hang together, and blah, blah . It's as if there were no racism even in the football team, the school says . The foot high school ball team was kicked out of the field .
 A few days later, when I came out of gym at the end of the school day, there was this long line of Black guys who’d come from different schools around Oakland, as well as our school . "I’m not surprised. It’s a
 The UFC fighter says he's trying to figure out what he's going to do after the fight . "Every white guy coming out there in the aftermath of this fight is getting kicked and punched," he says .
 "I didn’t particularly want to be kicked or punched, and as I’m getting ready to enter into this gauntlet, I see two or three guys that I know," he says . "I’d like to see people who I know. I didn
 I managed to make it all the way through the gauntlet without being kicked and punched . They nodded at me or said something back, and I managed not to be punched .
 'I noticed once I was through there were some other guys who came behind me and the kicking and punching started again. Then l noticed once l noticed that there was some other people who came in behind him and kicked and punched again,' he said .
 "This was bigger than anything having to do with me, this was coming from the larger contradictions of society and the larger racist relations and racist ideas that were being challenged," he said .
 Lonnie and Clarence weren’t politically conscious activists, and they had their own particular characters and things they did. I mean Lonnie, Clarence and Clarence were not politically conscious .
 People have these idealist visions of Berkeley as some place that’s always been the way it became through the ’60s . Berkeley is Berkeley, Berkeley, a city that's always been Berkeley, became Berkeley in the '60s.
 There was a lot of open segregation and overt racism in Berkeley at that time . But there was also open segregation in Berkeley, Berkeley, a Berkeley resident says .
 A couple of years after I left Berkeley High, in the early ’60s, a really ugly racist incident took place . A really ugly incident occurred at Berkeley High in the '60s and '70s .
 There was this area called the slope, where people would eat lunch outside . People would eat outside of the slope in the area .
 There were certain areas where the white kids ate, and Black kids better not come over and eat there or there’d be a fight . White kids ate in certain areas, and there was a fight over eating there, the author says .
 If you were a white kid you could go eat where the Black kids were, and some of us did . Some of us were able to eat where we were eating at the end of the day .
 If you were Black you did not go in these 64 areas . From Ike to Mao and Beyond other areas, you didn't go in .
 This came to a very overt and very ugly head during my younger sister’s senior year . Finally, this came to an end during her senior year, when her sister was in high school .
 "When the segregationist content became overt like that, fights broke out in the school," he says . "Then the lines were very clear," he adds . "The lines are very clear. When it becomes overt, the lines broke out," he said .
 Jeff and his friends were more isolated than they would have been even when I was in high school . But things were beginning to change, and this guy Jeff was more isolated . Jeff's friend Billy, who was in the same class as my sister, found him .
 "Even in this earlier incident, with Lonnie and Clarence, though it didn’t have the same overt, clearcut social content, we sensed and knew that this had something to do with these larger things going on in society," says the author .
 "To one degree or another, many people, including myself, understood that, even if we didn’t feel like getting into this particular fight," he says .
 At that time, the basketball coach at Berkeley High, Sid Scott, was a Christian fundamentalist . Sid Scott was the Christian fundamentalist.
 Every year when 1 was in high school, and even before 1 got there, the starting team would always be three Black players and two white players . Even before 1 was there, there were always starting teams with three players each year .
 A lot of times you could easily see there were five Black players who should have started, or at least four. thought that this coach’s thinking went along the lines that if he had four Black players and one white on the floor, the four Black . players would freeze out
 If he had five Black guys out there, he figured all the discipline on the team would break and it would just be an undisciplined mess—also ridiculous. And if he'd had five ... it would be a mess, also ridiculous. He figured all discipline would break .
 High School 65 had to have less than three Black players because it would be so outrageous, given who was on the team and how good different players .
 "Look, man, it's not just Sid Scott, it’s the alumni and all that kind of shit from the school," he says . "People who have more authority around the school, they don’t want an all-Black team out there"
 The civil rights movement was picking up and the more this carried over into all kinds of ways in which people were saying what had been on their minds for a long time but were now expressing much more openly and assertively .
 One time, when I was a senior in high school, our school got to play in a night football game . One of the night games was a night game in which our school played in the dark .
 We went on a bus trip to Vallejo, which is maybe 20, 25 miles from Berkeley, and the bus ride took about an hour . The bus trip took about half an hour, the author says .
 "1 learned a lot more in that one hour than I learned in hours of classroom Lime," she says . "I remember that very, very deeply," she adds .
 "This bus ride was kind of a concentrated opportunity to get into all this," she says . "Things like that discussion went on all the lime, one level or another, but this bus ride" was kind a concentrated chance to get in, she adds .
 "A lot of times when we were riding lo games we’d just talk about bullshit, the way kids do," he says . "We were just talking about bullshit," he adds. "We’re just kids do. We’ve got a lot of time
 There was something about this being a special occasion, this night game, and somehow this lent itself to more serious conversation . But sometimes, it would get into heavy things like this .
 There were girls who actually liked me, bul they would say ihings like, “You know I like you hut 1 can’t go out with you because you hang around with all these Black people,” she said .
 "There were things that were explicitly said like that, and then sometimes you could just tell the deal by the way people acted," he says .
 "All this was being shaped by the larger ihings going on in society and the world," she says . "And all this was ... being shaped in society," she adds. "And it was shaping the world."
 This was being shaped, or heavily influenced, by these larger ihings going on . Whom you were even attracted to and whom you were interested in going out with, whom you wanted to be friends with . Who you were attracted to, who you were looking at and going out
 "There were a few kids in my class who did, and they took a lot of shit for it," he says . "There was a few students who did," he adds . "They took a little bit of shame for it, but it's not easy to do
 In his senior year, there was one girl that 1 was very fond of, who was in glee club with me, and we went out for a little while . In my senior school, 1 was fond of her, and she was a very good friend .
 Every social club had to invite at least the president of every other social club to whatever function they had. Now it was a rule that every social club . Now it's a rule . Every social . club must invite . at least one other club to their function .
 She was invited to a New Year’s Eve dance sponsored by one of these white social clubs . She asked me to be her dale for that dance, and I was her .
 New Year's Eve tradition is to give a big kiss to your date when it strikes midnight .
 "There was all this tension because we were there and we were dancing together the whole night, and hanging out together, just like any other couple would," she says . "So, at the dance there was all . There were no tension because of the tension," she said .
 When midnight came, she and 1 gave each other the biggest imaginable kiss . "We really liked each other, bul we also really wanted to make these people eat it," she said .
 Of course, I got called things like “nigger lover” and 1 didn’t get invited to join these social clubs—which was nothing, because 1 would’ve wanted to do that anyway . “1 wouldn’have wanted to . do that
 High School 67 was “ostracized” and “outcast” among the mainstream whites . But whatever ways in which l High School was ‘ostracizing’ and ‘outcasts’ among mainstream whites was really nothing compared to what my Black
 Matthew, who was Black, really had a crush on this one white girl; he wanted to ask her out and finally he worked up his courage and asked her out . Matthew is Black, who is Black and has a crush of white girls .
 She told him, “Well, you know, I’d like to go out with you, but my parents and my friends...” and all this kind of shit, he said . And she told him she wanted to date him, but her parents and her friends
 "It was the kind of thing that left a deep scar in Matthew. That was much more painful than anything that happened to me," he said .
 "It was just horrible and excruciating, and the scars of that were much deeper than anything that happened to me," she says . "It's just horrible, excruciating and excruciating," she recalls .
 John Sutter: I knew him before high school, because I went to a church in Berkeley where his father worked as a custodian and he would come around and help his father sometimes . He says he knew Sutter well enough to know him well enough .
 When I went to high school, he was a little bit ahead of me but we became friends . Then, we became part of a singing group. Then, when I went on to be friends with him, he became friends and part of the singing group .
 Sam, you just knew you should slay away from him then, because he didn’t want to talk, he wanted to eat. That was just Sam, just Sam . You just knew . you just . knew you . should slay . away .
 Student says he forgot to bring his lunch money, and he was hungry by lunch . He says he couldn't pay for anything in the cafeteria or the snack shack, or anything .
 I was walking all around looking for some friend to loan me some money. I was looking for a loan, looking for something to do with my money. "I was walking looking for help," he said . He said he was looking to borrow money from a friend .
 "So I just finally gave up there, but I started walking all around looking for someone to loan me some money or give me something to eat or something," he says . "I started walking looking for people to lend me money," he adds .
 Two pieces of cornbread were on his tray when he sat down to eat cornbread . "What particularly stuck out to me was that he had two pieces of Cornbread," he said .
 Leo figured, “oh this crazy white boy, he must really be hungry,” so he just let it go. But 1 was just so hungry, and 1 guess Leo figured . 1 guess . 1 was so hungry that he just decided to let it all go.
 East Oakland abutted against San Leandro, and it was like in the south . A few times I went out to his house, he lived right where East Oakland was . He lived in Oakland .
 If you were Black you did not go on the other side of the fence into San Leandro or these racist mobs would come after you . There was this creek and a fence right outside of 98lh Avenue in East Oakland, Oakland .
 "We went to this housing project which was kind of laid out in concentric circles, with a row of apartments, arranged in a circle," she says. "Then another circle inside that, and then another one inside that," she adds .
 At the very center was the playground, where there was a basketball court . The playground was filled with basketball courts and a playground .
 "1 went over and got in the game. When we got there, there were some guys getting ready to play ball," he said . "I recognized a couple of them who ran track for Castlemont High"
 "It just about got to the point of a fight. Well, at a certain point, one of these track guys and I got into a face-off," he says .
 "Everybody else stood back and gave us room, but after we stared at each other for a while, it didn't go any further," he said . "We just got back to the game," he added .
 Sam, who had been watching at the edge of the court, was turning and walking away . But, as this was happening, 1 noticed that Sam had turned and walked away from the court .
 Sam and 1 went to a basketball game between Castlemont and Berkeley High . Another time, Sam and One went to watch a game between Berkeley High and Castlemont .
 The game was at Casllemont, but I didn’t have any sense, so I kept yelling at the Castlemont players . "I kept yelling shit at the castlemont players," he says of the game .
 "Sweetie" Davis was knocked to the floor by a player on our team . Their star player was a guy named Fred “Sweetie” Davis, and at one point he got knocked down .
 "Sometimes, sometimes, without meaning to, I put Sam in some very difficult situations. So, sometimes I put him in some difficult situations," he says .
 Sam had a cousin named George who played piano, and George could also sing . Sam's cousin played piano and could sing .
 There was this other guy, Felton, who was one of the few Black kids who had gone to junior high school where I did. And there was another Black kid who went to Junior High school where he did. Felton was a good guy, he says .
 Randy was part of the impromptu singing group with John and me in our last year in junior high school . Randy was a white kid who’d been part of this impromptu sing group . Randy is a white guy who was in the group .
 We figured out pretty quickly that Sam should sing lead, at least on most of the songs, and then the others of us took our parts . "Sam's lead" was the lead singer, but the others took their parts .
 George had a second tenor, which was the lower-range tenor . Then you had to have a second 10or, George .
 Sometimes we practiced at George’s house, because he had a piano in his house, and sometimes we’d go to my house . Sometimes we practice at George's house, sometimes at his house . We also had to practice at my house, George's .
 We’d spend three or four hours a lot of days just practicing, working on our music . We'd spend 3 or 4 hours a day just practicing .
 Randy left the group and then Odell, who claimed I’d ‘stepped on his dogs’ way back on our first day of school— replaced him . Randy left, Odell left, Randy left and Odell eventually left . Odell claimed he’
 When Odell replaced Randy 1, Randy 1 reminded him of that run70 From Ike to Mao and Beyond in we had, and he didn't even remember it .
 We’d practice and try to gel gigs, wanting to get paid and get known a little bit . We would practice and we'd try to . get paid . We'd practice and tried to . try to get known and get . known, they said .
 There was already the Cadillacs, and the Impalas, so we became the Continentals . There were already Cadillacs, the Impala and the Cadilacs, so became the continentals .
 "We’d also been rehearsing at the rec center at Live Oak, because they had a piano in there," she says . "Now we’re rehearsing there, because there’s also a piano," she adds .
 "We rehearsed a lot for this, and we came there that night ready to do this Heartbeats’ song, “You’re a Thousand Miles Away,” and other tunes . "You're a Thousand miles away" is one of the Heartbe
 Sam's friend of Sam’s who had been playing basketball was coming over to get a drink of water . As we were about to go in the rec center, this friend came over to ask for water . Sam's friends were playing basketball .
 Sam and his friend had a sing-off before the dance, and after a couple of verses the other guy threw in the towel, because Sam could really sing . Sam and a friend both did a Spaniels song .
 "Another lime my younger sister got us a gig performing at their ninth-grade dance," she says . Another lime got us to perform at a ninth-grader dance .
 "A lot of the white youth were taking it up and were really into it, as exemplified by my older sister’s junior high school class voting “WPLJ” as their favorite song . “I’m not surprised. But a lot of
 "They would give you shit for that, but it was just part of a whole package of everything they were down on, and all the things they’d give you shoddy for. That’s part of the whole package," he says . "It was
 When 1 was a senior, the glee club teacher talked me and three other guys—two of us Black, two of us white—into doing a barbershop quartet song for the talent show . 2 of us were Black, 2 were white; 2 were White .
 When 1 was 16 or 17, 1 went to a Giants baseball game . Another time, when 1 was sixteen or seventeen, 1 attended a baseball game with the Giants .
 "I wasn’t super-patriotic, but 1 still thought this was a good country overall," she says . "I was very angry about discrimination and segregation and racism," she adds .
 We all stood up for the anthem and, for whatever reason, 1 started singing along . So we all stood . So did we all stand up for . The anthem .
 "They were relatives of my father, but they were very provincial, very snobbish, very big supporters of Billy Graham and big-lime racists. They were like my father," he says .
 "We got in an argument about all this kind of stuff. One lime my younger sister Mary-Lou and I were staying in their house," she says . "I was staying with them and they were getting into an argument," she adds .
 He didn't ask her how she’d feel about it, and she was sitting right there . He didn’t ask her if she was OK with it, she was right there.
 Fresno was very segregated at that time, and my relatives were, again, narrow, provincial and into a lot of this backward, reactionary and racist stuff . As I mentioned earlier, Fresno was . very segregated .
 When 1 was maybe eighteen or nineteen we were visiting down there on one of the holidays, and they asked me to do a dramatic reading of something that was being circulated in their circles . I was maybe 18 or 19 when I was asked to do the dramatic reading .
 When 1 started reading it, it turned out to be this racist parody about John Kennedy's son marrying Martin Luther King’s daughter . ‘All this racist garbage garbage.’
 When I realized what they were having me read, I just stopped and 1 got furious, and they must have regretted ever having given this to me to read . When I stopped, I stopped and got furious .
 "You refuse to go anywhere where they are, you avoid them, you with your freeway through the middle of town and all the segregation,” he said . “I don’t even remember everything I said, but it went on for about five minutes and they all
 "It became, of course, a big episode in family relations. Then I just threw the thing down and stalked out of the room," he says . "I just threw it down," he adds .
 When I was in high school I drove to Fresno with some friends to go to the West Coast Relays, and my Auntie Bit and Uncle Beecher put us up in their house and were very warm and welcoming . Now, I do have to say that, when 1 was
 Given the atmosphere they were a part of, that spoke to how they were very kind and generous people, on a personal level . Given the general atmosphere they said they were part of the community, that speaks to how generous people they were .
 They were against discrimination, segregation and racism, especially in any kind of overt form, they said . They were also against segregation, segregation, and racism .
 1 remember when we were visiting in Fresno, a discussion came up when my parents, myself and my younger sister, Mary-Lou, were on a trip . But at the lime they weren’t completely free of some of the more “subtle” forms of this
 My friend Matthew had started flirting with Mary-Lou, writing her poems, calling her up and talking with her on the phone, and all that. wasn’t sure how much this was a situation High School 73 where he was actually infatuated with my sister, and
 This led to a discussion during this trip about interracial dating and marriage, and 1 was surprised, and frankly shocked, to hear my parents bringing up all the ‘difficulties” that would be involved in this, emphasizing this especially to my sister .
 "Things got pretty heated. After listening to this for a while, I got involved and things got heated," she says .
 A kind of irony in all this is that some years later my sister did marry somebody Black—her boyfriend from high school, Buddy—and by that Lime, in the late ’60s, my parents had gone through a lot of changes and welcomed Buddy into the family .
 A lot of the kids I knew who played sports in high school were also into other things . "A lot of of the players I knew ... were also involved in other things," he says .
 1 was close with friends during his junior and senior years in high school . They used to read Plato and Aristotle, John Stuart Mill and Shakespeare . Some came from academic or intellectual families .
 If we were hanging out having a hamburger, or if we'd be on the playground during a break between games, we’d start talking about all these different things we were reading,’s coach says . We would have debates, he says. We would talk about
 Some guys would make fun of us, but some others would join in . Descartes asked about how god could draw a triangle without using a pencil . Some of us would joke, but others joined in .
 It wasn’t necessarily about god most of the time; sometimes it was about liberty, or John Stuart Mill’s views on liberty . We talked about slavery too, and of course, slavery too .
 "I became really fascinated with all this discussion and wrangling over different ideas," says author . "Before I got to a certain point in high school, 1 did my school work and 1 read what 1 was assigned to read," she says .
 This kind of thing may have been going on in other places, but I suspect it was more of a phenomenon in Berkeley because of the particular and almost peculiar mix of Berkeley . You have people coming out of the ghetto and you have a lot of people who were related to the university .
 Even Edward Teller’s son was in one of his classes, he was justifying the hydrogen bomb . "Even a reactionary ass**oophist" was in his class .
 "My friend Matthew actually lived in Oakland, but he wanted to go to Berkeley High," he says . "He was a great athlete, and so they wanted him at the school, but also wanted him to go there because he and his parents thought it was belter academically"
 "He came to our school, and he was very interested in and fascinated by all these big debates. So he came to us school," he said . "He was very fascinated, and fascinated, with debates," she said .
 Matthew’s father was a longshoreman and his mother worked as a domestic worker . Matthew's parents were longshoremen and domestic workers, he says .
 "All I could say right then was something like ‘Oh fuck”—because I’d grown up haling the military and all that kind of military discipline," says the actor . "I'd grown up . growing up in the military," he says .
 There was a guy in my Spanish class named David, who knew all these obscure facts about all these great literary figures from Latin America and Spain . David was a great student at the University of Columbia University .
 High School 75 wasn’t really a friend of mine—he kept to himself a lot. I was tremendously impressed by this guy, but he High School was not a friend, he says .
 "When you could draw him out in a conversation...which wasn’t so easy to do," he was fascinating, he said . "He seemed to be really very cosmopolitan, sort of a Renaissance man," he said of the late actor .
 The House Unamerican Activities Committee was going around the country with their anti-communist crusade and they came to San Francisco . The committee was going to the U.S. with its anti-Communist crusade . The Committee was in San Francisco at the time .
 Before then, there had been people who testified before HUAC who had been defiant . But now, they have been defiant, they say .
 More than 1,000 people demonstrated against HUAC in San Francisco . More than a thousand people believe, more than 1 believe .
 This was the first time that people stood up against HUAC in a mass public way . This was a massive outpouring, the first public outpouring of support for the anti-HUAC .
 John Sutter was attending a conference of high school poets around northern California . He was an aspiring poet and that day he'd gone to a conference .
 David wasn’t there when he got back in time for Spanish class . But I’d noticed that David wasn't there .
 He and a number of other kids from his school who went to the demonstration talked about how they’d been attacked by the police, how fire hoses were used to drive them down the steps of the courthouse, and how it was a big outrage .
 It became a big deal politically in the society as a whole, and they were all very proud they’d been part of this. was really envious of them . I asked them a lot of questions about it. I felt like I'd really missed out on something important,
 "A lot of things were busting loose, a lot of intellectual and cultural ferment was going on," he says . "So, it was kind of a spring thaw," he adds . "A little bit of cultural ferment is going on, and it's kind of an intellectual
 The Beats were breaking out in Greenwich Village in Manhattan and had come out of North Beach in San Francisco . They had started up in New York's Greenwich Village and then moved to San Francisco's North Beach Beach . The Beats had been breaking out .
 William Buckley started these disgusting antics to distract the audience while the liberal was talking about the first amendment, loyalty oaths, and all that kind of stuff . "I remember William Buckley came to debate some liberal about the First Amendment," he said .
 At the time, I was still strongly opposed to communism and accepted all the conventional wisdom, or “un-wisdom,” about communism and how horrible it was. At the . time, he was of course still strongly opposing to communism, and accepted .
 He said, “No, but I hale HUAC” and then explained why he hated it and everything it stood for .
 A lot of the girls I knew were influencing me at the lime, including the Japanese-American girls that I ate lunch with who were interested in 76 From Ike to Mao and Beyond and Beyond . "A lot of these questions were different artistic and intellectual questions," she says .
 Marlon Brando was the subject of a story about Brando . Brando died in a car crash in the early 1950s .
 She was talking about how her grandmother, who had come from Japan and lived with their family and spoke no English, was watching a movie about Japan . Her grandmother was watching the movie when she was talking to her grandmother .
 Brando was in it and at one point he spoke Japanese, and this girl told me that her grandmother said that if she closed her eyes when Brando spoke, she couldn't tell he wasn’t Japanese, she said .
 "There was a kind of mutual, or reciprocal thing there, where we influenced each other," he says . "So there was a sort of mutual ... influence," he adds .
 "They played an important part in getting me interested in poetry, in philosophy and a lot of the general intellectual ferment that was going on," he says .
 This kind of ferment was going on pretty broadly among a number of my friends and people 1 knew, both boys and girls, both girls and girls . "It's going to be going on very broadly," he says of his friends .
 "It was significant, and kind of a new thing for me, that 1 developed close relationships with a number of girls, not as girlfriends, but as friends who happened to be girls," she says .
 1 had more of a traditional view of girlfriends before then and 1 really didn't have very many friends who were girls . 1 remember a few teachers very fondly from that time .
 Bentley was an English teacher who had us read a lot of Shakespeare, and 1 remember one time I deliberately set out to write a paper about Macbeth to prove a thesis that 1 didn’t actually believe. Bentley was a good teacher .
 I was really angry with her at the time, but she had a point . She didn’t want to see whatever abilities 1 was developing misused for what she saw as paltry purposes .
 "She encouraged me to write, as well as opening me up to reading a lot of different things," she says . "I also learned a lot from Ms. 1," she adds .
 She quit teaching and after 1 heard about this I wrote her a letter trying to argue with her to slay on, because she was such a High School 77 good leacher . Later on, she quit teaching .
 "People like her had an influence on me, broadening my vistas about a lot of things," he says . She left anyway, but people like her influenced him, he says. "She left anyway."
 When 1 was either a sophomore or junior, we had this real “old school” history leacher . On the other hand, when 1 was a junior, he was a real "old school" leacher. 1.1.1 .
 "Reefer Madness" was the equivalent of communism and socialism, the author says . She says the movie was a movie about Communism and socialism .
 Of course, there was nothing about individual -ism or capital-ism , it was just about social-ism and commun-ism . Of course there was no individual -ist or capital -ism . It was about communism, communism .
 "A lot of that, even in Berkeley, was still being drilled into the students at that time," she says . "So a lot of . that was still ... drilled into . that time. So a lot . of that ... was still . being drilled . into that time,
 One of the influences that convinced me not to believe in god was Freud, Freud, who actually put forward and reinforced some reactionary notions, including in regard to women, but whose critique of religion I found compelling .
 "He tied religion in with the tradition of the powerful father figure," the author says . "Religion was a human invention and a human device," he says .
 At that time, most of my friends were still religious, and I hung with Matthew, Hemby, and Joel . The four of us who hung together all the time still went to the same church .
 "We sort of had to put in our lime in order to legitimately "represent" the church. Mainly that was because we were playing on the church-league basketball team together and so we sort of . had to . play on the . team together . "So I sort of
 "I was still living with my parents, still under their aegis so to speak," he says . "They wanted me to go to church and 1 still went, even after I started not believing," he adds .
 "Religion and the idea of god were human inventions," he says . "But the intellectual ferment ... led me to see from a lot of different directions that religion was human inventions"
 All these different cultures had different ideas of god that conflicted with and contradicted each other . All these cultures were different cultures .
 Different people in different ages believed in all different kinds of gods . Some of these had passed out of convention and weren’t widely believed in any more .
 I talked earlier about how when I was a kid 1 used to “tempt god” by saying “f***” then wondering if god would punish me and if l should atone for my sins and pray for forgiveness . I used to say ‘f***
 1 found belief in god to be very intimidating, very oppressive and repressive .
 The Christian religion is full of fear—as is Islam—over what’s going to happen to you if you somehow displease god . Islam is a religion full of terror over what it's going to do if you displease God .
 "I still believed that there was right and wrong; 1 don’t know exactly what I thought it was rooted in, but 1 just believed that certain things were right and certain things wrong," she said .
 You didn't need religion to tell you what was right and wrong, and you didn’t need the fear of god to make you do what was wrong . You need not need fear of God to make it right to do what you're doing, he says .
 There were just some things that were right and some things wrong, and you acted accordingly . You acted accordingly. There were some things right and others wrong, he says . He says .
 "At that time it was very emancipating for me. That might have been somewhat naive, and obviously it's not deeply enough rooted to carry you a long, long way," he said . "That might have had to be somewhat naive and obviously, obviously it’s
 "My parents were aware of this, especially once I got out of high school and became more intellectually emancipated," she says . "I became more intellectual and practically emancipationated in a lot of ways," she adds .
 "I just started voicing my view more, and this was the source of a lot of conflict and tension," she says . "This was the cause of a big argument," she said of her husband .
 There’s all this nonsense about how Black people are just inherently religious—and that's a whole thing that gets me pissed off, it's just bullshit . As for my friends, I’m not sure what I really want to say .
 A lot of my Black friends and a lot of people who influenced me later in life, like the Panthers, were going through the same thing I’d gone through, he says . "These religious ideas and institutions are human inventions—and not very good ones," he writes .
 Some of my friends were still religious, but many of them were going through the same general kind of emancipating experience that I was in casting off religion . So some of his friends were .
 Anne Frank's boyfriend Peter Van Dam never sat down and memorized his lines . Anne Frank’s boyfriend Peter van Dam was Anne's boyfriend . He says he never memorized any of his lines. Anne Frank had to memorize her lines .
 'I just went to rehearsal all the time and by the lime the play was actually pul on, 1 knew everybody’s lines from beginning to end'
 "If you’d plug me in anywhere in the play, and give me the first word, I could just go forward from there through the whole play," he says . "I’m not sure what I’ll do next, but I would like to go
 "I don’t think the full heaviness of that story really hit me until a few years later," she says . "But I don”t think I really hit that story until I got to know more about it," she adds .
 The senior play was just a senior play in high school . "I actually did try to get inside of the play and understand my character and the other characters as well," she says .
 "I was a seventeen-year-old kid, I hadn’t lived through an experience like that," he says . "But still, I was a . seventeen years old, I had never lived through that. But still, he was a 17 year old kid, he
 "I knew about the Holocaust, but I didn’t really have a deep understanding of it," she says . She says she knew about it, but didn't have a "deep understanding"
 "I got that later, when I went to college and I had more Jewish friends and learned about it more," she says . She says she learned more about her Jewish heritage when she was in college .
 It wasn’t just that 1 had never experienced anything like that, but I’d also never had relationships with friends whose family had gone through that, or who knew people very closely who’ve gone through it, she said .
 High School senior play was high school senior play in high school . "Anne Frank" was Anne Frank's most gripping story of the Holocaust .
 Playing on the high school football team was very important to me in a lot of ways . Playing football was important to my high school career . I was very proud to be able to play football in high school .
 The integrated setting of the team ended up Leaching me more than any class that I had . I spoke earlier about how the integrated setting . ended up . up to the best of his class that he had .
 In his senior year things didn’t go so well, he says . And, on the level of football itself, things didn't go well, in my senior year . He adds: ‘I'm not going to be able to get back to playing football again. And
 We usually had a really good team, but that year I think we only won four out of the nine games we played, so that was kind of frustrating . We usually won four or more games in a row, but we didn't have the best team in the league .
 People kept getting injured, people were quitting the team, and the coach was using all these oldfashioned formations which weren't really working, so he kept shifting them . The coach kept shifting formations so that he kept using them, and kept moving them . People were getting injured and people were
 "From week to week everybody had to learn new assignments, which was part of why we didn’t have such a successful season," says Toni Kroos .
 We trav80 From Ike to Mao and Beyond eled 50 miles to play against a school in Stockton, Stockton in junior year, for instance, to play 50 miles away .
 The socializing was a lot of fun in general, and there would be some occasions like that Vallejo game with the bus ride, where we had that deep talk about racism and discrimination, and we ended up winning that game that night .
 Overall, overall 1 have very positive and fond remembrances of this whole experience . There were other, more frustrating experiences, but overall 1 has very positive memories .
 College football is "like a business, not nearly so much fun as in high school," says John Sutter . Sutter: College is "much more serious affair, like a business"
 You lost a game on Friday and on Monday you’d be back at practice with your friends and get ready for the next game . You lose a game in a week, you would be back in practice with friends and getting ready for your next game. You would have to be
 If you had a good game, you’d get written up in the paper for having a good, bad game . It was all part of the fun, but it was all the fun. You had to pul up with being written about for a lousy game, but you had
 There is a lot of macho macho, macho and macho stuff that goes along with sports in this society . At the same time, there is a whole dominant sports culture in the U.S. sports culture .
 "The whole thing breaking loose around Black people, which mainly made this a positive experience and a positive influence on me, even though a contradictory one," she says .
 I played quarterback, and when you’re sort of leading a team that’s not doing that well, it can be a pretty sharply mixed experience . I was a quarterback in college football, and it's not a great experience, he says . He says it's a
 I just thought of it as a position I want to play, largely because I loved to pass in football and 1 developed a pretty good ability to pass . I just wanted to play football, and I loved it in football,’s a lot of the time I played in football
 I remember one game when I was playing on the junior varsity, we came from behind to tie the game, and I completed five or six passes in a row and then we scored a touchdown and that fell really good . I remember when I played for the junior team, I completed
 "I never thought of myself as the “field general,” I just thought okay, I’ll call the plays, and 1 sort of led the team in a general sense—but more it was that I liked this position because I loved to pass the ball .
 I High School 81 thought that passing, if you could really do it well, was a beautiful art— that’s the way 1 looked at it . 1 also loved track, and our school always had really good track teams. 1 also thought .
 In her younger sister’s class, there was a guy named Jerry Williams, who was a great sprinter . "He broke all kinds of records and had a beautiful running style," she says .
 My friend Matthew was on the track team as well as the football team, and he won the state meet one year in the shot-put . Matthew was also on the football and track teams .
 1 really loved track and basketball, and 1 went to almost every one of our school’s basketball games and almost all the track meets . Anyway, one really loved Track and Basketball, and went to most of the games .
 During his senior year there was a league track meet, leading toward the stale championship meet . "During my senior year I was a senior track meet," he says . "I'm not going to be able to compete in the championship meet. I'm not looking forward to it," he
 I really wanted to go to this track meet, but it started at something like 2m. on a school day and was an hour drive away . I wanted to see a track meet but it was too far away from my school . I'm not sure if I'll be able to
 I wanted to see the meet from the very beginning, but it started at two and 1 didn’t gel out of school until three, and if I left then it would be almost four o’clock and I’d miss more than half the meet . I was
 Spanish class sent a note saying you’re supposed to meet your father outside at one to go to a dentist appointment . So I was sitting in my Spanish class, and they sent me a note .
 I think I got away 82 From Ike to Mao and Beyond with it mainly because 1 was a good student . I think he got away with it because he was good student.
 After the football season in my sophomore year, 1 went out for basketball, and the coach tried to tell me that 1 was too short to play on the basketball team . The coach told me that if I played for the football team, I would be too short for basketball .
 'I knew I was good enough to be on the squad. I’d played with a lot of the guys on the team at the playgrounds, so I knew I could play with them,' he says . ‘I’ve played with many of the players on
 The basketball coach was my gym teacher, and we used to play basketball in gym class . Then, a couple of years later, the basketball coach became my basketball coach . I'm not just a basketball player, but I was a basketball coach in high school basketball .
 "I was trying to cultivate this reputation of someone who was both a wild kind of guy, but also a surprisingly good student who never had to study," she says . "I always tried to get my homework done in study hall"
 1 really worked hard in study class, and only rarely did I take books home to study . Only if I had to write a paper or maybe study for a test, I would take home books .
 "Sometimes I’d get bored in study class, and I'd think up antics and pranks," she says . "But sometimes I'd get bored ... and I would think up pranks and antics"
 There was a teacher in one study class who was this nasty disciplinarian, and everybody hated her . "Everybody hated her. Everybody hated her," she said of the teacher .
 If you were in study class and had to do a make-up test or something, you could be excused from study class to go do it . Now, if you had to go to do it, you would have to go and get it done .
 The student had to go take a Spanish test during a study class . Her Spanish teacher signed the note with the name of her Spanish teacher, she says .
 I then walked up to this study class teacher whom everybody hated, presented her this note . She then presented it to her study teacher .
 She counter-signed it, "which point I tore it up and threw it in the wastebasket," she said . "She counter signed it, which point I threw it up," he said .
 She got so furious that she looked the note out of the wastepaper basket and meticulously scotch-taped it back together . She then sent it down to the vice principal in charge of discipline for students . She was so angry she scotched the note back together and
 "I got called into the vice principal’s office the next day, and my defense was, "Look, 1 was just having fun, I didn’t actually cut study class," she said . "I didn't actually cut studies class. So I got called in
 I was just trying to see if I High School 83 could fool her, and once I fooled her, I just tore the note up and threw it away . "I just tore it up," she said .
 I also had a physics class as a sophomore, and I think the teacher’s name was Mr Nelson. Mr Nelson . Mr Nelson was a physics teacher at the time .
 He was a lively teacher, and a pretty good teacher, but he also had this strict thing about no talking out of order in class . He was also a strict teacher, with a strict rule of not talking in class, he says .
 You were not allowed to talk unless you’re called on by Mr Nelson himself . You were allowed to speak only if you were called on .
 He would take points off every lime you spoke out of turn in class, and that would take away from your grade average . He would also take away points from every lime spoken out in class .
 One lime he was talking about measurements in physics, one named after Isaac Newton, called the Newton, and the other called the Dyne . The two measurements are named after Newton and one called the Newborn .
 My love for basketball and music sometimes drew me into some wild situations . My love of music and basketball and basketball sometimes drew him into some crazy situations .
 "It was a good game, but they had a better team. We ended up losing in the final to McClymonds," coach says . "We ended up . losing"
 The first day of the TOC began at Berkeley High with a couple of friends who'd come up to Berkeley High from Garfield Junior High with me . But even before our game, I went with two of the friends who’d come up with me, Jim and Phil .
 We were sitting in the front row right under one basket, and Poly High was playing, a school from the Fillmore ghetto of San Francisco . Poly High is playing, the school from Fillmore, San Francisco.
 'Every time he’d line up on the free throw line, he would intimidate everybody around him. Every time he'd line up there, everybody would be intimidated,' he said .
 At the end of the first half in this game, when Poly was still behind, the ball rolled off the court and right to where we were sitting . Poly was behind in the game, but was still in the lead at the time of the game .
 There were only a few seconds left until halftime, and the ball rolls right to me . The ball rolled right to him. There were just seconds left to go .
 Jim sticks his hand underneath the ball where you can't see it, and when I try to give it to John Lewis, John pulls the ball back . So 1 pick up the ball and 1 try to hand it back to him, but Jim sticks . Jim pulls it back when he
 His team went off the court and he turned and ran off with them . Then, fortunately, he was able to run off with his teammates .
 Jim and Phil both said, “I’m getting the fuck out of here,” and they went and sat way, way up high in the gym, as far away from the court as they could get . Jim said, "I'm getting the hell out of
 "I loved basketball, and the whole scene by the court, too much to just move away like that," she said . "But I loved basketball," she added . "Too much" to move away from the court .
 When John Lewis was a senior in high school or just out of high school, he was arrested for pulling an armed robbery of a store in San Francisco . Lewis was arrested in the early days of his high school career .
 Oakland City College play against San Francisco City College . The game was a college football game between Oakland and San Francisco .
 This guy, Charles, who had gone to our high school was playing for San Francisco City College, and they won the game . Charles was a high school student at the time . Charles played for City College .
 Afterward, he was standing in the doorway leading down the locker room and bragging about how he had held down this player named Howard Foster . Foster had played for McClymonds and was now playing for Oakland City College .
 He was bragging about how “Howard Foster ain’t shit, I held him to 8 points,” and all this kind of stuff, he said . He was boasting about how he held Foster to eight points, he ain't shit,’ he said, and
 Charles says he was bragging that he was going to run track at Oakland City College . He says a guy who ran track for the college stepped out of the crowd and said to Charles, "You ain’t shit either” Charles was hit by the runner .
 Charles was standing against the wall and he was knocked out on his feet, he went sliding down the wall . Charles was knocked down and slid down a wall at 85th grade High School 85 .
 "I was trying to get me out of there, and on our way out, we passed this woman that I’d always seen at McClymonds games at the TOC," she says . "She was maybe in her thirties or early forties, and she
 She opened her purse and said, ‘No I’m not worried, ’cause I always got my friend with me,” and pointed to her gun .
 "We finally succeeded in prevailing on me to get us out of there," he says . "Then all my friends were saying, “Man we really gotta get out of here now," he adds .
 Joel, Matthew, Hemby and 1 had been hanging out on a Saturday night . Joel and Matthew were hanging out at the end of the night . Matthew and Hemby had been drinking a lime together .
 There was this place called Bobo’s, a hamburger joint in west Berkeley, and we decided we wanted to get a burger . We decided to go to the Berkeley burger joint .
 Bobo’s is the world's largest eatery in the U.S. state of origin .
 There was a stand-off between two high school friends, one of them with a knife, and the two of them were threatening each other . "There’s this other guy I knew from high school named Wazell, with a . knife," he said .
 The incident happened at Bobo’s, a popular restaurant in the heart of the city . The incident was caught on camera, but police were called to the scene .
 We calmly went and put in our order and got it, and we were sitting in the car with our hamburgers and shakes when the cops pulled up . The cops pull up. We calmly go and get it, but the cops pull out .
 "Wazell was just this kind of character," says Wazell . "My friends and I, we wanted our hamburgers, and this wasn’t a big thing to us," he says .
 "We weren’t going to cooperate with these cops either," police say . On the other hand, we weren't going to cooperate with them either, police say. "We’ve got a lot of respect for the police," police chief says .
 Matthew and Matthew went to the Oakland Auditorium to see a concert with James Brown and the Famous Flames, the Drifters, and Hank Ballard and the Midnighters . It was a big show .
 Part of the floor was cleared and people would stand and also would dance, even before the acts came on . They played music before the show started and in between the sets .
 The scene was already a little bit tense, because you had all these rivalries, with people from different schools and different cliques, all there in this Auditorium . It was already tense because of the rivalries .
 Since Matthew was from Oakland, he knew a lot of people there, and he was going around talking to them . Matthew was able to talk to people in Oakland, Oakland, California .
 For a while during the evening, when the acts would come on, and people were dancing, fights would break out . For a few minutes during the acts, people would be dancing, and fights broke out .
 The fights would slop, and the acts would start up again, and then the same thing would happen . Then they’d cool it out, the fights would begin, then the acts started up again . They’ll cool out, cool out and slop again,
 This happened two or three limes, and finally Matthew said, “Man, 1 don’t want to get caught up in all this, let’s go upstairs,” because there was a balcony and we could see the whole thing from up there .
 A fight broke out in the middle of the show, much bigger than any of the previous fights . The fight was the biggest of all the fights in the history of the boxing world .
 Oakland cops were known to be particularly brutal and racist . "People were fighting all over the floor, and all of a sudden the main door into the auditorium flies open," the author says .
 From where we were sitting in the balcony, we could see all the people down on the floor just rotate and form a kind of phalanx of their own to fight the cops . And from where we . could see . see all of the . people down . on the . floor
 It was some of the most beautiful choreography I’ve ever seen—they stopped fighting each other, swung around 90 degrees, got into formaHigh School 87 lion and started fighting the cops . It was a forma high school 87 lion fight .
 This was all spontaneous, there was no plan or leadership, but it was very impressive. This was a very impressive display of leadership, says CNN.com's Tom Charity .
 I also saved up and bought myself a cashmere sweater when 1 was 13 because, for whatever reason, that was considered to be the height of cool in the crowd that 1 was in at that lime . 1 was thirteen .
 "When I got to high school, again things changed for all the reasons I’ve been talking about, and my sense of cool changed completely as well," he says . But when he got to . high school things changed .
 "I have to confess that one of the things I prided myself on was what was then called “the mack,” which was how cool you walked. I have a confession to this, but I'm not sure if it's true .
 "Mack" is another word for pimp, and this was sort of imitating the supposedly cool walk of the pimp . Of course, you can see the contradictory nature of it because “mack” is another .
 How slowly you walked and how you moved your body when you walked was a barometer of cool . Most of the guys who were into this, most of them didn’t have any interest in being a pimp, but how slowly you walk was a key barometer .
 When I was a senior, I worked in this school office where 1 would sometimes take messages to different classrooms . I would sometimes work in the school office to take messages from different classrooms to different rooms .
 "There was one math class in particular where the math teacher was kind of a wild, crazy guy anyway," she says . "And there was a math teacher anyway," the author says .
 1 was coming to deliver this message to his class, and 1 just happened to walk in through the back door . 1 was delivering the message to the class .
 When I opened the back door, everyone looked up to see what was happening, and I think I literally had forty seconds to walk the forty feel to the front of the room to deliver the message . "I think I have 40 seconds to go," he says of opening the door .
 "The whole class started cracking up because I was really putting on my mack," she said . "I really put on my Mack. I was cracking up," she added .
 After that, there were a number of limes during that semester when 1 would have messages for that class . "Every time I would open the back door, all of the students would look up and as soon they saw me, they would begin clapping their hands and snapping their fingers
 This became sort of an institution—it happened maybe ten times during this class, and I could always tell that the students in the class were glad when I opened the back door and they saw it was me . "They knew there was going to be a diversion, a little entertainment,
 From Ike to Mao and Beyond bly.ly.com is a weekly feature on CNN iReport . iReport.com . Follow CNN Living on Facebook and Twitter . Back to the page you came from .
 A number of ihe football team decided to have a contest to see who could have the baddest mack walking up to gel our football letter . As part of that, who could take the longest from the time their name was called until the time they actually received their award?
 "The whole thing associated with the mack. So that was the kind of thing that was a matter of style and cool, even though it obviously had a negative aspect," the singer says .
 "You didn’t think of yourself as a pimp, you just thought it was cool. But it was a much broader phenomenon," he says . "You just thought you were cool. It was cool"
 “I graduated from high school at a very optimistic Lime. Brimming With Confidence”
 A lot of things were changing—there were a lot of challenges, but there was a feel in the air that things could change for the better . "There was a sense of things being changing," says President Obama . "A lot of the challenges are still to be overcome, but
 "A lot of Black people, a lot of people, felt a certain optimism," she said . "I'm glad that we're here today," she added . "We're here to fight for our country," she says .
 The fact that 1 came from the kind of . kind of family and the kind . of middle class background that 1 did, that can give you a certain sense of confidence too, frankly. And the fact that . 1 came out of the . sort of family . that can . give
 Even for people who weren’t while or middle class, there was in the air a feeling of a positive wind blowing, and optimism about social change for the better .
 "All that was part of the swirl of the times, if you want to pul it that way," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 I fell good about playing football. That was how I felt about things, and about myself. remember even though our football team didn’t do very well, I fell in love with football. remember . remember even . even though . our football . team didn't do well,
 "Bobby, a little guy... but brimming with confidence" was a phrase that was in a local sports reporter's article about him . His sister, Mary-Lou, used to always kid me because at one time this reporter wrote an article that featured him and he referred to
 "This did sort of capture something about me personally, personally, but also how I felt about the times," he says . "So my sister would kid me about this, but this did ... capture something ... about me, personally"
 Buddy, whom she went out with in high school and later married, is her younger sister's former boyfriend . Buddy was her high school boyfriend and she married him .
 First encounter with Buddy was when I was a senior in high school and he was a sophomore . But his first encounter was with Buddy, who was a junior at the time, when he was 16 .
 Some of my friends and I were driving around in Oakland looking for something to do on a High School 89 Saturday night, stopping at different friends’ houses and asking if anything was going on, and finally somebody said they knew something about a parly in East Oakland, Oakland .
 Even though Buddy lived in Berkeley, he had some relatives in East Oakland with a bigger house, so he was having a party out there . Buddy had a party in Oakland, but he was staying in Berkeley .
 "The place was packed. But we got out of our car and went walking up to the door, rang the doorbell, and when Buddy opened the door we could tell there were all these people inside," the author says .
 It was getting late and we’d driven way out there to East Oakland to go to a party. So we were pissed off . We were going to party. We were getting pissed off. We wanted to go home. We didn’t want to leave the party.
 "They all said to me, “Naw, naw, man, calm down, c’mon, we can’t do that," he says . "And they all said, "Naw ... calm down," he adds. "C'mon,
 "Part of the whole culture that 1 had taken up as my own was that you had to be cool and kind of bad," he says . "You had to have to be kind of good and bad," says 1 .
 "Buddy and I laughed about this when I told him this story," he says . "Once we became really close and became family, then it had a whole different meaning, obviously, and we laughed about it"
 Later on, after they were married for a few years, my sister and Buddy broke up, but even though that was painful, she remained fond of him, and I liked him a lot too .
 "Buddy, tragically, died in a car accident not too long after he and his sister broke up," she says . "But Buddy, tragically," she adds .
 At the lime I graduated from high school, I didn’t have any clear idea what I wanted to do with the rest of my life in the big sense . At the same time, I had no clear idea of what I was going to do .
 I was going to go to Cal and play football, but was interested in English literature and history and politics . I was also interested in history, literature and politics, and wanted to play football at Cal .
 I was going to major in law, or some combination of those, and maybe I’d end up in law . I didn’t know, but I wanted to go straight straight to law, and law .
 1 didn’t know what I was going to do for sure when I was a teenager . Maybe I’m going to end up being a lawyer, maybe writing poetry, maybe I was writing poetry . 1 didn't know what was going on for sure. Maybe I was
 Coming from this middle class, professional family, we had enough money that 1 didn’t have to work. We were able to afford to have 1 of our children to go to school,’s parents say .
 1 got two part-time jobs. "They thought it would be good experience for me to do some work, and I could save some money," she says . "I'm not scared. But they thought it was a good experience," she adds .
 In the afternoon and evening I worked in a truck barn, where the trucking companies leave their trucks at the end of the day . And in the evening, I worked at a trucking company's trucking barn . The trucking industry is changing its way around the world .
 "I had to make sure the trucks had enough gas, that the motors were oiled, that what they called the fifth wheel, which connects to the trailer, was greased so everything would fit together right, and things related to that . I had to ensure the trucks have enough
 "I just had to get the job done. I could come in during the afternoon, whenever I wanted more or less, and work in the evening until I finished," he says .
 At the end of the week, I could work either Friday or come in Saturday morning, because they didn’t run on the weekends, so I just had to gel the trucks ready for Monday . And, at the other week, he could work Friday or Saturday morning .
 The office job was the first time I’d worked in that kind of situation, and the people were very narrow and petty . It was the people who I worked for, and it was a very small and petty job .
 "Some of the people working there had really broadened their outlook. But interestingly enough, I went back and worked there for a little while about four years later," he says .
 1 worked at those jobs right up until the end of August in 1961 . "I even saw some of these people at anti-war demonstrations," he says . "People you could never have imagined being at something like that"
 Tankers come in to fill up underground lank with gas for gas for the gas pumps at the truck barn . The truck barn is located in the middle of the country's largest city .
 "The guy put the hose down into the tank, then he went off into the office to do something," she says . "He put the water in the tank and then went off to the office," she adds .
 Gasoline hose slips out of tank in the ground and gasoline is spraying everywhere . "He hadn't put the hose in very well, and so the hose started slipping out of the tank," she says .
 1 went running up to try to grab the hose and shove it back in. Like a fool, because I wasn’t very experienced, 1 ran up to . try to . grab the . hose back in . The hose fell out of the water .
 "I got this geyser, this torrent of gas, shooting into my face and High School 91 into my eyes," she says . "And, of course, I got this . And, course, this . Well, it's not a Geyser. And, of
 "I wasn't sure if the blinding was only temporary. And even more upselling, I wasn't certain if it was just temporary. I'm not sure if it's only temporary."
 "Even though I was working these two part-time jobs, l still tried to have my social life," she said . "I was working full-time. Even though I worked part time. l still had a social life. I still wanted to be social," she added .
 After I finished work in the truck barn, 1 would go hang out with my friends . 1 would be able to get to sleep with his friends after work .
 One night I had arranged with my friend Hemby to go to a party after work . One night he had arranged to meet up with Hemby for a night out .
 "I had to quickly explain to him who it was and remind him we were going to a party," she said . "We then did. So then I had to . explain him," she added .
 1 still loved the TOC, but now 1 had a problem because it ran from Thursday through Saturday . It was a little nerve-wracking there for a second. But it was a good time for 1.1 .
 The last game started at 9 a.m. Thursday it started at 4:30, and the last game was nine . The schedule conflicted with my work, so I was able to play .
 Somebody got me a pass to the TOC that let me go in and out every time 1 wanted to, without having to pay each time . I'm not sure what happened to me, but I was able to get in without paying .
 McClymonds was playing in the first game on Thursday and I really wanted to see that game . McClymond was playing Thursday's opening game .
 Richmond High was playing Richmond High in the nine o’clock game . 1 really wanted to see that game too .
 1 could miss the other two games on Thursday if 1 had to . So, I figured okay, 1 could . miss the rest of the week's games . 1 could also miss Thursday's other games .
 "I showed up at the TOC on Thursday at my customary time, about five minutes after four when they opened the doors," he says .
 I strategically parked my car and watched the McClymonds game, which ended a little before six a.m. The game was the last of the season .
 1 went sprinting out, got in my car and went ripping through the job at the truck barn . Finished up about 8:40, got back in his car, went ripping back up to the gym . Then parked the car, got my pass out, ran in and got there
 Friday it wasn’t a problem, because I could pul the work off until Saturday morning, so 1 went to all the games on Friday I only missed two games that year . Then, Friday it was a problem . I went to every game on Friday and missed two of those
 Everybody was wailing to see Richmond and McClymonds play in the final of the TOC that year . The two teams played in the championship .
 McClymonds hadn’t lost another game all year, and they’d won the TOC five years in a row . Richmond had broken the team’s sixty-eight-game winning streak in the first game of the year .
 Richmond and McClymonds were in separate brackets in the TOC, so they were supposed to meet in the final . Richmond was in separate bracket in TOC so it was supposed to be a final .
 Leroy Walker, who later played for the Globetrotters, made the difference in beating McClymonds earlier in the season . Richmond had this great player named Leroy .
 Richmond lost unexpectedly in the TOC . The team lost unexpectedly .
 McClymonds and Richmond didn’t have a rematch, but nevertheless there were a number of great games . The final was the final between the two teams, McClymond and Richmond .
 All the effort 1 went through that year to see as much of the TOC as I could was definitely worth it .
 He only stayed there one year before he got disgusted by the racism in the school and in the football program, so he came back to go to Cal . The Cal football player says he was disgusted with the racism at the school .
 A couple of weeks before school started in the fall that year, I quit the two part-time jobs . "I quit the part time jobs. I quit one of the two jobs," she says .
 Matthew was home for the summer during a camping trip to Yosemite in Yosemite . He was home from college when he was away from college . Matthew is now a junior at the University of San Francisco .
 "We were having a great time, but then something happened that changed all that," she said . "I was having a good time, and I was very happy to be here," she added .
 Matthew wanted to learn how to drive, but his father was kind of a tyrannical patriarch, who always liked to have something over him, he says . Matthew's father was a "tronical patriarch"
 Matthew would beg for money from his dad, even though his dad had a relatively good job as a longshoreman and could afford a few dollars for a movie . "We’d go to a movie and Matthew would want to borrow some money," he says .
 As part of this whole “lord of the High School 93 house” bullshit, he wouldn’t let Matthew get a driver’s license, he says .
 Matthew was always after me, even though he didn’t have a driver’s license, to let him learn how to drive by driving the car that 1 had. So Matthew always wanted to drive . Matthew always had a driver's license, but Matthew didn't have a
 1 had a car that 1 had at that point was my parents’ car, so that made me especially reluctant . But the car 1 had to drive was his parents' car, which made him especially reluctant to do so .
 1 held out and held out, "Let me drive, let me drive. Let me drive," he says . "We got up in Yosemite and he kept after me," he adds .
 The two of us hiked up to the top, and we expected to find the other two up there waiting for us . "Obviously you could drive up faster than you could hike it," she says .
 We looked all over the parking lot—we looked and we looked, and all of a sudden this car pulled up . We looked and looked and they looked and, all of the sudden, they found the car . The driver pulled up and said he was looking for a car .
 Matthew and the other guy had only really minor injuries, basically just scrapes and bruises . We got a ride down to the site of the accident, and luckily Matthew had only minor injuries . The other guy was also injured in the accident .
 Accident happened at the scene of the accident in the early hours of Sunday morning . The victims were taken to hospital with minor injuries . Police say they were not injured in the accident .
 They’d gone off a mountain road on a turn, they sailed over a pile of rocks, between two trees, and landed on an upside-down fallen tree which acted as a brake and brought them to a stop, nudged right up against another giant tree .
 The two escaped serious injury, but it was obvious that they could have been killed . And, even though they escaped serious injuries, the two were clearly at risk .
 These were friends of mine, and Matthew was one of my very closest friends . Matthew was a very close friend, and I was very proud of him, he said .
 "I felt responsible, and then 1 had to call my parents and tell them that their car had been totaled. I felt responsible," she said . "I had to tell them [her] parents," she added .
 'They were away somewhere and got a third-hand garbled message, so they thought that I’d been in an accident,' he said . 'I’ve been in a car accident. They were away from me and thought I was going to be OK,' he
 Matthew's parents were angry at his decision to let him drive the car . They were relieved that he hadn't been in an accident and that nobody had been badly hurled or killed .
 "I felt 94 From Ike to Mao and Beyond" was responsible for their car being wrecked, and allowing a situation in which he and the other guy could have been killed . And I felt 94 was responsible, not only for their wrecked car, but also for allowing the situation .
 "But then I was getting ready to go to Cal, so I turned my thoughts toward that," he says . "I'm getting ready for that. But then I'm going to Cal," he adds .
 "I’d always wanted to go to Cal ever since I was a kid growing up in Berkeley," he says . "I was a student at Cal," he adds . "It was a dream come true," he said .
 It had always been a dream of mine to play football at Cal. I knew Cal was a good school academically, and 1 was interested in the academics, but it had also always been my dream of playing football there .
 "I still wanted to be on the team, and at least maybe get a chance to play," he says . "But I still wanted ... to be a player," he adds . "I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to play. But I just wanted to
 "I was also excited about all the intellectual and artistic ferment going on," she says . "I'm excited about the intellectual, artistic ferment"
 "I can remember arguing one time with people, late into the night, about the writings of St. St. Francis, St. Louis. I'm not a stranger, but a friend," he says .
 "I enrolled at Cal the week before classes formally started, and we began football practice for the freshman team" "Life Interrupted" is the story of a Cal football player's life .
 'I could tell the whole thing was going to be more like a job and a business. Even though I was really looking forward to it and excited about it, they had already given us big play books,' he says .
 In high school you had to learn plays and practice, but it wasn’t all so serious,’s coach says . ‘In high school, you have to learn . plays and you had . practice, he says . But it wasn't so serious. In high
 There was a camaraderie about it and there was a particular social experience that went along with it in a school like Berkeley High at that lime .
 1 could already tell this was going to be a much different atmosphere for the game . But it was already telling 1 that he was already in the mood for the first time .
 The former Cal Cal star admits he still wanted to play football for the Cal team . But he admits he wanted to do it 'because it was sort of a thing I'd always dreamed of doing'
 I would be throwing up a lot. noticed that while I hadn’t changed my diet or anything, I was gaining weight really quickly. noticed . noticed that . while . I hadn't changed his diet or . anything, he was gaining . quickly, he said . noticed he
 "I thought that maybe I just had a little bit of the flu. Even though a lot of different things indicated that something was wrong, 1 thought that . Maybe I had the flu," she said .
 "I kept vomiting all the time. But this persisted for that whole week," she said . "This persisted for a whole week, and I kept vomiting every time," she added . "But this persisted ... but this persisted," she says .
 It’s one thing if you do that a couple of times in one day, or for a few of days, it's one thing to do that . It's one of a lot of things you can do that one day or two days, or a few days . It
 "I’d be hungry and eat food, but as soon as 1 ate I felt ter95 96 from Ike to Mao and Beyond rible. Or I'd be hungry . Or I’m hungry and . eat food . But as soon after 1 ate, 1 ate
 1 went into the clinic, and 1 described his symptoms, and they gave him a urine test and some blood tests . So 1 went to the clinic . 1 described my symptoms and was given a urine and blood test . The clinic gave him the results .
 "Pretty soon they came back and said, “We have to admit you to the hospital," she says . She says she was admitted to a hospital after the incident .
 "My kidneys were basically shutting down and I was retaining all the water that I was drinking," he says . "They wanted to see what would happen, and between that afternoon and evening I gained five pounds," he adds .
 At this point, my parents called a friend of theirs who was a doctor and asked him to go check and see what was happening . "My parents called him to check out what was going on," he said .
 When they told him what the urine tests had showed, he said, “Uh oh, that’s not good,” and explained to them that it could mean there was a serious problem with my kidneys .
 'I knew from what they said about the tests that something wasn’t right, and the fact that 1 was gaining this weight meant something meant something. And that was the first lime that I knew that I was very sick. knew something wasn't right,’ she said
 The next day, the head of the medical staff at the student health clinic, who became my doctor, Mori Meyer, came in and looked over my case . He recognized it was very serious and he told me, frankly, that I was very sick. He said, "I was
 'My kidneys just completely shut down. And for a couple of months l was in the hospital, in a bad way, because my kidneys just shut down,' she said .
 The way they were saying it meant they were serious. They were telling me I was very sick and, obviLife Interrupted 97 ously, the way they said it meant serious .
 'I didn’t really think about dying. just knew I was very sick and the question was how to get well, that was what was in my mind'
 "1 was very sick, and the implications of that. My parents, I know, got the point that 1 was sick," she says . "I know, my parents, got ... the point," she writes .
 They could pul you on dialysis, where they basically lake your blood out and filter it and put it back into your body, because your kidneys are supposed to do that but they’re not functioning—and they almost did that with me . They could have pulped you on
 "You couldn't stay on dialysis indefinitely, and dialysis then wasn’t even as good as it is now. know that my parents understood right away the seriousness of the situation," she says .
 "My father was very affectionate and wasn't one of these fathers who wouldn’t show emotions," he said . "He didn”t cry a lot in front of other people. Although my father was extremely affectionate, he wasn’�t one of those
 1 was told by my mother and my younger sister, later on, that he went into a closet and just wept, because he understood what this meant . And 1 was . told by his mother and his younger sister that he . just went to a closet . He said he went
 "They would come in every morning and take a bunch of blood tests to see what the chemicals in my blood were. They would come into contact with me every morning," she says .
 1 wasn't allowed to eat anything for about a month. Since my kidneys weren’t functioning, 1 wasn‘t allowed to . eat anything . 1 was allowed to stay away from food for a month .
 I could drink around five hundred milliliters of water and an additional amount of water equal to whatever I was able to urinate for the day . It's your kidneys that release the urine, and your kidneys are your kidneys .
 The doctor used to come in, look at my eyes and see that I had uremic poisoning in my eyes . I couldn’t urinate . So all this was backing up in my body, because I couldn't urinate, so I had to urinate. So
 They would come in the morning and take these tests, and if my potassium were too low they would give me potassium during the day, in pills . They would also give me something to counter-balance that . If my potassium was too high, they would then give me pills to counter
 "I felt as if I were a test lube and they were chemically adjusting what was going on in my body to keep me alive," she says . "They were chemically adjusted what they were doing to keep my body alive"
 Thai’s why I couldn’t eat anything, because they didn't want anything to complicate things further . Every time you eat, it affects the chemical balance of everything in your body, they say .
 There was a guy across the hall from me who had hepatitis. Despite that, one thing that was hard was that I’d gel very hungry every day, says actor .
 He was put on a 5,000-calorie-a-day diet to avoid weakening his body .
 He would describe to me how he had two or three milkshakes a day, and I would get really jealous of him . He would tell me that he would get jealous of me, but I'm not so jealous .
 In the hospital, one of the things people look forward to, if they’re not too sick, is meal lime . It breaks up the monotony and you get something to eat, she says .
 "I used to lie there and listen to the dishes clinking on the trays, but I could never eat. I used to listen to dishes clinking on trays," she says . She says she could not eat .
 Can still remember when, finally, they let me have something to eat—it was a peach . I was hungry, but if I had eaten 1 would have felt even worse .
 "I remember how grateful I was, and how I profusely thanked the orderly in the hospital who went out and got that peach," she says . "It was a peach. It was a very special moment," she recalls .
 "Of course, there were a lot of ways in which this whole thing was very difficult," he says . "Of of course, the whole thing is very difficult"
 The treatment wasn’t as bad as the sickness, but sometimes you kind of wondered, because they’d have to get potassium in me by one means or another . The treatment was not as bad .
 "I’d have to take something like fifteen of them at a lime," he says of the potassium capsules .
 I'd take so many and then I’d throw them up, so then I'd have to have to lake them again . I would have to take them up and throw them away again, he says . He says he’s not afraid to throw anything away .
 One day after I’d passed the most acute stage of this, they brought in this glass of orange juice, and they said here’s some orange juice with just a little bit of medicine in it . The day after he'd passed he was brought in a glass of
 One swig can't even describe the taste, it just made my body shiver, it was such an awful taste. I look one swig, and 1 can’t even describe it,’s so awful that it made me shiver. The taste was such
 The one teaspoon of potassium ruins a whole glass of orange juice . Since then I’ve used this as a metaphor sometimes, sometimes it’s a metaphor .
 "I couldn’t orally take in the potassium because I’d throw it up. But that was not as bad as what I had to go through earlier," he said .
 "They decided that the only way they could keep it in me was to give it to me by enema," she said . "Then they decided that they decided to give me enema. Then they decided ... that they would give it in."
 "I’d have to have an eight-hour drip of potassium coming in by that means. So I’m going to have eight hours of it coming in," he says .
 It didn't hurt, but there was a pressure build-up, the way it is with IV drips . It didn’t hurt, and there was pressure build up, but it was the way to deal with it .
 If a nurse doesn’t come around to check it every Life Interrupted 99 so often, then the drip will start going a little faster . A nurse should come round to check the drip every single time .
 The nurses can get very busy and preoccupied with something else, and it starts going faster and faster . The more it goes, the more the pressure builds up. The nurses are preoccupied, and the more time they spend .
 These are the kinds of things you had to come up with in order to overcome this disease, especially in its acute phase . These are things you have to do to overcome the disease, even in your acute phase,’s acute .
 "They knew that if I were too sick to even feel up to listening to a football game, then it was very serious," she said .
 "Even though this hit me completely out of the blue and really knocked me down, 1 felt like “I’m going to overcome this. Because I was young, and even though . Even though this . felt like "I'm going to . overcome this," she said
 "Everything’s knocked out from underneath you, you’re just barely hanging on to life, and you feel completely vulnerable in a way you never did before," he says . "It is very difficult when you feel the way a lot of youth do—invulnerable and
 My friends were a big part of giving me the support and strength to keep going, as well as my father, my mother and my sisters . My father, her mother and her sisters were also a big help .
 "They would spend hours with me, when they were allowed to visit in the hospital, they would come and do all kinds of things to try to keep my spirits up and keep me in the orientation of fighting this, rather than giving in."
 I was in the hospital for a couple of months in this sort of acute phase. I was hospitalised for a few months, I said . I'm not sure how long I'll be able to recover from this kind of acute period of illness .
 After that 1 went back into the hospital to get a biopsy of my kidneys . After that I went back to the hospital for a further biopsy on my kidneys. After that, I had to go back in the hospital and get back on the road .
 The biopsy was actually somewhat encouraging, because it showed that there was damage to the tubes of my kidneys, but not to what’s called the glomeruli, which are the actual filtering units, the kidney .
 If I’d had serious damage to the filtering units, the glomeruli in the kidneys, 1 would have had a much worse prognosis . So that meant there was there was a reasonable chance that I would recover, whereas if I'd had serious . damage to filtering units
 "They put me back in the hospital to start these treatments because 1 was very weak and also because they wanted to monitor me," she said . "I'm not going to be able to go back to the hospital again," she added .
 Cortisone is a very, very powerful drug, and they were giving me very high dosages to begin with, says the doctor . The drug is a powerful drug that can be taken with no time limits, he says .
 "It can also have very serious psychological side effects, which fortunately I never had," she said . "I never had any serious psychological problems," she added .
 All of the fat in your body gels mobilized into your trunk, your neck gets really thick, your face swells out, while your arms and legs become very thin and your muscles tend to get broken down . But physically, you get what is called Cushing Syndrome .
 You look very swollen and sort of disfigured, especially when you’re taking high dosages of cortisone,’s author says .
 Lavon "Cookie" Patton used to be on the basketball team at Berkeley High . Lavon was a year or two ahead of me in high school . He was a cook in the hospital where I was then .
 When he found out I was in the hospital, during his off hours or “down Lime” he’d come up and visit with me for a while, he said . He also visited with me during his time in hospital .
 "I didn’t really realize then that I still had a long-term battle ahead," he says . "I was hoping that I would get this steroid treatment, this cortisone, and I’d gel well in a few months, then I would be back
 Three years before that happened, a lot went on during that time . But actually it was three years ago, and a lot of things went on before that .
 "I got sick right at the beginning of September in 1961, and I wasn’t able to go back to school, even on a limited basis, until the next fall. I got sick . I wasn't able to return to school until the very next fall . I got
 There was a whole year when 1 was basically recuperating, and at the beginning of that, after I got out of the hospital and was just getting going with the cortisone treatments, 1 had to spend a lot of time at home . 1 was very weak and I was
 During those years, while it would be an exaggeration to say that l literally didn’t recognize myself when I looked in the mirror, l . just looked completely different to myself, really disfigured. just looked . in the most literal sense that was true .
 I was altered very significantly in my physical appearance, and not in a good way, and 1 was also very sickly . 1 was altered significantly in a very good way . I was also sickly.
 "I grew up in this society and came of age in the '50s, with all the conventional and superficial ways in which people are conditioned to think about relations between boys and girls, men and women" "I, obviously, was conditioned myself by all that. I grew up
 I mentioned that among my good friends in high school were girls who were intellectuals and whom I respected for their minds and their thinking . For example, I said that among our friends were intellectuals who I respected .
 A girl did have to be good-looking, in the conventional sense, for him to get romantically interested . On the other hand, while 1 didn’t go for the classical separation, he said .
 "It wasn’t as if this were an epiphany, and my whole viewpoint changed completely, all at once, but it did start me thinking in a different way and more deeply about what’s really important in people," she says .
 "It did cause me to start thinking more deeply about what really matters in people, what are the important qualities in people," she says .
 'I couldn’t gel out of the house for a while. Also, my friends were coming to visit me when I was able to go home from the hospital,' she said . ‘I was so happy to be able to see my friends again,’ she said
 "My friends would spend their weekends with me, and this meant a tremendous amount of time," she says . "This meant a lot to me," she adds .
 They could have been out doing a whole bunch of other things, but would have liked to be out doing more . They could've been doing a lot of other stuff .
 1 wouldn’t necessarily have described himself as ‘popular’ in high school. was controversial. But they cared about me and it was important lo them to be with me and give me support. This kind of thing also makes you think differently and more deeply about things,
 I was popular with some people and very unpopular with other people, including people who were “popular” in the classical and conventional sense . I was unpopular with some of the people I was ‘popular’ with, “in the classical or conventional sense,”
 I did think of myself as a guy who’s “got something going for him,” and I more or less expected people lo like me. But I did have a lot of respect for people who like me, he says .
 As for those who didn't like me, "it was for good reasons they didn’t like me," he says . "I was doing things that I believed in and things I wanted to do that are important and right"
 "If they don't like me for that reason, to hell with them," he says . "There are other people who will like me. So if they don’t like me ... there will be others," he adds .
 "The world seems like it’s open to you. That was all part of the whole “brimming with confidence” thing, which also partly comes from the background that I came out of, where the world seems open to me," she says .
 'Then all of a sudden you are knocked down, with this serious illness and all its side effects, and you don’t have everything going for you'
 "I could only have very, very limited amounts of sodium every day. For example, I would have to have very little sodium every single day," she says .
 I used to write up menus, going through books calibrating the milligrams of sodium in different things . My mom would find the right foods and prepare the meals that fit that diet, she says .
 She had to weigh everything, she had to shop at special stores, at a time when they didn’t have the whole broad array of health food stores and different kinds of health foods that they now have now, she says .
 'This look up was a big part of her life, for a couple of years, she said . So this look up gave me other kinds of practical and emotional support,' she said. 'So this look-up was a very important part of our lives,' she added .
 At a time when I was beginning to go out on my own, all of a sudden I was forced to live at home for a couple of years, but to be very dependent on my family . I'm not sure how long I will be able to go on my solo career,
 "My mother in particular did this on almost an hour-by-hour basis, especially in the early stages," she says . "She was very supportive, but she also had her own life, and while my parents also cared about her and her life," she adds .
 "I had tremendous appreciation and gratitude for my mom and for everything that she was doing for me," she said . "Of course, I had tremendous gratitude for her," she added .
 "There was also a more intangible part of this whole experience that was extremely difficult emotionally emotionally. There was also also something that was also difficult emotionally," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Loll says the side effects of her medication, including the physical disfigurement, took a heavy toll on her life . She says she was 'a heavy burden' on the medication .
 "It lifted my spirits and made me feel better. For instance, my family had a recording of Harry Belafonte, whom I really liked, and I used to play that record over and over again"
 "By this time I had started to gel really interested in poetry," she says . "This started during my last years in high school. Also, by this time, by . time I was really interested," she writes .
 It’s funny, not too long ago I was watching a movie where they quoted a line from a Keats poem without attributing it . It's funny that not too soon ago, it was a movie that quoted a poem without attribution .
 "I just didn’t think very much about giving up. But also, society was changing at this time in dramatic ways, and because of the influence of these larger things, which 1 was still very passionately interested in," she said .
 'Of course, there would be moments of despair when I’d really feel down,' she said . 'I’m not going to give up. Of course, I would feel down, but I wouldn’t give up,' she added .
 "I still felt that I was going to overcome this. But I’d rebound from that, because I'd rebound," she said .
 As soon as 1 was able, 1 tried to throw myself into things that could give my life some meaning within the severe limitations that it had. As soon I was able I tried to give myself a sense of life .
 At the beginning, the doctors had been worried that any kind of exposure to infection could just kill me . At the end of the year, the doctor had said that any infection could kill me. At the start, doctors had hoped that any of the exposure would just kill her .
 "As soon as I was able, I wanted to get back out," she says . "I wanted to go and watch sports, listen to musical concerts, go to poetry readings, and listen to jazz," she adds .
 "Because of the way I felt about being acutely physically disfigured, I was very reluctant to go out and even see anybody that I knew. At the same time, because of the . way he felt about the way . I was reluctant to . go out, even though I was
 "I would be tempted but I’d answer, “Naw, I don’t want to.” "I was later able to laugh about, but at the time was very painful for me,” he says .
 It wasn't because I didn’t feel physically up to it, although I would get tired very quickly, but because 1 didn't want to face people that I’d known before looking the way I looked now . I didn't feel physically well enough to go on the
 A couple of friends drove me down to the library to meet this other friend of mine . So a couple of the friends drove her down to meet another friend of hers .
 Art hadn’t seen me since I’d gotten sick, but these other friends of mine had been visiting me all the lime, so they knew what the deal was and what 1 looked like . Art hadn't seen Art since his illness .
 "They brought him out of where he was, and he looked around, not recognizing me," she said . "He looked around and not recognized me. But they brought him ... out of the hospital," she added .
 "There were things happening in the world, there were things I cared about, and there was things 1 wanted to do," she says . "But finally 1 got over that, because there were ... things I care about," she adds . "I'm not going to go back to
 "1 mainly went to Berkeley High and other high school games," he says . "I went to some of the Cal games, but actually I was more interested in high school sports," he adds .
 Jeff, a good friend of mine from high school, had died from tetanus . Jeff's death came before 1 first got sick, when he had just come back from Yosemite .
 His family was one of many Black families that had recently come up from the south, and he didn’t have any tetanus shots . His family had recently moved to the south . He didn't have a tetanus shot .
 "He had been working around some construction, they were tearing down some things, and there were all these boards with nails," he said . "They were tearing up some things and there was all these nails with nails"
 'It was this horrible thing where, after he stepped on a nail, he wailed a couple of days to go to the hospital, and by the time he did go it was too late. It was a horrible thing," he said. 'By the time I did go,
 Jeff's high school dedicated a football game to him and his friend . The game was dedicated to Jeff and to Jeff . Jeff was one of the first to get sick .
 "1 would go to some of the clubs that 1 could go to, that would admit people under twenty-one. Anyway, I finally started gelling out," he says .
 1 started looking for things to do that 1 thought would be useful, that would mean something . Then started looking at things that 1 had to do . Then 1 looked at what 1 thought was useful, then 1 thought it was useful .
 "I started tutoring people at my old high school, particularly some of the guys who were into athletics, but also other students, because that was something that 1 could do and it made me feel as if I were doing something worthwhile," says O'Neill .
 When 1 went back to do tutoring at my old high school, sometimes I’d help officiate at track meets and see him run . 1 went to work as a tutor at his old school, and sometimes he helped officiate .
 "I still vividly remember different things that gave a sense of his style. And I still vividly . Remembering different things ... gave an insight into his style," she says .
 Jerry Greene: "I went out there to see the meet in general and specifically to see Jerry run, because it was always a great thing to see. One lime" Greene says .
 Castlemont had these two sprinters who were supposed to be pretty good . Castlemont was supposed to have a good sprinter, but it was never good enough .
 Jerry was ahead by a few yards, and he lengthened his lead, so he was ahead of more than five yards . Jerry extended his lead to more than 5 yards, according to the NFL legend .
 He got down to about 20 yards from the finish line and you could see him just ease up, he said . Then he went through the tape and won by a couple of yards . He was down to 20 yards .
 Jerry Greene had an entourage of people on the track team and others who’d follow all of his exploits . He says he had a lot of people following him on track team .
 Jerry had great speed and great style, but training hard was not that much of his thing, let’s just put it that way . Jerry was great speed, but not great training hard, he says . He says training hard is not his thing .
 Coach wanted Jerry Henson to run the 440 because he's so good at the 220, he'd really be good in the 440 . Henson: "One day the coach comes up to Jerry, and he wants him to run a 440, because he figures he’s so
 Jerry says alright, and they line up for the race, Jerry and these other two guys, and the coach fires the starter gun . The coach says, "Jerry says alright" Jerry says okay, and it's Jerry .
 As Jerry comes off the final turn, he’s ahead by about 60 yards . He slows down and starts loping, and wins by about 20 yards .
 "I knew if 1 came in with a fast time, under 48 seconds, you were gonna make me run the 440," he said . "You knew if you came in at 48 seconds you were going to make me do the 440"
 It turned out that it was a school assembly where they were introducing and giving out this award . "It turned out to be an assembly," she said .
 This was the first I had heard of it, so I was very surprised and, of course, moved . "This is the first time I've heard of this," says the author of the book .
 "The interesting thing, though, is that after I became somewhat notorious in that area as a radical activist, the award was discontinued," he says . "I'm glad to have had the chance to win the award again, but I'm not sure if it will happen again," he
 For the first year after I got sick, I was still taking very high dosages of the cortisone . For the rest of the time, I had to be very low dosages for the first time after I was sick, he said .
 "I felt as if I were a walking pharmacy. had to lake my pills with me everywhere I went. did my best to make that part of my routine"
 "I wasn’t really able to get back into doing very much for the better part of a year," he says . "But realistically, I wasn't really able [to get back to doing] much," he adds .
 "Even if I could tutor or officiate at track meets, it was very, very limited what I could do," she says . "I could tutor, officiate, but I could not do anything," she adds .
 I would get very weak, I’d get very tired very quickly, and I had to be very careful not to get injured or get an infection . I would be very tired and very tired quickly,’s coach says. ‘I’ would get tired very
 "I would frequently have this terrible experience where I'd see somebody that I’d gone to school with for years, and I would instantly recognize them, but they would not recognize me," she says .
 "Sometimes 1 would actually try to hide, or quickly walk out of the bookstore to get away, because I didn’t want to go through the excruciating experience where they would finally realize who I was, and then would react to how different I looked," she says .
 "I just wanted to avoid it. Even when they did it in a really good and kind way, I just wanted it to be avoided," he said .
 One time I was with one of my close friends who’d been hanging out with me all this time, we ran into somebody else that we knew. One time we ran across somebody else we knew, he said, "I’m not sure what happened."
 This person asked my friend, "So how’s Bobby doing?”—and I’m standing right there. He was standing . "Bobby," he said, "and I'm standing right . There was no answer to that question."
 "I told him who I was, of course, but that kind of thing was very painful, and 1 wanted to avoid those situations," he said .
 "That meant a tremendous amount to me, in a way because it was a small thing," he says . "That was a very small thing. That meant a lot to me," he adds .
 The actor had one foot into the criminal life, even in high school, but had the sensitivity to know that it was important to me for him to see me as still the same person . He recognized that the superficialities of how my looks had changed didn’t matter .
 "There were times when the whole thing with the illness would be very discouraging," she said . "There would be times when I would have been very discouraged," she added .
 After a couple of weeks they’d knock it down five milligrams, and then after a few weeks more milligram, and so on. So they would be knocking it down, then again, down, down again . So they'd knock it .
 "All this time I had to go in the doctor’s office twice a week and have tests to see how my kidneys were reacting to the lowering of the dose. All this time, I was going to have to go to the doctor's office twice every week to have tests
 "Near the end of the first year, they’d gotten it down pretty low, and I actually fell a little belter, because the medicine took a lot out of me," he says .
 Tests started to show that my kidneys were losing function again . But then the tests started to . Showed that the kidneys had started to lose function again, he says .
 The dosage had to be raised back up again and then slowly trying to reduce it . So they had to raise the dosage way back up .
 The cycle would lake the better part of a year, and then, boom, the symptoms would start showing up again, so they’d have to raise it back up . This happened to me twice—two cycles over the past two years, where we'd get down low in
 When I got a little bit stronger, I started doing more tutoring and things like officiating at track meets, he says . He says he's still taking medicine for his kidneys, and other medicine to counteract that medicine .
 Berkeley High's coach organized and coached summer league players who were going to be on the varsity next year at Berkeley High .
 Berkeley High hadn’t won the TOC in a long, long time and I wanted to make it happen that year . Berkeley High had never won a TOC before .
 "I was tutoring some of these guys, along with other people, and then I was coaching them in the summer league," he says . "So I was ... coaching them," he adds . "I'm going to be a big success in my career," he said .
 "It was still kind of touch-and-go in a very real way, even though I was past the most acute phase of my illness," he says . That was in the second year of his illness, after the first acute phase .
 One of the side effects from this medicine was susceptibility to really bad throat infections . The side effects of this medicine were to be seen in the U.S.
 This happened during the time I was coaching this summer league team, but I was determined to keep on coaching, and my dad helped me out . This happened while I was playing in the summer league, but 1 was determined .
 'I managed by sign language or writing things down to indicate to my dad that 1 wanted him to go down to the playground where they had a summer league and be my assistant coach, or my voice,' she says .
 I had a clipboard, and whenever anything would happen in the game and I wanted to make a substitution or tell somebody something about what to do, I’d write it down . Then my dad would be my “translator” and verbalize it to the players .
 They got all the way to the final of the TOC, and lost in the final to McClymonds, by one point in overtime, in overtime . The team also lost the championship in the 2014 TOC .
 Berkeley High was ahead of McClymonds by three points, and they were putting on a full-court press . What made it particularly hard to take is that there was a crucial point, right near the end of the game, where Berkeley was ahead .
 Billy, a tremendous leaper, stole the pass and dunked it downcourt . Billy dunked the pass downcourt after stealing the pass from a teammate from McClymonds . Billy was a "tremendous leaper"
 They would have been up by five points, with less than two minutes to go, with just two minutes left . They would've led them to a five-point lead in the final minutes of the game .
 He shuffled his feel in order to get his steps right to dunk the ball . But they called him for walking, because they said he shuffled it right .
 Billy was 'heartbroken' by the loss of his son, according to his mother . "So that was doubly heart-breaking for me, and of course even more so for Billy," she said .
 "I actually tried to challenge him to a light, but he had a big enough heart that he just sort of grabbed me and turned this hold he had on me into an embrace," she says .
 1 went back to Cal on a reduced schedule, and then 1 started being able to get into things more than he had before . So 1 went . back to . Cal on reduced schedule . Then 1 started . getting into things a little more than I had before.
 I still had to live at home, because 1 had to have a special diet and I had to lake all this medicine . I had all these side effects from the medicine. I had also had side effects of the medicine .
 "Even though I had some criticisms of the government, I still looked upon these government buildings and the people in them with a certain amount of not only respect but awe," he says .
 Congress was in session, and 1 remember walking in and being struck that there was nobody in there . "I remember walking into Congress and being really struck that nobody was in there," she said .
 CNN.com's John Sutter says he was young at the time, but there were some congressmen he’d heard of . Sutter: "When 1 saw some of them, close up, they looked not just old, but decrepit"
 "I found out later that my dad would hold his breath every night until I got back at one or two in the morning, after having been in the Village all that time," he says . "Of course, I found out . Of course, my dad held his breath."
 During that period, even though 1 was still very limited in what 1 could do, I started to get involved, in the ways I could, in some of the bigger issues that were going on .
 People may not think of Berkeley in this way, but this was at a lime when there was still a lot of open, overt segregation in the schools and in housing, and there was a big struggle about ending that . Berkeley was still at a time when it was still an open,
 There was this ballot initiative to pass a fair housing law in Berkeley, California, which was narrowly voted down . There was also a ballot initiative that was narrowly defeated in Berkeley .
 I was very much into that battle, even though I could only be involved from a distance, so to speak. I'm very much involved in that battle . I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to get involved in it again, but I was there at the moment
 A conservative property owner opposed the fair housing law was opposing the law, CNN's John Sutter says . Sutter: "I was listening and getting more and more angry and passionate"
 "This was one outlet 1 had for my passion that was being stirred by what was happening," said one of the stars .
 I was still very much concerned with what was going on in the larger world beyond me, even though 1 was severely restricted in being able to be actively involved in anything . I was very concerned about what was happening to the bigger world beyond him, says the author .
 Everybody sensed to one degree or another—certainly anybody who was paying any attention, and most people were, they couldn’t help it—that the world could literally end at any time, they said . Everybody sensed, or not, that the world was about to end at
 "I still remember feeling very, very deeply, right down into my bones, that the whole world could come to an end," says author . "It was very difficult to think that the world could end," she says of her experience .
 "I followed this whole thing very intensely. At that lime, I was back on a restricted schedule in school, but I followed it very intensely," she says .
 Of course, they always give you only the United States imperialist side of the picture, and that’s what people get drummed into them,’S. ‘They always give [the United States] only the U.S. imperialist side . That's what people
 Adlai Stevenson, who was the United States representative to the United Nations, gave a speech where he showed photos of the Soviet missiles that had been brought into Cuba . "I remember this dramatic incident that they still like to replay from time to time," he says .
 Adlai Stevenson denied in the United Nations that the U.S. had anything to do with the Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba . A year before that, at the beginning of the Kennedy administration, Stevenson got up and vehemently denied that the United States had any involvement in the Bay
 'They like to show the one thing on TV as a highlight from history, but not the other thing where Stevenson was overtly lying in front of the whole world. So they like to . show the . one thing they like are the one . highlight from . history .
 Kennedy tried to justify this by claiming that the Soviet Union had violated the UN Charier by putting missiles in Cuba . Kennedy said that this was a violation of the UN .
 Even though I had a lot of suspicions about the government already at that time, I still wanted to believe in my government . "Even though I was very angry about the injustices in American society, and especially the oppression of Black people," she says .
 I still wanted to believe the government could at least be brought around to doing the right thing. "I still wanted the government to do something," she says. "But I still want to believe it could be done"
 "I didn’t want to believe that on something where literally the fate of the world was involved, they would just openly lie to everybody," he says . "I'm not sure what happened to me. And I'm not going to believe it," he adds .
 There wasn't anything like that in the Charier either and, as I later found out, the U.S. had missiles all over the place, including in Turkey . Even though the ones in Turkey were older generation missiles, they were still missiles that could set off nuclear devices .
 Bush was using the logic he was using then, and that’s the logic that, right up to Bush, they use now . That was the logic Bush used then . Bush's logic is now being used now, he says .
 Dylan captured the inability or unwillingness to engage in abstract thought, and to abstract from one situation to another, the refusal to be consistent in applying a principle (what applies to you doesn’t apply to me; I can do what 1 want, and you can't do it if
 "I knew some things about injustices in American society, but lying on this level, lying before the world with the fate of the world literally at stake, was more than 1 expected," he said .
 Of course, this didn't immediately cause me to become a communist . "I was still against communism, as much as I understood it, which was very little," he says .
 "It shook me up a lot and kept circulating in my mind as other events, like Vietnam, unfolded," he says . But it shook him up a little bit, he says, "but it shook me a lot"
 The Cuban missile crisis and things like the fair housing struggle contributed to my feeling that there were important things in the world and I should do something about those things, he says . "I should do ... something important with my life when I got my life back," he says.
 I no longer believed that god existed, and being sick didn't make me feel any more like 1 should believe that God existed . didn’t yet have a communist, dialectical materialist approach to things, but 1 did have a sort of basic scientific approach . didn't think
 The fact that he didn't know, the fact that there are things we don’t know at any time, is not a reason to start inventing imaginary causes and forces to explain things, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 "That just gets in the way of actually learning more about the reality of things," she said . "I'm not going to be able to do that, I'm going to have to do it," she added .
 "He never charged us a single thing for the intensive care, and then the years of ongoing medical treatment, because he looked a liking to our family and to me," she said . "He didn't want to charge us anything," she says .
 He died recently, and when I read his obituary I learned even more what a great guy he was, and how this had been a part of his whole approach to medicine, to give people the medical care they needed, even if they couldn’t pay for it .
 He'd finally quit practicing medicine late in his life because these HMO’s would not let him really give people the kind of medical care that they needed . He’d finally quit .
 1 was sick, he’d let me come into his office at any time and have the tests done that I needed, and whenever I'd go in his office I would see people who could not afford the medical care he was giving them . He was giving it to them free
 "I never thought it was punishment from “god,” or that ‘god” had anything to do with it. But I never thought that punishment was punishment . "God’s punishment was not “God”
 This was a medical condition, it came on because of ‘natural causes,” real-world things, even if the precise causes couldn’t be known . This was the case, even though it was not clear what caused the condition .
 Just because the doctor was honest enough to simply say, “I don’t know” and couldn't tell me exactly why this happened, didn't mean that I started looking to supposed supernatural causes for this . "I don't know’s just because I don
 There are many things we obviously still don’t understand, but there are things the people thousands of years ago didn't understand that we do now . There are still many things that we still don't understand now, but we do understand now .
 The ruling classes down through the ages have found it convenient to keep people believing in these kinds of things . They made up myths and stories to explain things they couldn’t explain otherwise, and then the ruling classes made it convenient .
 "1 had gotten free of that, and there was no attraction to me to go back into believing in that stuff," she said . "But 1 had gotten . free of . that, she said. "There is no attraction"
 "There was a real-world way that 1 was going to get over it, by putting up with all this medicine and struggling to regain my health," she says . This was a 'real-world thing that had happened'
 "I’d get up and keep going, because that’s the way I felt this was going to be dealt with, not by praying or turning back to some religious views," he says . He says he'd come to understand that religious views didn’t really
 After a year oi going to Cal on a limited schedule, by 1963 I was feeling better and able to take a more regular load . By 1963, I was able to go on a regular schedule .
 This was a time when important changes were starting to lake place around Vietnam . This was the beginning of a new era in the country .
 In fact, one day I was walking on the campus and all these people started running down toward the gym. didn’t know what this was about. didn't know what it was about . Didn't know why people were running down to the gym .
 Madame Nhu had been invited by the university to speak in the gym . They said she was invited to speak at the university .
 Madame Nhu was the wife of the brother of the president of South Vietnam, the U.S. puppet, Diem, and her husband was the head of the secret police . She was also the wife to the president's brother, the United States puppet Diem .
 She was there speaking on behalf of the United States puppet government and the U.S. intervention in Vietnam . People were protesting even then, even though she was speaking .
 People were trying to gel into the auditorium to protest Madame Nhu’s appearance at the university . People were running to try to . try to try . into the . auditorium .
 Nhu and Diem had become a liability and had them assassinated just before Kennedy himself was assassinated . Nhu was assassinated in Vietnam in 1968 . Diem was assassinated by Nhu in 1968, a year before Kennedy assassinated himself .
 "There were things like that going on that seemed to come out of the blue," he says . "But, anyway, there were things ... that seemed like that," he adds .
 "The thing that kind of turned the corner for me, ironically, actually started when was I was lying in bed one morning ... and I started getting this really severe stomach pain, like I’d never experienced before, as if someone took a two-by-four and hit
 This pain just kept getting worse and worse, and I was literally doubling over, so finally I woke up my parents . The doctor said, “He’s got a perforated ulcer”—which means it had broken open and was bleeding into the stomach .
 "I had to be rushed to the hospital and they put a tube through my nose down into my stomach to drain the stomach," she says . "They put a . tube through the nose down in my stomach, down into the stomach, out of the stomach"
 "There was a question of what was going to happen as a result of that. But, because of the ulcer, they slopped the cortisone treatments, and there was a possibility of that," she said .
 Loo's body didn't respond badly to not having the cortisone . Surprisingly to both me and the doctors, my body didn’t respond badly . Loo’s body responded badly to the treatment, but he says it was 'surprising'
 The theory was that it was like giving a jolt to the body, almost like a kick-start to get the body to recover . The theory is that it is like giving the body a boost to recover from a bad injury .
 "This was like turning a corner for me. So they started with this treatment, and as it turned out this was like a corner," she says .
 "Just when l thought maybe I was going to be through with this and get off the medicine, I went in on a Friday, when the doctor was out of town, and the nurses did the tests and discovered that some of the symptoms had begun to reappear .
 "That was always his attitude, and it helped get my spirits up, even though 1 still had to up the dosage of the medicine again," says the author . "That's always been his attitude," she says of her father .
 After seeing that l did pretty well without any cortisone for a few weeks, they decided to try this new approach . But then, not long after that, he had this ulcer perforate and had to have surgery .
 When you have to lake all these steroids it has a lot of different effects on you, and I’d feel really weakened and tired,’s the author says. ‘I’m really weakened, tired and tired a lot the time.’ He says
 It evolved to where I would take steroids on Thursday, Friday and Saturday, and then nothing Sunday, Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday . But now it was a completely different experience, and eventually it evolved to .
 "I was carrying pretty much a regular load at the university at that point and trying to do other things. I was carrying ... other things," she says . "I'm not going to be able to do anything else," she adds .
 Cortisone is actually an extract from the adrenal gland, so it’s like a jolt oi adrenaline, and by the lime it kicked in on Thursday night, man, I was going. I’d start taking the steroids on Thursday .
 By Sunday afternoon it was almost like withdrawal symptoms . Then on Sunday 1 would stop the medicine, and by Sunday afternoon, it had almost withdrawal symptoms. It's almost like withdrawing symptoms .
 "My nose would start running, my stomach would get sick, I’d feel completely sapped of energy, and I couldn’t hardly do anything," she says . "I’m just completely sapping of energy," she adds .
 On Monday I felt really draggy, then by Tuesday, Wednesday, Wednesday I’d sort of feel leveled off and okay, and by Thursday night I was back on the steroids and flying again . "I’m flying again. I was flying again," he says .
 "This went on for the better part of a year, but it turned out that either my body was just ready to respond and/or this different treatment actually did work better. This turned out to be a different treatment .
 By the summer of 1964, I started noticing real improvement in how I felt, and my body was responding well, so that by that time, I was able to get off the medicine altogether . By that point, I had noticed real improvements in my body .
 And I never had to go back to the cortisone after three years of taking it. And I didn't need to take it again for three years. I'm happy to be able to play football again, but I'm not afraid to play .
 In 1964, when I was just starling to feel better and on my way to recovery, though not fully recovered yet from all the sickness, I turned twenty-one . In 1964 he was turning twenty-21 .
 I wasn't a big drinker at that time, but I liked to go to clubs and see different acts. I wasn’t a big drinkinger at the time, and I liked going to clubs,’ he says. ‘I wasn't going to drink,
 "I couldn't find anybody to go with me that time, so I just went by myself. I couldn’t find anybody else to go," he says .
 Around that time the Coasters had out this song called ‘’Taint Nothin’ To Me’—sort of a novelty song, which was characteristic of the Coaster, a whole funny song that 1 really liked .
 "1 liked a lot of the other Coasters classics, so I really wanted to go see them," says one of the fans . "1 really liked the Coasters. And 1 liked it," she says . "I liked it so much that I liked it"
 "When you sit in a bar you have to drink, so I had a couple of drinks," he says . "So I went, but the show didn’t start until pretty late, and when you sit . I went to the show, but it was a pretty late
 "I’m sitting at the bar, I order another drink, and I start drinking the drink ... and then I set it down— and the next thing I know somebody’s tapping me kind of . on the shoulder, he says . The next thing he knows is
 I look up, realizing that I’ve fallen asleep, and I'm staring into the face of the bartender . "I look up and realize that I've fallen asleep," he says. "I’m staring at the bartender. He’s staring at me.
 "I was, the only white guy in this bar, a little bit embarrassed that I’d fallen asleep and had to be awakened by the bartender. You know, I wonder what the other people in the bar thought," he says .
 “Your Sons and Your Daughters ...” l\^Ly family and all my friends and I were still holding our breath, because you don’t know—twice before I’d been through a situation where things were going well with low dosages of
 There was the possibility of a relapse now that 1 was completely off the cortisone. So there was the possible relapse now. 1 is completely off cortisonesone .
 John Milton was the English poet who wrote Paradise Lost . He was nominated by some of his English professors to be part of an undergraduate honors seminar on Milton .
 There were about ten of us in the seminar, which was taught by Stanley Fish, a big Milton hotshot . Stanley Fish was only a few years older than we were —1 think he was 24 at the time . The seminar was held in Milton, Florida .
 He's now a big figure in academic and intellectual circles more generally in the U.S. and I’ve written a few things recently commenting on some of his books . He’s now a major figure in intellectual circles in the United States .
 At that time, I hadn’t heard of him but I was into English literature, I was still trying to write poetry, and this sounded like an exciting thing to do, she says .
 "We met for a number of weeks, five days a week for several hours, and it turned out to be a fun seminar," she says . "It was a great seminar. We met for several weeks," she writes .
 One time Professor Fish brought in this guest lecturer who talked about a certain aspect of Milton’s work, and I was wearing my dark glasses in the classroom, he says .
 Opening Up 1 met Liz in this seminar, and she had a big influence on me . Opening Up: "Opening Up 1 meets Liz in a seminar. She was an inspiration to me"
 I was already anxious to be more involved in political affairs, and she came from a progressive family . Her parents had been sympathizers of the old Communist Parly. Parly . She came from an old Communist family .
 She told stories about how people she knew had to bury their Marxist books during the McCarthy period . She said she knew people had to cover up their Marxism books .
 "She had a radicalizing efTect on me, to pul it that way," she says . "I was drawn to the Free Speech Movement when it broke out that fall, but she had a big influence"
 1 still was not by any means a communist and, as reflected in the comment he made about Mao at that time, I still accepted a lot of the anti-communist propaganda and bullshit . And he answered, “No, it’s a good thing, because it
 "The prejudices 1 had were clashing up against somebody else who had a different understanding and was challenging me," says the author . "That kind of thing was repeatedly happening. The prejudices 1 . had were ... clashing ... up against someone else who was challenging them," she says .
 "I didn’t say, “Oh I see” and just agree with him, but on the other hand, it became one of those things circulating in your mind," he says . "I'm not sure if I'm going to have a lot of things to
 In fact, during the Free Speech Movement there were some people in leadership of that movement, including Mario Savio, who were making statements against the Vietnam War . Savio: "In fact, some of the people in that movement were making ... statements against Vietnam War"
 The Kennedy assassination was a perfect example of the contradictoriness of my thinking, Tom says . Tom by Kennedy and the Democrats .
 "Everybody was stunned and saddened that Kennedy had been assassinated," she says . "They were all openly grieving," she recalls . "I came to class at the university that day"
 "I remember one of the women in one of my classes got mad at me because I was sort of aloof and not expressing any emotion," she says . "And I remember a woman who was angry at me for being aloof," she adds .
 1 actually wrote a poem memorializing Kennedy a few weeks after that . Phil Ochs at that time, who talked about his Marxist friends being unable to understand how he could write a positive song .
 For much of his life, he was a real liberal Democrat. Toward the end, he became more alienated from the whole system and more outraged about the injustices in the United States .
 In fact, he had been offered a position in the Kennedy administration, but he turned it down because he was in the Bay Area and loo sick to move . He didn't want to be separated from me while I was sick, and he didn’t want to move,
 "My parents, of course, were very upset about the Kennedy assassination, and I think my dad went to a meeting and read this poem," she says . "I think my father went to meet with me and I wrote this poem memorializing Kennedy"
 "This kind of contradictory thinking that characterized my parents, and myself, is fairly common among progressive people," she says . This kind of contradiction thinking is quite common among progressives, she adds .
 You see a lot of the injustices and what we sometimes call the “running sores” of the whole society . You see ways in which the people presiding over the society are responsible for this, says the author .
 It takes a lot for people to fully cast that off, and that was true for me loo. That’s an illusion that is often difficult to shed, she says . That's an illusion .
 At this point, in 1964, I was finally able to leave home . At this time, I finally left home .
 "Since 1 had been cut off from a lot of social experiences, 1 wanted to go live in the dorms, even though I was by then in my third year of classes" "1" wanted to live in dorms "since 1 had to live away from many social experiences
 "There was still a question of whether my health requirements would allow that," she said . "There were still a few questions about whether I would be allowed to go to the hospital," she added . "But there were still questions about my health," she says .
 "Every day 1 was calculating how many milligrams of sodium 1 could eat, and things like that. Among other things, I had this very strict diet, where literally every day I had to calculate how much sodium 1 can eat," he said. "Among other things"
 I had enough strength, but there was also the question of diet, because something that threw my system off could give me a severe setback . I had to decide whether to go on a diet, as well as diet, to avoid a setback. I had a lot of confidence, but
 This friend of mine from high school named Tom was living in the dorms, and we got it arranged so that he and I could be roommates, which made it easier for me . This friend, Tom, was living at the same dorms as I was in high school .
 "That was a very important step for me at that lime, given how dependent I’d been forced to be," he says . "I’m not going to be dependent on that," he adds .
 "Even though 1 loved my family, 1 wanted to be taking steps to be on my own more. Even though 1 of them loved their families, 1 loved being on their own more."
 While the dorms, obviously, have their limitations, this was a positive experience for me under the circumstances . The dorms have some limitations, but this was the best experience I've ever had .
 Mainly people go in the dorm when they first come into the university, and then move on—but since I hadn’t been able to do that, I enjoyed it quite a bit for the short time that 1 was there . Mainly, people go into the dorm and
 Tom, his roommate, was a progressive guy and also a big sports fanatic like me . Tom was also a sports fan like me. Tom, who was also progressive. Tom was a great sports fanatic.
 This was a lime when even life in the dorms was beginning to be affected by the big changes sweeping through society and the world . This was the time of the year when the dorm life in Britain was affected .
 That kind of ferment was finding expression throughout university life, says university president . Students were engaged in fermenting ferment in their own way of life .
 At that lime 1 still physically bore the scars of being sick and I was also struggling to overcome them psychologically . At that time I was struggling with the scars, I still bore them physically and psychologically .
 "My friends used to talk me into going to parties, and my love for singing provided a way for me to sort of break out of my shell socially," she says .
 J 25 or how 1 gol the nerve to do this, but when I’d go to the parties—and 1 didn’t have to get drunk or high to do it, either . Often at a break I would just start singing, either—and often at a
 We had four dorms together in a group where everyone ate at the same cafeteria, and at the big meal on Sunday they used to have a microphone for people to make announcements . We were in the same dorm as four other dorms in the group .
 "I actually gol up and just took hold of the mike and started singing this Mary Wells song," "Bye, Bye Baby" "The whole place just responded. So one Sunday at the urging and daring of my friends, and somewhat on my own initiative as well, I
 Dylan and “Beatlemania” was a big deal when the Beatles first came to the U.S. It was also a big time for the Beatles, says Dylan . Dylan and "Beatlemanmania" were a big thing for Dylan, says Bob Dylan .
 "Everybody in the dorms gathered around the TV to watch the Beatles, except for me and Tom, who really didn’t like or care about the Beatles that much," she says . "We were also making a statement that we had other kinds of music we were into,"
 I’ve since come to understand how narrow that was, how 1 failed to appreciate something that was new and breaking with some conventions and molds, and I've tried to learn from that, not just about music .
 MickJagger was staying in the same hotel as some of the athletes in the meet, a friend of mine told a story . Mick was staying at a hotel in L.A. during the time . Mick's career spanned from 1972 to 1986 .
 Later on, 1 came to appreciate especially John Lennon a lot, in a different way . John Lennon's political and social views, but even musically musically .
 There was this one guy at Cal who used to sing the whole repertoire of Bob Dylan music, and he had the Bob Dylan look as well . There was also a guy who sang the entire repertoire of Dylan music .
 This kind of “imitation” was exactly the kind of thing Bob Dylan didn’t like, but this guy had the harmonica and the guitar and everything, and that’s actually where I first started hearing some Dylan songs . I’m sure there
 As 1 got more political, I really got into Dylan, remember in particular the album The Times They Are A-Changin\ They were changing, and this brought a lot of generational conflicts . Then, as 1 got political, he really got involved with Dylan .
 Bob Dylan spoke for the whole social and political upheaval that was occurring, especially for a lot of youth out of the middle class, but not only for them . So, even though 1 didn’t want to have anything to do with the Beatles, there was a way in which
 A lot of his early songs had to do with the civil rights struggle, outrages like the one captured so powerfully in “The Lonesome Death of Hattie Carroll,” about the killing of a Black maid by a rich young white planter in Baltimore .
 "The poetry of Dylan's songs just really drew me. And the poetry of his songs also drew me," she says . "I was into poetry, and I was really drawn to Dylan," she adds .
 I didn't see him as a white boy who was just mimicking other people’s music. I didn’t see him . He was not a white white boy, he said. He was just a white man who mimicked other people's music, he added .
 1 only stayed in the dorms for a short time, and then Tom and I and a couple of other people got an apartment . New People, New Influences 1: "I'm glad to have some of the best people in the world, but I'm not sure if they
 One of my good friends in the dorm, who later moved into an apartment with me and Tom, was from India . One of our good friends later moved in to an apartment .
 "He was a really good-hearted guy, but he used to recount to us, he said, that when he was back in India, he was awakened every morning by being given a massage by servants . He used to tell us, for example, that he was awoken every morning
 Every day he would step over the dead bodies of the poor people who had starved to death on the streets of Calcutta the night before . Then he would walk from his house to his father’s business, where he lived, he acknowledged to us .
 "We struggled with him and struggled ... and we finally got him for a little while to become kind of a hippie, but that’s as far as we could get with him," she says .
 He did share with us a lot of experiences and open us up to an understanding, or at least a glimpse, of a whole different part of the world and different cultures and customs . On the other hand, he did .
 Politically at that time—in the period before the Free Speech Movement, there was mainly civil rights activity among students .
 The right to organize for civil rights activities on the campus was the focal point of what became the Free Speech Movement . In fact, it was a focal point for the movement that became the free speech movement .
 The Cal administration had a rule that you could organize things like student clubs, but you could not carry on political activity on campus for “off-campus political causes,” such as civil rights . It may sound unbelievable now, but in those days, it was a rule .
 You were not allowed to organize on campus for, say, a civil rights protest or demonstration against a company that wouldn't hire Black people . It was against the rules and you could be expelled for it . You could be kicked out of college if you organized a protest .
 The FSM was a major impetus for a wave of changes on campuses all across the country . The Berkeley campus has been transformed by the FSM . Berkeley's campus is now a model of American higher education .
 When the FSM was going on, people, young people, came to Berkeley from all parts of the country . Berkeley is Berkeley, Berkeley, California, and Berkeley, New Hampshire .
 He told me stories about having visited Italy, where Communist Parly was looked at very differently than in the United States . It was a mainstream political party there, he said . He said .
 "When I put things like that together with things I knew and was learning, from my own personal experience, and especially the experience of many of my friends, it had a kind of cumulative effect," he says .
 Even when 1 was in high school some of the gathering momentum of the civil rights movement carried over in various ways and found various expressions among students and within the school, among the Black students .
 "1 agreed with that right away. That immediately struck me as true and important," she said . "I agree with that," she added .
 It’s one thing if you want to say there should be pacifist tactics in a particular situation, like a demonstration, but I never agreed with pacifism as a principle . Black people, for example, should always turn the other cheek, he says .
 When 1 heard about the Deacons for Defense in the south, who organized and look up arms to defend the Black community from the KKK and all the racist sheriffs, I thought that was right—it was necessary and important .
 Malcolm X articulated “by any means necessary,” I fell that was right, and I didn’t agree with the idea that you should confine the people to turning the other cheek or just to passively accepting, for whatever supposedly loftier purpose, being brutalized .
 At one point, I got a recording of “The Ballot or the Bullet,” and 1 listened to that over and over . At one time, I listened to ‘Ballot or The Bullet’ over and again .
 Straddling Two Worlds is the work of a friend who came back to Cal. He says he became friends with a group of friends who were mainly Black that he also got to know .
 When 1 went back to Berkeley High to do tutoring and officiating at track meets and coaching summer league basketball teams, 1 maintained contact with his old friends and that milieu, so to speak .
 While 1 didn’t think of it that way at the time, looking back on it now, I feel like I was straddling two worlds, but to me they were both part of my life . To me, I felt like they were part of the world .
 "The same kind of shit that 1 ran into in high school came up again," she says . "There were people at Cal who would straight up tell me that they would not be friends with me because I hung out in the Student Union and around campus with Black students"
 "To me this was all part of what I was about. As I said, I was sort of straddling two worlds," he said . "As I said ... I was straddled between two worlds, but to me this is part of my life," he added .
 "I wasn’t trying to make a “statement” — these were just my friends, these were the people and things 1 was interested in and cared about . These were just the different parts that made up the whole of my life, but objectively 1 was .
 "I was drawn more to things that were from my earlier years, especially my high school years," she says . "In a lot of ways, culturally, culturally ... I was drawn to things I was from my early years," the author says .
 "There were things about the university that were increasingly drawing me," he says . "But then politically, and in terms of intellectual ferment, there were things that were also drawing me"
 "Faerie Queene" by Edmund Spenser is a classical epic poem, hundreds and hundreds of pages long, written at more or less the same time as Shakespeare . I took courses in Shakespeare and Chaucer, and I’m one of the few people that I know of
 Spenser was a big influence on Keats and 1 was really into Keats . 1 actually took a course on this poem, and 1 actually read it .
 I also had a goal of learning five or six languages, but I didn't ever fulfill my goal . "Other things intervened which became more important to me. took Italian and 1 took some Spanish," he said .
 Italian romantic poets from more or less the same period as Keats and the other English romantic poets . But by taking Italian I got interested in some of the Italian poets .
 "My favorite Italian professor was very progressive, and 1 used to have talks with him about what was going on in the world," she says . "As much as I could, I would talk with him in Italian about all this"
 Most of the people who were big into athletics—let’s put it this way, they were not among the vanguard of the progressive and radical forces on the campus. You know, most of the . campus .
 There were some friends of mine, like Kayo and Tom, who were sports fanatics and who also had strong progressive views and radical tendencies . But that was more the exception than the rule .
 In that way you could say there was a certain conflict in terms of things that 1 was passionate about . So, in that way, you could . say there were things that were passionate about. So, it was a conflict .
 By this Lime, around 1964, 1 was finally getting back on his feet physically and feeling like he dared to do some things . But by this Lime was finally feeling like I dared to .
 When the summer gave way to the fall and the Free Speech Movement arose, "I was ready to throw myself into that," he says . He says he was "ready to throw himself into that"
 People were organizing on the campus to protest against local businesses which they identified as practicing racial discrimination in their hiring, such as the Oakland Tribune and Mel's Diner . Despite the administration’s rule that you couldn't do “on-campus organizing for off-campus issues,
 Everybody on campus was aware of this, it was becoming more and more of an issue that people were debating and talking about and getting involved in, because there was polarization . "There was polarization," says one of the students at the University of Washington .
 Fraternity boys grew brains in the '60s, but that was later in the ’60s—at the time of the FSM they didn’t have them yet . "I’ve often said that in the . ‘60s even fraternity boys grew
 A guy named Jack Weinberg was sitting at a table organizing for this and he refused to fold up the table . Weinberg is a member of the Republican National Committee for the Democratic National Party .
 The suspect was arrested and put in a police car to drive him off, but then a bunch of students came and surrounded the police car . They arrested him, pul him, drove him off and surrounded him .
 While this sit-in was going on, I was at a reception that the Chancellor, Chancellor Strong, was having for honor students .
 The Oakland Tribune was owned by William E Knowland, who was a well-known reactionary . Knowland was the owner of the Oakland Tribune . He said the newspaper was pressured by Knowland .
 The Tribune called up, the Chancellor told us, complaining about the organizing of civil rights demonstrations against the Tribune for discriminatory hiring practices . The Chancellor said the protests were organized against the paper .
 I was shocked, first, that this was actually how this came about, and, second, that he was just saying this so baldly as if everybody would accept it . I'm shocked that this is actually how it came about and that he just said this baldly, as if
 "A lot of people there did find this very objectionable, including myself," he says . But a lot of the people at the school found it very objectionable .
 Jack Weinberg was silting inside a police car when he spoke . The police car had been surrounded by the protesters and transformed into a speaking platform .
 William E Knowland was nicknamed William ""Formosa" Knowland because of his big-time support for Chiang Kai-shek, who had ruled China with the backing of the United States and other imperialist powers . He was driven from power in 1949 by the Chinese revolution .
 For more on the author’s views on the Free Speech Movement, see "FSM Reflections—On Becoming a Revolutionary," by Bob Avakian, Revolutionary Worker, #882, November 17, 1996, .
 The FSM expressed the general feeling that students wanted to be treated as adults and citizens . Students wanted to have the same rights as other people, the student says .
 Phil Ochs had a song where the refrain went something like, I’ve got something to say, sir, and I'm going to say it now . The refrain of the song was "I’m going to tell it now"
 "As it was in that song, so it is in reality with students and youth at that time," she says . "And as it was . in that . song, as it . was in reality," she said .
 CNN.com: "There were a lot of big things going on in the world. But, beyond that, there were a few big things to be going on" CNN's John Sutter: "The world is going to be very exciting this year."
 Vietnam was already beginning to heat up in the fall of ’64, and there was the civil rights movement . The Vietnam War was already heating up in '64 .
 People wanted to be actively involved in or debating about these things, they said . They didn’t want to be treated like little children just because they were students, she said .
 There were some people who weren’t students who were involved—and they were welcomed, it was good that they were involved . "There were some students who weren't students who . were involved," she said .
 Records show overwhelmingly those arrested were students . The records show arrests were mostly made for students .
 Most of those arrested were students, they claimed that they were students who were failing or getting poor grades anyway, so they were just being troublemakers . Then, since they couldn’t deny that most of them arrested, they said they were failing students anyway . They then claimed that
 FSM committee looks at grade point average of students who were arrested . Committee also looks at grades of those arrested .
 At this time Liz was more politically aware and more of an activist and radical than 1 was . Liz was 'more politically aware' and 'more of a radical' than her husband .
 It was partly the political discussions we had and partly the fact that I was interested in her romantically and she wanted to be very active in the Free Speech Movement, that led me to be so consistently involved, she says .
 When we went into Sproul Hall for the big sit-in, I was trying to help keep the morale up . I was there to help with morale up, and as the sit-ins went on, I tried to help them up .
 "At one point I went from floor to floor organizing singing to keep the spirits up. At one point, I went to floor to . organize singing," she said . "I'm not going to be able to get back on the floor."
 1 just decided, “Oh, the hell with it,” and threw my homework away . The sit-in lasted several days and I was still a serious student, so I was also trying to keep up with school work .
 "This also had a larger symbolic meaning, even though I myself wasn’t fully aware of it yet," he said . "But this also had also had the larger symbolic significance,," he added . "I'm not sure if it's true, but I'm sure it
 People were arrested in almost an assembly line fashion at the end of the sit-in . Another one of those ironies of “straddling two worlds” happened to me . The sit-ins were held in a “assembly line fashion” fashion .
 As they were arrested, a lot of people were thrown down the stairs, and the women in particular were grabbed by the hair and thrown out of the stairs . The incident occurred during the arrest of the women who were arrested .
 "I was on the top floor and saw many people brutalized like that," he says . "This was only a few months after I had finally recovered from being sick," he adds .
 "I was also a little worried about what would happen to me if I got thrown down the stairs or otherwise brutalized," he says . "So besides being outraged generally, I was also worried about ... what would be happening to me," he adds .
 The cop who was arresting me was someone who had played basketball for a local college . He recognized the cop as someone who was arrested as a college basketball player .
 "Gray" played basketball for St. Louis St. Francis, Missouri, in the 1980s . He was a star player for the Cardinals . He is now a member of the NBA's Dream Team .
 At the same time, my dad was appointed as a judge by the same governor, Edmund G “Pat” Brown, who sent the police in to arrest us in Sproul Hall . At the time, his whole involvement in the Free Speech Movement came shortly after his dad
 When I did get arrested, it was another case where both of my parents agreed with the principles of free speech, and even agreed generally with what the students were lighting for, but 1 think were made very nervous, not only in a personal sense .
 "I was still in a precarious position. On the other hand, as soon as they learned that I got arrested, my parents called up my doctor, since I had just gotten over this very serious illness," she said .
 "My doctor felt so strongly about this that he insisted that my dad get me out that night, so that I wouldn’t have to spend the night on a cold floor under jail conditions," she says .
 "I was surprised to get out a little earlier than some of the other people did," he says . "Most everybody was out by the next morning or the next day sometime," he adds .
 Mario Savio, who led the FSM, had a big effect on me, though I didn’t really know him personally . He was one of the best players in the sport, playing in the World Cup .
 I was active and involved in FSM pretty much all the way through, from the beginning; l went to all the rallies and heard Mario and others speak. I was also involved in the FSM. I went to the rallies, heard Mario speak and heard him speak. l went
 Mario gave a speech at Sproul Hall before the start of the day . 1 was very moved by his speeches, 1 remember one lime right before we all got busy .
 This was in early December of 1964, and 1 was actively looking into the Vietnam War and trying to figure out what stand to lake on it, but 1 hadn’t made up my mind yet . This was early December, 1964 .
 1 felt like we had a certain level of unity in the Free Speech Movement, but it didn’t include opposing the Vietnam War . As 1 referred to earlier, I was troubled by Mario’s saying this at that point, because 1 felt . 1 felt that we had
 You didn’t have to be opposed to the Vietnam War to be actively and enthusiastically involved in the Free Speech Movement, though probably if you took a survey, the overwhelming majority would have been opposed to Vietnam War .
 'Within a short time after this, I became convinced that it needed to be very actively and strongly opposed. And, within a short . myself became convinced . I myself became . convinced that . it needed a very actively . strongly opposed to the idea of the idea .
 "At that lime I was still in the process of wrangling with this—debating and studying and trying to learn enough to make up my mind about it," she says . "I was still debating and studying"
 Mario Savio had a big influence in convincing me to oppose what the U.S. was doing in Vietnam . So this was a little troubling to me, but as I was trying to make up my mind and come to a decision about Vietnam, it was troubling .
 Malcolm X was assassinated in February of 1965 . Shortly after this, Malcolm X had been assassinated .
 Malcolm X was seeking to link up with people in other parts of the world who were fighting against injustices and oppression . This hit me as a devastating loss for Black people, and also for people generally fighting against injustice, not just in the U.S., but throughout the world .
 Malcolm's assassin was Elijah Muhammed and the Nation of Islam . Malcolm's assassination was the result of an assassination plot . Malcolm never believed that it was just Elijah .
 "I knew that the United States government was somehow behind this. Whether or not they were involved in some way, I knew that they were," she said .
 "I hadn't studied the issue, and a lot of the exposure of how they were involved hadn’t come out yet, obviously," he said .
 1 knew they haled Malcolm X and saw him as very dangerous to them—and it made me really sad but very angry too . 1 had been aware of the transformations Malcolm was going through. But 1 just sensed this .
 People were debating about the split between Elijah Muhammed and Malcolm X, and most everybody I knew sided with Malcolm X . We saw him as more radical, more willing to stand up in the face of any threat against Black people and against oppression .
 1 don’t remember exactly where 1 was when I heard the news about Malcolm’s assassination, but 1 do know how I fell immediately upon hearing this . So I was following that very closely, and all that was an important part of what was causing me to undergo a
 It is done in the persona of a liberal, it's done in a biting exposure of the contradictoriness and hypocrisy in liberals . It starts out with how sad this liberal was when Kennedy got killed, and even what a tragedy it was when Medgar Evers was murdered, but
 Phil Ochs captured that with rather brilliant and biting irony . That was a fairly widespread view among a lot of liberals, he says . That's a rather brilliant, biting irony.
 "There were a lot of very sharp arguments with some people that I knew, because I vehemently disagreed with that view," she says . "I vehemently disagreed ... with some of the people I knew," she adds .
 All these things were influencing me in making up my mind about Vietnam . Deciding About Vietnam is a series of Vietnam experiences .
 "Then there were a lot of debates that were sharpening up on the campus and in activist circles," she says . " Then there were debates ... sharpening ... up on campus," she adds .
 Geneva Agreements were to provide for reunification of Vietnam and elections in 1956/ France was gelling out of Vietnam . They’d been forced out by the struggle of the Vietnamese people, having suffered this devastating defeat at Dien Bien Phu .
 Malcolm X talked about how the Vietnamese sent the French running, Malcolm X says . Malcolm X: "Malcolm X said that ... how the French sent the Vietnamese running"
 1 went to the university library and read the initial Agreement and most of the reports of the commission it set up . He found that their reports overwhelmingly demonstrated that the United States was systematically sabotaging it .
 Eisenhower recognized that Ho Chi Minh would have been overwhelmingly elected to head any government of a reunified Vietnam . Eisenhower, who was then President of the U.S., recognized that he would have voted in any government that reunified the country .
 The U.S. sabotaged the Geneva Agreement and prevented reunification of Vietnam . The United States knew that things wouldn’t go their way if this Agreement were implemented, he says .
 The 1954 Geneva Agreements came out of a conference that included China and the Soviet Union . The U.S., France, Britain and other lesser powers also participated in the talks .
 The conference occurred in a situation where liberation forces in Vietnam, headed by Ho Chi Minh, had delivered a devastating defeat at Dien Bien Phu to the French colonialists . The Agreements set up a commission to oversee the reunification of Vietnam, which was temporarily divided into
 '1 had to become actively involved in opposing the Vietnam War too. That was the thing that led me to be firmly convinced that 1 had to . become actively . involved in . opposing the . Vietnam War . That led to the . thing that . led me . to become firmly convinced
 There was still a lot of division, even in the city of Berkeley itself, on these issues, however . Berkeley residents are divided on the issue of immigration .
 As I’ve described several times, 1 grew up in a pretty well-off middle class family . One of the children grew up with a wealthy family . He says he's not surprised by the results .
 Among people coming from that part of society, there are very strong generational divisions developing . And among people coming . from that area, there were very strong . divisions developing. And among those coming .
 There were also political divisions in line with larger economic and social divisions in society as a whole . And there were also social and economic divisions in the country's society, the author says .
 The ‘60s were a time when the universities were opened up to broader sections of society . The ’60s was a time . The '60s saw the universities open up to wider sections of . society .
 White students came to Cal at that time, mostly middle-class, white students . But it was still largely the middle class whose kids went to college, and largely white .
 Among the students, there was tremendous conflict developing with their parents over a host of issues, including Vietnam . The students' parents were divided over Vietnam .
 For example, my parents were troubled by the Vietnam War, but they were still supporting it . My parents were still supportive of the war, even though they were troubled .
 The author is more or less a liberal, but at that time was more radical . He is now a conservative, but more radical than a liberal .
 He’d written a pamphlet making very strong and cogent, very well-documented arguments about the Vietnam War and what the United States had done and why it was wrong, and I was using this pamphlet to argue with my parents . He'd written this pamphlet making strong, cog
 1 didn't appreciate this sort of nitpicking way in which he was approaching the question of Vietnam . But 1 didn’t appreciate this kind of nitpick way . It was argued that things would be argued to gel away from the truth .
 "I got very frustrated with this, and I looked this Bob Scheer pamphlet and threw it across the hall and stomped out of my parents’ house," she said . "I looked at this pamphlet and looked at it and threw the pamphlet across the hallway," she says .
 1 wrote a several-page letter laying out my arguments about what the U.S. was doing in Vietnam and why it was wrong . So 1 wrote it out in a letter .
 He sent me back what was pretty much a form letter—and 1 probably only got that because he knew my parents and didn’t want to insult them, he said . He sent it back to his parents, who he said were probably not insulted .
 He ran out the standard government propaganda about what the U.S. is doing and why it’s good for the Vietnamese people . He quoted something from a Berkeley professor, Robert Scalapino, at Berkeley, who I, and many others, regarded as a Slate Department professor
 "They weren't going to listen to people who had real arguments about why it was wrong. That just infuriated me more and convinced me even more deeply that what the U.S. government was doing in Vietnam was wrong."
 At the time there were students who were aggressively supporting the war, like the Young Republicans . At the same time, students who supported the war were aggressively backing the war .
 Students would come from off campus and seek to debate with each other . Students would often come from outside of campus, seeking to debate, she says .
 The Vietnam Day Committee organized a big teach-in called “Vietnam Day’s Day” in the spring of 1965 . The anti-war organization on the Berkeley campus was called the Vietnam Day .
 People from off-campus would seek out the Vietnam Day Committee table . Many soldiers would do a one-year tour of Vietnam and, if they didn’t volunteer to be sent back again, would then come back .
 They would often seek us out to argue, often in their uniforms, sometimes in “civilian clothes,” but identify themselves as soldiers . They would talk about how they’d been in Vietnam and how we didn’t know what we were talking about, says
 Many of these soldiers would try to hold sway by acting as if they knew all about Vietnam, because they’d gone there to conquer it and occupy the country and oppress the people . Many of them would try . by acting like they knew . because they'd gone . to conquer
 The soldiers were still mainly defending what they were doing in 1965 and ’66 . A few years later, there would be many, many soldiers and veterans of the Vietnam War with a very different viewpoint .
 "A lot of times it would go from the level of all this bullshit about fighting for freedom to talking about their buddies," he says . "They would be able to talk about their friends," he adds .
 The U.S. is using the same kind of rhetoric it uses about Iraq now, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "They would try to give us more lofty-sounding arguments about freedom in Vietnam"
 President Obama and Hillary Clinton would hem-and-hale and hem-hench haw, says Sen. Ted Cruz . Cruz: "They’d sort of hem and haw and we’ll get back to the substance of the issues," he says .
 Besides being actively involved in demonstrations, what I loved most was being in all these vibrant discussions and arguments . Besides being active, what was most important was being involved in discussions, she said .
 Knots of people would form around the table and then they’d break up, and another knot would form, and more people would come to the table . New discussions and debates would break out, over these tremendously important issues, he says .
 Sometimes arguments got pretty heated, even with people that you would expect would be on your side . Sometimes the arguments got heated, sometimes with people who would expect them to be on their side .
 The hippie thing was generally cool, as far as 1 was concerned, even though that wasn’t really what 1 was “into,” as we used to say . 1 was not "into" hippie stuff, as well as hippie .
 "Everybody do your own thing," without regard to what “your thing” was . But I didn’t have any patience for some of the “hippie/dippy” stuff about “everybody do your . own thing,” without
 One lime I was at the office of the Berkeley Barb newspaper, which was kind of an alternative newspaper that was pretty radical at the time . One lime he was in the office at the paper's office, "Berkeley Barb"
 "I was talking to some other people in the Barb office about the Vietnam War, denouncing it and exposing different things that were going on," she says .
 Lyndon Johnson was both the symbol of continuing and escalating the war and the president who was actually doing it . And I was really ripping into Lyndon Johnson, what a mass murderer he was, he was .
 During this period, Liz and I had continued to become closer, and then to become lovers . Liz and Liz continued to be closer to each other .
 'I was an activist and wanted to remain an activist, but I was thinking about what 1 wanted to do as my life's work, so to speak. didn’t want to become a doctor so I could go to the golf course,' he said .
 I wanted to become a doctor so 1 could give people medical care who didn’t have medical care, she says . She says she wanted to be a doctor to help people with medical care . She wanted to help those who had no medical care.
 I went to the university administration and asked if I could withdraw from school that semester . I asked for permission to withdraw from university that semester, she says . She says she is proud of her decision to withdraw .
 "Because I had a good standing as a student, they allowed me to withdraw that semester "without prejudice" "I became much more of a fulltime activist," she says . "I withdrew that semester ‘without prejudice,” she says. “I became more of
 "They had a whole history of being political activists and communists perhaps, perhaps, or at least radical people who were communist sympathizers. Remember, they had a lot of history," says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "Remember that they were political activists or communists?"
 They weren't so upset when we became active in the Free Speech Movement or opposing the Vietnam War . They weren’t so upset in the 1960s when they were active in opposing the war .
 1 took this step of withdrawing from school to become involved full-time in anti-war activity, as well as civil rights and things like that, they got very upset . But when 1 took the step, 1 took it out of school, it became very upset. It's not
 I argued vigorously with him that this wasn't true, because at the lime I didn’t think that was where I was headed, he said . ‘At the lime’ he said. ‘I argued vigorously . I didn't think that’s where I
 "It wasn’t bound to turn out that way, but he recognized the trajectory that I was heading off on," he says . "He could see it more clearly than 1 could," he adds .
 Are Beyond Your Command ‘I was now a full-time activist in the Vietnam Day Committee. ” I was now an activist in Vietnam Day . ‘‘Vietnam Day Committee’s ‘Nietnam Veterans Memorial Day Committee . Are beyond Your Command
 We had rallies on campus, but we would also organize marches and demonstrations in the broader community . 1 signed up to be on the speakers bureau, and would go speak at everything from junior high schools to Rotary Clubs .
 "I did go back to Cal for one more semester as a student, even while I remained very active in the political movement," says LZ Granderson . LZ: "I was a very active student in the student movement. I was very active and very active"
 "I dropped out of college altogether, about a year’s credits away from graduating, in 1966," he says . "Then I finally dropped out altogether" in 1966, he says, "but then I dropped out entirely"
 "That caused tensions and conflict with my own family and also with Liz’s family," she says . "And that caused tensions, conflict with myself and Liz's family," he says .
 "You could tell they were worried, very worried, about the direction I was taking. From the conversation I previously described with her father, you could tell them were worried," he said .
 When I went back to school maybe they were temporarily relieved, but then when 1 dropped out altogether and didn't even talk about going back any more, they were really upset, as were my parents . My parents were also upset when I dropped out of school altogether and then didn't talk
 He had a big influence on me at that time, and generally a positive one in radicalizing me. He had also been influential in his life, he says. He says .
 Scheer went on to Ramparts magazine, which had originally been founded as a liberal Catholic journal . As things got more radical in the ’60s, the magazine drew more radical people into it . It became an important voice .
 It was still within a certain framework, but it was an important radical voice at that time . It was a radical voice, but not within the framework, he says .
 Scheer asked me if I wanted to come work there, doing research and helping to prepare different articles . Scheer was asked if he wanted to work at the centre of the world's largest university .
 "I didn’t have to do the 9-to-5 thing. That sounded like a good way for me to combine earning a living with doing something worthwhile," he says .
 "I would gel my research assignments done, but 1 also had a lot of freedom to be involved in the things that 1 thought were most important," says author . "I was very happy to be able to do what I wanted to do"
 Donald Duncan is the subject of a new series of stories on Ramparts . Donald Duncan was a member of the Ramparts team at the time of his death . He was killed by a bomb blast in 1996 .
 One day some people from the Berkeley anti-war movement came to me and said that they were talking to this guy who was a soldier who was questioning the Vietnam War very seriously and deeply . "One of the biggest things I've ever seen in my life is that I'm going to
 They wanted to talk to him because he had done a lot of public speaking and study around the war . They wanted me to talk about him because I had worked a lot in public speaking, they wanted him to talk .
 CNN.com's John Sutter spent a lot of lime over at a friend's house talking to Donald Duncan . Sutter says he spent a bit of lime at the house of Duncan, who turned out to be Duncan Duncan .
 Duncan had been a soldier in Vietnam . He was at the rank of master sergeant when he left Vietnam .
 Asked him a lot about his experiences in Vietnam and did what 1 could to help him come to a clearer understanding of the nature of the war and what was wrong with it .
 Ramparts editor suggested to Ramparts editors and Donald Duncan himself that they do an article in which he would tell his story and come out and denounce the war .
 At that lime, there weren’t that many soldiers who’d been in the war itself and publicly denounced it . At that time, the war was still young and young .
 Ramparts had a circulation of a couple hundred thousand or so, and this article had an impact even beyond the readers of Ramparts . Ramparts was published in Ramparts' circulation of around 700,000 people .
 People who dodged the draft as doing something truly heroic, not just to save their own ass . As a matter of fact, I would, and did, uphold those people who dodged . George W Bush, not George W. Bush, but people who opposed the draft because they opposed the
 People who evaded the draft, or outright refused to be drafted, or refused to go to Vietnam once they were in the military . They were doing heroic things, definitely more heroic things than United States soldiers who, with all their destructive technology, were massacring and slaughtering the Vietnamese
 For the United States population broadly, for someone who’d been in that war to speak out against it had a very big impact . Nevertheless, for the U.S. population broadly .
 This was right up my alley, combining my love for sports with being able to do something to expose injustice . This was combining love of sports and exposing injustice, I said .
 1 tried to interview Bill Russell, who had been a big hero of mine when 1 was a kid, but he refused . Russell refused to answer the questions .
 Jim Brown, one of the great running backs in football history, did agree to be interviewed . The interview was interesting, and this was interesting .
 This was around the lime when I first met Eldridge Cleaver, who had gotten out of prison on parole . Cleaver had been serving time on parole, but Cleaver was released on parole in 1972 . Cleavers was a member of the NAACP, a former member of Congress .
 Ramparts had given him a job as a writer, and I’d met him in that context . Ramparts has given him job as writer, but he’s met him again in context of that .
 He and 1 went to L.A. together to interview Jim Brown, who had these programs that were supposed to improve the lives of Black people, with small businesses .
 CNN.com's John Sutter: "He got very indignant and gave me some answer which 1 don't remember in all its details, but which didn’t really answer the question"
 The article did end up being mainly a positive one, focusing largely on Jim Brown . It reflected where people at Ramparts including myself were at then, and partly reflected the fact that Jim Brown was in certain limited ways standing up against the Establishment at that Lime .
 Eldridge: "This guy’s just bullshit, man. When we were leaving, after interviewing Jim Brown, Eldridge told me, “This guy's just bullshit.” Eldridge said .
 The verdict from Eldridge obviously made an impression on me, even though the article ended up being mainly positive in its presentation of Jim Brown .
 Getting with Eldridge, Huey and Bobby Eldridge Cleaver was much more radical than people that I’d known before, says Cleaver . Cleaver’s Cleaver family was “radical” and ‘radical’, Cleaver said .
 Eldridge was talking about trying to revive the Organization of African Unity . Malcolm X had been trying to get together this organization that he called the “Organization of Afro-American Unity .
 Through him 1 met people who were associated with SNCC 9 and things like that . But generally he was very radical, and through him he met people associated with the SNCC .
 Organization of African Unity was formed in 1963 by newly independent governments of Africa . Organization was formed by African governments of African nations . Organization of Africa Unity is based in Africa .
 SNCC grew out of the civil rights sit-ins and voter registration drives in the South during the early 1960s . SNCC, or the Student Non-Violent Co-ordinating Committee, was founded by SNCC in the 1970s .
 What’s wrong with Israel is not the Jewish character of it, it's the fact that it's an instrument of imperialism . Israel is a tool of imperialism, writes David Frum, a former Israeli diplomat .
 I made these arguments and I made the point in writing the letter that 1 was a strong supporter of SNCC and of Black liberation, but this bothered me because it wasn’t the right way to look at the problem and to analyze friends and enemies, and so on. I
 "I met them through some old high school friends of mine. Before that I had met them in high school . Before that, they had met some old friends of my own . I'm not sure what happened to them .
 "Weasel" played on the team that beat Berkeley High in overtime in the 1963 TOC . "Soul Students Advisory Council" was being held on the community college campus in Oakland .
 In 1967, Israel launched a surprise attack on Egypt, Syria and Jordan, and seized the Gaza Strip, the West Bank, and the Golan Heights . The Palestinian people had already been turned into refugees by the 1948 war, which created the Israeli settler state .
 The U.S. left as a whole did not take a clear stand against this, but many actually supported the Israeli attack . The United States left as well as the United States .
 SNCC stood out at the time for taking a stand against the Israeli aggression . SNCC lost quite a bit of financial and political support as a result .
 Bobby Seale was actually the emcee of this Soul Students cultural program . There were a lot of different performances that night that night . Seale emcealed the program .
 Bobby Seale was very effective at this and also he was hilarious . Seale is one of the best known actors in the world, but was also hilarious .
 "I found out from him later that he’d actually been a comedian for a while after he got out of the Air Force," he said . "He was actually a comedian after he left the Air force," he added .
 He would do really great impressions of everybody from Kennedy to Bill Cosby . He was just really hilarious as well as being very penetrating with some of his satire .
 Huey, Bobby and Eldridge saw themselves as the heirs to Malcolm X . Huey took up what Malcolm X was doing when he was assassinated and carried it forward . Eldridge: "Huey and Bobby were the heirs"
 In his eyes, they were taking it and becoming even more radical with it, he said . "In my eyes, I saw it as a very radical move," he said. "I saw it being taken and becoming more radical"
 They had this revolutionary stance, they were indicting the whole system, that's what they got from Malcolm X . But they were calling for revolution, too, too. They had a revolutionary stance. That's what Malcolm X got .
 The four-part interview was conducted in May 1989 immediately after Newton’s death . It touched on his relationship with Newton and Newton's strengths and weaknesses as a revolutionary leader .
 Are Beyond Your Command” 1 49 talking and debating and struggling over things. “We are beyond your command” “I’m not going to be able to talk and debate over things,” says Mark Twain .
 Black nationalist group meeting in a classroom was open, and this guy was giving an agitational speech about the blue-eyed devils, and so on . couldn’t help it, I was interested and l was drawn to listening, he says .
 Bobby Seale, Huey Newton and Eldridge were open to anybody else who was opposed to the system . They would try to push you to become more radical, he says . Seale's indictment of the system was more powerful and more profound than this .
 Eldridge and Bobby and Huey had pushed me to become more radical, to move more toward a revolutionary position . They were taking up things that 1 felt very passionately about and they were doing it in a way that 1 saw as being very uncompromising .
 "All this had a tremendous impact on me in the context of everything that was happening in the U.S. and the world at that time," he says . "All I’d learned up to that point. So all this had to be considered a very important part of
 The CP claimed to be for socialism and ultimately communism, but the people who were in the CP were very conservative to our eyes . The CP as a whole was always opposing and denouncing the most radical things that were coming forward, he says .
 However much the movement advanced and become more radical, they were always trying to drag it back down to the lowest common denominator, they said . However, they always tried to drag the movement back down .
 Malcolm X was way too radical for the Black liberation struggle to support only things that they could present in the context and the confines of civil rights, the author says . Malcolm X would have been too radical to support someone like him, he says .
 When he tried to make it an issue of human rights and put it in the context of the whole international struggle against the United States and against imperialism, they didn’t want any part of that, they said . He said: “When he . tried to . put it
 They denounced him as an advocate of violence the same way the bourgeoisie did . The bourgeoisie did not denounce him as a violent advocate, they did .
 It may be hard today to realize just how radical and, yes, shocking the Panthers were when they came onto the scene . I’ve written about this elsewhere .
 There was nothing remotely like this on the scene in terms of the specter it raised and the impact it had, and I’ll get more into this in the next chapter .
 I want to speak to the impact that my relations with the Panthers had on my family . The Panthers were the Panthers' first franchise in the NFL, which won't be allowed to play in 2015 .
 "With that, I really crossed a line with both my family and Liz’s family— and Liz herself," she said . "I really crossed that line with [Liz] and with that, she really crossed it," she added .
 Both sets of parents came over to our apartment and read me the riot act for what was I doing . I remember there was something almost like a ‘summit meeting’ with both sets of . parents .
 Liz’s father, who was the most political, actually tried to engage me on an ideological level, criticizing the Black Panther Parly for speaking in the name of the “lumpen proletariat” as if that were the most revolutionary force, he says . Liz�
 The Panthers were really talking about sections of Black people who were largely proletarianarians, in and out of jobs, especially a lot of youth . The “proletarians” actually refers more to people whose whole life is centered around crime .
 "The people the Panthers were rallying were a lot of proletarian youth by and large," he says . "Now there aren't hard and fast divisions there, especially when you’re talking about an oppressed people," he adds .
 "A lot of them were also in and out of jobs and actually had a more proletarian position," she said . "But a lot of the time they were in a more proletic position," she added .
 'He tried to argue with me ideologically and politically as to why the Panthers were wrong and why 1 was wrong to be uniting and working closely with them. He tried to . be . with me politically and ideologically as well as ideologically, politically as he argued with me that 1 was
 All of the parents were arguing that I was wrecking everybody’s future . ‘Everybody’� was being dragged down by what I was doing,’ she says . “I was trying to save my own life,” she adds .
 "She had a very positive influence on me in that kind of way. As I said, when we first met Liz was more politically experienced, more politically advanced, more political active than I was," he said .
 At a certain point, she began to pull back from more radical positions, and especially from political activism . But at a certain time, she pulled back from radical positions .
 Part of the basis for that was that the women’s movement was beginning to develop, feminist ideas were beginning to be brought forward more forcefully within the movement and also more broadly in society . This was the beginning stages of that, the mid to late 1960s .
 She was upset that when I dropped out of school, she was working while I was being a political activist . She felt like this is the traditional way in which things have always been done . That situation did change once I got a job at Ramparts and we were both earning money .
 Women were examining their position and role in society—and they were demanding changes in their personal relations . Women examined their position, role and role and demanded changes .
 Liz began to see things more in personal terms, to more and more turn inward, and to pull back from involvement in political struggles . Liz was part of that in an overall sense, but one aspect of this was that she began to turn inward .
 As I was coming to see the problem as the whole system and starting to consider the question of communism, I remember at one point we had an argument where she was reading this book and she said, “Listen to this. Listen to this," she said. "As I was
 As part of this, I was talking about moving from Berkeley, where we were living, to Richmond, which, as I mentioned before, is a more proletarian town . Richmond is a better place to live than Berkeley, which is more proletarian .
 She was still progressive, she still had enlightened views on all these questions, she was still sympathetic to these struggles . But, partly out of feminist concerns, she didn’t see how you could change things on a big scale in society .
 She thought that the enemy was too powerful, that what you were up against was too great, or that in any case this wasn’t the right way to go about changing things . She thought it was the wrong way to change things, or not the right thing to do .
 "We had these fundamental differences about the direction of our lives and our priorities were becoming very different," she says . "It was a very emotionally difficult thing because we still shared a lot of common"
 At this time 1 didn’t yet consider myself a communist, but I was exploring a lot of different political tendencies and groups . remember, for example, when the Cultural Revolution in China was in high gear, around 1966, PL was sort of known as the Maoists in the
 Everybody who considered herself or himself even sympathetic to communism thought PL was the most radical version of communism . Just about everybody who considered themselves or himself sympathetic to the Communist Party was opposed to the PL .
 PL were supposed to be the most radical communists and even pro-Mao. That’s why Huey was talking about PL the first lime I met him, he says .
 I was taken in by a lot of the bourgeois propaganda that this was just chaos and madness and Mao had gone nuts and was just making the whole society go crazy . I'm not sure what happened to me, but I'm glad to have had a positive reaction to the events in China
 He backed off from defending or explaining the Cultural Revolution, or even trying to analyze it . He just backed off entirely .
 That turned me off more to PL than to the Cultural Revolution because, although 1 still had my questions and ways in which I was confused and being influenced by the bourgeois slander about it, I knew better than that . That turned him off more than to PL more to Cultural Revolution than to
 I knew you had to learn about things like this and do your best to analyze what was going on, and this guy’s backing off just made me lose respect for him much more than it turned me off to the Cultural Revolution and Mao. "This guy's backing off made
 There were huge debates in the movement in Berkeley about whether you should vote for Johnson . There were debates in Berkeley over whether to vote for him .
 A lot of my more radical friends were insisting that you shouldn’t vote for Johnson, that it was all the same thing . But I have to admit that I did actually vote for . Johnson because Goldwater was so terrible, he says .
 "By 1967, I was turned off to the bourgeois political parties and the whole bourgeois electoral process," says David Cameron . "I'm not going to be able to go back to the old world," he says of his time in the US .
 In the spring of’67, I was part of a slate of candidates that ran as sort of a radical reform slate for city council in Berkeley, California . I think it was called the "New Politics Slate"
 When I ran for office, a number of candidates came before this New Politics Group to ask for its endorsement . "When I ran, I was asked to run for my seat in the Senate," says Sen. Ted Cruz . "I'm not afraid to run. I'm scared to
 One of them was a Black candidate who got up and basically gave a riff about how, if this group really was opposed to racism, they should endorse and work for his candidacy . One of the candidates got up to give a riff on the group .
 "No matter who gets up and fronts off, and no matter what they might say is your obligation, you 13" "This made a deep impression on me," she said .
 At the time of Johnson’s election as a ‘peace candidate’ in 1964, there were 25,000 U.S. troops in Vietnam .
 Our reform slate had a program of taking over Pacific Gas & Electric and making it publicly owned . Our program was to make it public owned, but it was not .
 Supporting civil rights and opposing the Vietnam War was part of our platform too . And, course, supporting civil rights was also part of the party's platform too.
 As part of our campaign we managed to raise some money to have a few billboards around the city of Berkeley listing the candidates and several slogans .
 "All this controversy around the billboard turned from a bad thing into a good thing in a certain way" "They didn’t get anywhere with that suit," the author says of the billboard . They didn't get anywhere .
 This whole experience gives both a flavor of the times and a sense that, even though 1 was learning about imperialism and becoming very radical, 1 still hadn’t completely broken with the idea of reform on a local basis by running radical reform candidates for office .
 By the way, we didn’t win, although our slate did get about 30 percent of the vote . We didn't win, but our slate got about 30% .
 At that time, change was coming from a lot of different directions . The Summer of Love was the summer of the year .
 “Summer of Love” was going on at the same time as the draft week . People were organizing for “Stop the Draft Week’s” and ‘Summer’ of Love . “You had people organizing for . ‘Stop the draft Week
 These, of course, were very different phenomena, even if they were both in a broad sense part of the same developing opposition to the way things were . But they were not very different .
 "You were up against powerful forces that weren’t going to be changed by your loving them or trying to leach them to love," she said .
 It was not possible to change things by creating a powerful wave of love that would sweep away unjust war and other injustices . Nor was it possible to . change things with love, he said, but it was necessary to do so .
 I went to some of those loveins and all that kind of stuff just for the vibe, if you want to put it that way—to be part of all that . So I went there just for a vibe .
 "That wasn’t my thing, but in a larger sense it was part of the thing that I was . That wasn't my thing," he says .
 At that time, I was listening to R&B and Motown and things like that, on the one hand, and I was also listening to Bob Dylan . The crowd I was in were all very, very disappointed when he came out with Nashville Skyline .
 It was one thing when Dylan did ‘My Back Pages’ and in effect denounced his association with radical and even revolutionary political groups, but as long as he was still doing other things that were giving inspiration to the youth rebellion and things like that, we were still deeply into him
 "When he came out with Nashville Skyline and that whole direction, that was too much," she says . "That whole direction is too much. That's too much to me," she adds .
 "I didn’t really get into it deeply, even after the JefTerson Airplane came out with music that actually had an unmistakably radical content" "I listened to some of the music that was associated with the youth culture of the time, like Jefferson Air
 I later drew some lessons from this, about not just jumping to oppose things that arc new and different, and learning to appreciate things that are coming at the world from new angles, not just in music but more broadly . Not just music, it's not just music but the world,
 '1 was not that inspired by it, and even turned off in some ways by it. But at that time 1 was not ... turned off by it," she said . 'I'm not that impressed by it,' she said.
 "I looked at it somewhat negatively as a hippie haven. Then later it became an arena where these other groups like the Jefferson Airplane or Janis Joplin played,’s Janis .
 In fact, there’s a funny story which kind of highlights some of the points I’ve been making. It was kind of a joke, but it was funny to me, I said. I was very happy to hear it, and it was very funny to hear
 I talked earlier about how 1 had started getting up in the dorm cafeteria on Sunday and singing . "1 had started singing. 1 started singing in the cafeteria and singing. It's not the first time I've heard them sing, it's the second time I heard them .
 Some of the people in the dorm who were organizing a dance asked me if, during one of the breaks in the dance, I would sing a few songs . After that had gone on for a while, some of the students in the room asked me to sing a song .
 1 came there and when the group that was playing took a break, I got up and sang some old doo-wop and Motown songs . So 1 came up with the idea to sing some Motowns and doo wop songs .
 Janis Joplin was a member of Big Brother and the Holding Company, with Janis as their singer . The band was playing at the time . Janis was the singer of the band .
 'There was still a feeling of solidarity there, between the hippies and the people, like myself, who were more into going up against the way things were in a more directly political way'
 When 1 was working at Ramparts I had a press pass authorized by the San Francisco police . One time 1 was driving through the Haight-Ashbury area and saw all these police cars around . They were clearly busting some people in this house .
 "I stopped and 1 went up to the house and I saw it was some kind of drug bust," he says . "They had all these people who looked like I did sitting on the floor handcuffed," he adds .
 "1 was dressed like a bum. But even though I was working for Ramparts and had a press pass, to the police and to the “straight people" 1 was dressed "like a bum," he said .
 Cops say they didn't answer much of anything about the incident . "I asked the cops a few questions, and they didn’t answer any of them," police say .
 "I showed him my press pass, and he said, “Well, you look just like one of them," she said .
 Even though the hippie thing wasn’t my thing, you felt an affinity, that you were all part of the same sort of opposition to the establishment or the power structure or the ‘straight world”—however people saw it, she says .
 “Stop the Draft Week” came later in 1967, in October, right around the same time as when Huey Newton ended up arrested and charged with murdering an Oakland cop and a massive struggle developed around that . “From Protest to Resistance” is the first Stop the
 During that lime there were people, including myself, who felt that the opposition to the Vietnam War needed to become more active and militant . I felt that it should appeal more directly to soldiers and the people being drafted and more directly oppose the machinery that was carrying out the war .
 1 himself at one point was actually called in for induction, but he had a letter from his doctor explaining why he couldn't serve in the military . The Oakland Induction Center was one of the major centers where they inducted people into the Army .
 "I was prepared, if 1 hadn’t gotten the medical deferment, to refuse to go into the military. But 1 also went there and passed out a leaflet exposing and denouncing the war and I was prepared to go there," she says .
 Huey Newton was accused of murder after a shootout in Oakland in which Newton himself was wounded and later handcuffed to his hospital bed during surgery . Newton was shot in the head and handcuffed to the bed in a hospital room during surgery.
 The Panthers led people to very aggressively take up Huey's defense with the demand to “Free Huey’s” campaign . This campaign helped catapult the Panthers to national prominence .
 Oakland pigs are just massive phalanxes of Oakland pigs all around . The city's pigs are all around, including the city's famous famous pigs .
 The Panthers were "heroic in what they were doing" in Oakland, California, police say . "One of the things that was so heroic" was going up against the Oakland police, he says . "The Panthers were so heroic," he adds .
 Those cops were notorious for being especially brutal toward Black people in particular, especially toward anybody whom they saw as an enemy of the status quo .
 In fact, one of our early anti-Vietnam demonstrations was supposed to go through Berkeley and Oakland; the Berkeley authorities gave it a permit but the Oakland authorities refused and then had large numbers of police out to prevent the march from going into Oakland .
 There was a whole court battle before the Oakland authorities had to back down and allow a march to go into Oakland . The march was held in Oakland .
 Oakland police were everywhere in formation that day with the aim of shutting down the induction center . Oakland police are obviously prepared for battle . People were trying to shut down the Oakland induction center with the help of police .
 The police viciously descended on them and brutally attacked them, police say . "As soon as the first group of people sat down in front of one of the doors of the induction center," police say. "They viciously attacked them. And as soon as they sat down, they
 They attacked people from the media to prevent them from covering this, and they even attacked bystanders as well as people who were there to demonstrate, and not just the people sitting in around the doors . They attacked journalists, protesters and bystanders, and even bystanders .
 A reporter for one of the local TV stations was knocked unconscious by the police and was in a very bad way, and some other demonstrators . He was carried away from the scene and got medical attention .
 There was a real irony here, in that the media generally were slandering every demonstration, but we ended up carrying this guy away before the Oakland police would have maybe even killed him, he says . The Oakland police "were just going viciously after anybody," he adds .
 "For some lime afterward, whenever we wanted to get something into the media, we would contact that reporter, and he would actually try to get it on the air," he says . "We would contact him afterward," he adds .
 "That day at the induction center was kind of a setback, but people learned a lot from it," he says . "People learned a little bit from it. That day at that induction center ... we learned from it" "People learn a lot"
 There was heated controversy about whether to go back again, in the face of this, to the induction center . We went back to campuses and other places, and I remember there was heated debate about whether we went back again .
 "When we came back, we came padded up and ready, with football helmets and other protective gear. And when we came . We came . up with helmets and helmets, and we were padded up, ready, ready to protect ourselves."
 The police attacked as soon as we started rallying again there, it didn’t have the same effect . So then when the police attacked, which they did as soon . They did as well as the police attack, they did again, they said . The police attack didn't have
 In the midst of this intense situation, pigs would smash you on the top of the head with their nightsticks, and it would just bounce off and you would keep on going because you had a helmet on . That day they had these county sheriffs and highway patrol and Oakland police,
 Traffic got blocked and cars got pulled out into the street . The original idea of doing these sit-ins around the induction center didn’t succeed and they were still able to draft people that day . This actually became a much bigger thing, and it had a very powerful impact in
 The famous demonstration to surround the Pentagon Look place literally the day after, and someone who was involved in that told me how, the night before the Pentagon action, a bunch of people who were going were simply ecstatic and inspired from reading the Associated Press account of "Slop the Draft Week
 There were arrests off it, obviously, and a political defense and legal defense had to be mounted . This happened more or less in the same frame as the Huey Newton case . The arrests were made off it .
 "As part of the whole swirl of activity in those days, a core of us were going all over. As part of that, we were going over. We were all over."
 We went to anti-war rallies in the Bay Area and also in L.A. where Muhammad Ali came and signed autographs and generally expressed support for the demonstration . Ali: After he’d refused to go into the Army, after he'd refused to . Ali came to
 Muhammad Ali was a member of the Congress of Racial Equality, a reformist civil rights group . Ali was the inspiration for the civil rights movement in the 1960s and '60s .
 I remember Ron Karenga was there speaking, and people reputed to be members of his organization United States were responsible for murdering two Black Panthers later, John Huggins and Bunchy Carter, whom I knew .
 The Panthers were already in a lot of political conflict with Ron Karenga because they saw him as being just a reformist and basically a bourgeois nationalist . The Panthers had already been in a long-running political conflict .
 All these kinds of conflicts were going on within the movement, but they weren’t just personality disputes, or “ego conflicts”; they were conflicts about what kind of program, politics and ideology were necessary to end all this oppression, and what were you up against
 Muhammad Ali attended a CORE convention at the end of the 1960s . Ali was invited to the convention by Eldridge and Eldridge . Ali attended the convention with some people he knew there .
 The New Politics convention was held in Chicago in the summer of '67 . The convention was part of a loose grouping of people trying to do radical reform politics in the electoral arena .
 More than a thousand people came to that convention, mainly people from the middle class, mainly white, who were undergoing some of the radicalizalion of the time .
 As I’ve described, they were always trying to keep things within the framework of bourgeois politics and reformism . Even when they’d run their own candidate for an office, at the same time they'd support the Democrat for whatever electoral office was being contested .
 If they’d opposed that straight up at that convention, they wouldn’t have won, they would’ve won. But if they had opposed that, they won, he says . He says, "They’ll have won" if they didn’
 This Black Caucus met separately, and at a certain point they set down a bunch of demands on this New Politics Convention . This Black caucus met separately and met separately . This is the first time the Democrats have met with the Black Caucus .
 White people should form “white civilizing committees” to go into the white community and civilize white people, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Some of the ideas were legitimate, but some were ridiculous, he says .
 Some of the people I was with were there supporting the Black Panther Parly . Some of us were preparing to move to Richmond because we were taking up the call of SNCC and other radical Black forces . Now I and some of us are moving to Richmond to take up the fight against
 There were some ridiculous things like that as well as some more valid and important demands they made. So there were some of them like that, as well . So there was some of the important demands that they made, and there were a lot of them that were valid, important demands .
 The CP manipulated and maneuvered to get it to move on this convention in a certain way so that it ended up disrupting the whole thing of breaking with the Democratic Parly and took things off into a whole other place .
 In the guise of radical, militant politics, they were actually maneuvering to keep people from the middle class from breaking with the bourgeois electoral framework, he says .
 We walked up to him and asked him what he was doing, but he refused to answer . He refused to say when asked why he was on the job .
 We started marching around his car chanting, “No more FBI, no more FBI...”—and, after a little while, he finally got out of there . So we started chanting, "No more . FBI" and "No. more FBI"
 "I ate a sandwich that had been sitting in the car, exposed to the sun for about 24 hours," he says . "We were kind of crazy youth, and we didn’t have much money, so we just look turns turns driving and didn't stay anywhere overnight"
 By the time we reached the mountains in Utah, we were having to stop the car every few minutes so I could throw up . And, of course, I got very sick, so that by the lime we reached . We were stopping the car for a few minutes every time so I
 Finally, we stopped in Winnemucca, Nevada, and found the cheapest motel we could .
 In the middle of the night in that motel, 1 went down the hall to go to the bathroom, and after 1 finished, I was getting ready to head back to our room, and suddenly I felt a powerful blow against my cheek . I had passed out and hit the edge of
 I barely made my way back to our room, nearly passing out again . I managed to get myself up and barely make it back to the hotel .
 "I opened the door to the room, turned on the light, aimed myself at the bed and let myself fall straight forward onto the bed," she said . She said she fell straight into the bed.
 "The next day, as we started out again for the Bay Area, I called my doctor, Dr. Dr. David Miller, to check out the symptoms . Miller: "I'm not going to be surprised when I find out what I'm going to do next."
 I asked if this could cause me to have a relapse of my kidney disease, I said to Dr. Meyer, and told him what had happened and asked him if it could cause a relapse .
 He gave me some advice on how to recover from this bout of food poisoning and told me to come see him when I got back to the Bay Area . He also said that he thought he wouldn’t suffer a relapse .
 As I said, about the time of this New Politics convention, l was getting ready to make the move to Richmond, with my friend Kayo. Restless Farewell .
 After Kayo had gotten out of high school I’d lost contact with him . When I got back in touch with him, he was working in some dead-end job and was kind of dreary .
 I was still in college at that time, and 1 prevailed on him to get out of there and he decided he wanted to go back to college, which in those circumstances represented a break from the dead end his life had gone into .
 "He also became very active politically," he says . "Here we were going to sporting events and then going to political demonstrations all the time," he adds .
 "These were our passions, and at a certain point, he and 1 became very active in supporting the Panthers and the Black liberation struggle," he says . "We decided to take up this call of going to the poor whites, taking radical politics to them," he adds .
 "We ended up working with poor whites and Blacks and Latinos and Native Americans after we started doing work in Richmond. Actually, we ended up . Actually, actually working with . poor whites ... and Blacks ... and Latinos, Native Americans .
 There were actually a lot of poor white proletarians in Richmond and San Pablo next door to Richmond, California . But our original mission was to . lake radical politics to poor whites, and this was one area, in Richmond .
 "It was a very wrenching thing, a real change in our lives. So we were on the threshold of making this move," she says . "It's a very difficult thing to do, but it was the right thing," she adds .
 She went back and forth and agonized over it, but she decided that this was not the direction she wanted her life to go in . She finally decided that she wanted to move on with her life .
 "I’ve always been kind of a romantic. I was still in love with her," he says of his ex-wife .
 "Even when I became a revolutionary, I remained a romantic—so it was heart-breaking to me," she says . "I was a romantic. Even when I become a revolutionary I remained romantic," she adds .
 "It was a lifechanging decision in many ways, but l felt this is what needed to be done," she said . She said: 'I felt this was what I needed to do'
 She agonized over the decision, but when she decided that this wasn’t the direction she wanted to go in, that was the final blow to our marriage, she said .
 When I moved to Richmond, I also broke off relations with my parents, because they were still trying to influence my life in ways that I needed to break with . I felt the terms of our relationship had to be radically changed, and I felt it had to change .
 It had to be on the terms of what I was doing, there must be a radical break and rupture there . It was a radical rupture there, he said . It had had to have a radical change and rupture, he added .
 I didn't see my parents very much over the next several years, and when I did see them it was when I would take initiative to get in touch with them, because they didn't even know how to reach me . I basically cut off any kind of direct contact with them for
 "It was very painful, but it was another break that I needed to make in order to carry through with the way my life was going and the way it needed to go," she says .
 "I think there’s an important lesson to this whole trajectory which ended up rupturing the relationship between me and Liz," he says . "There was a lot of love for Liz," the actor says .
 She was still a progressive person, still someone sympathetic to and supportive of many of the things that I was active in, but our lives were just going in different ways, and the way she saw .
 "Throughout her life she remained, as far as I know, a progressive person. Throughout her life, she remained ... progressive person," she said .
 "You can't maintain an intimate relationship and you don’t even see politically and ideologically eye to eye, in one sense," he said . "Things can develop, your paths can diverge, in such a way that you can’d maintain an intimacy relationship," he
 Any other romantic relationships since that time have had their own personal dimensions . "It is not the cardboard “commie” stereotype, or caricature, where supposedly there is no personal side to things, and people are stiff and unfeeling," she says .
 The relations I've had of an intimate character have always had that personal side to them, but in a larger sense, the direction those relationships have taken has been influenced by the political and ideological direction and content of my life and of the other person's life .
 "I have found someone who deeply shares the commitments and the goals that define my life," she says . "Our relationship has grown deeper and closer as soulmates united in romantic love but also in our common goal of radically changing the world and achieving communism"
 Beginning in the fall of 1964,1 was in a real sense able to move beyond this whole battle with disease as the defining thing in my life . For a number of years after that I still had to be in touch with my doctor and to have tests to make sure that I wasn
 "Everything for me was changing very rapidly, and by 1967 “everything” included my views toward revolution and communism,” he says . “By 1967 ‘everything’ included “revolution and communism," he writes .
 One of the main things that turned me in a communist direction, as I was becoming more and more radical and starling to have a revolutionary edge, was something that happened one day when I went over to Eldridge Cleaver’s house .
 Eldridge had some definite weaknesses, things that ended up pulling him back away from the revolutionary road actually, including some of his views toward women . But nonetheless he also had a lot of positive qualities and strengths .
 1 went to his house one day, and there was this big poster of Mao up on the wall . And I remember 1 went there one day and there were this big posters of Mao .
 "I knew that these Panthers were pretty bad, pretty heavy, politically and politically and in every other way," she says . "I thought, “Wow, that’s heavy,” she says of the Panthers . "It was pretty heavy"
 "That was the character of the times, this was the direction in which a lot of people were being moved, and I was being moved that way too," he said . "I was moving that way, and that was the way I wanted to do it," he added .
 "I had gone through many changes in my personal life, but above all in the whole way that 1 saw society and the world and the struggle to change it," he says .
 Getting Down with Revolution O ne day in early 1967: "I just happened to come into Ramparts about an hour after a very dramatic thing had happened, and when I heard what went down 1 was really upset that 1 missed it"
 Betty Shabazz, the widow of Malcolm X, came into town to interview people at Ramparts . She was going to interview Malcolm X's widow . The interview was part of an effort to get her interview with Ramparts staff .
 Huey Huey and some other Panthers met her at the airport and escorted her into San Francisco, to the Ramparts office .
 They had their guns with them that they carried for self-defense, and as they got out of their cars, some cops drove by and saw them and screeched over to a halt, and they jumped out and pulled out their guns . The incident happened in the early hours of September
 Huey had his shotgun pointed down, so it wasn’t aimed at the cop, but he was clearly not going to back down . Huey's shotgun was pointed down so it was not aimed at him, but it was pointed out .
 This whole tense showdown occurred, and finally the cops had to back down . This whole scene was a tense showdown .
 The Panthers had protected Betty Shabazz, and they had taken a clearcut stand . They had protected her, and the Panthers took a clear cut stand .
 "This was electrifying, and people were still buzzing about when I got to Ramparts. This was electrified," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 1 was extremely frustrated about having just barely missed this, 1 got a very vivid account of what happened, especially from Eldridge . The Panthers in Action .
 The Panthers were involved in a series of confrontations with police officers . The Panthers had a history of violent encounters with the police, police sources say .
 "He went to bed and slept for something like two days before he could get up, because this was so intense," he says . "And he went to sleep for two days," he adds . "I'm not going to be able to get up," he said .
 There was a police murder in North Richmond, which was this unincorporated area just adjacent to the city of Richmond itself, and right near San Pablo . Shortly after that, and this was not long before I moved to Richmond, there was an unsolved police murder . The murder occurred in
 Denzel Dowell was shot and killed by the police out there . They claimed he was burglarizing a liquor store and that he tried to run away, so they shot him and killed him . The young Black man was killed by police .
 The Panthers had gone to the Sheriffs office to register their outrage, and they'd taken their guns with them . Of course, it was deemed justifiable homicide .
 This was close to the time when the Panthers went to Sacramento with their weapons to make a political statement, to protest a law that would make it impossible for them to do their armed self-defense patrols in the way they’d done them .
 Even the people I knew who were generally considered to be really “bad” regarded North Richmond as a place you didn’t go . Even people who were considered ‘bad’ would not go to North Richmond .
 In fact, right around this same same time, I went with some friends to a basketball game between Contra Costa College and Merritt College in Oakland, California .
 People didn’t know me and they were kind of reluctant to talk to me, so I asked my friend Billy to go out and talk to people—I got him paid by Ramparts as an investigative reporter . People didn't know me. I asked him to go .
 Denzel Dowell might have been involved in a burglary there, but the cops just shot him down, just murdered him . He came back and told me that most people said that . Most people said he might or might not have been . But most people thought he was involved in the
 They had a couple of rallies in North Richmond, one of which 1 spoke at along with Eldridge and some others, but even before that, there was this really dramatic rally at the house of Denzel Dowell’s family .
 1 got in his car and drove out to North Richmond, still having this whole image of North Richmond in my mind from people 1 had grown up with and these stories I had heard . But it was important, so I went. So 1 got into my car and went .
 Denzel Dowell's mother attended a rally at the home of the actor's mother . The rally was held at the mother's home . "I got there and I parked my car, and they had this rally going on," he says .
 "Up and down the street were these armed Panthers in a very disciplined formation," says Bobby Seale . "Bobby Seale was on lop of the garage roof giving a speech. Up and down, the armed Panthers were in a disciplined formation"
 Bobby Seale was giving this speech, pointing at the helicopter, saying, “This is what the pigs do” and comparing it to what the U.S. military was doing in Vietnam . The cops didn't dare come right into the area .
 Bobby Seale’s speech and then what that guy said to me made a dramatic impression on me . So that whole scene and Bobby Seales’S speech . Bobby's speech and Bobby's "dramatic impression" on me made me think of it, he says
 This was just as I was getting ready to move to Richmond, Richmond, so in a sense this was another introduction to that whole move . "This was just a sense of me moving to Richmond," he says . "It was just an introduction to the whole move," he adds .
 Moving to Richmond in 1967, it was time to make the move to Richmond, Virginia .
 "We didn’t really have any idea how to go about it. So, in a basic sense, that was our mission, but we didn't really know how to do it," he says .
 We had an orientation that we were still going to relate politically to things happening at Berkeley and other parts of the Bay Area and other important political struggles . We were going to try to orient ourselves toward really, deeply immersing ourselves there in Richmond .
 We thought of ourselves as revolutionaries and we were for socialism, but with a little bit of Mao, Che, the Panthers and revolutionary nationalism all part of this mixed bag . We were ... for socialism—sort of socialism, sort of socialism .
 "That’s where we were at and it was typical of a lot of radical people at that time," says the author of the book . "We were at the height of that time. That's where they were at," he says .
 It wasn’t just the radicals in the Bay Area who were into this kind of mixed bag, but people more generally throughout the country and even in other parts of the world. And it wasn't just those radicals, it was people throughout the U.S. and around the
 At that time, even bourgeois heads of government in the Third World would talk about socialism in some sort of favorable way . Things are very different now, but at that lime, even a lot of heads of . government in . Algeria or India, say in Algeria or . India .
 'There was a lot of mixed bag ideology around and we were just a part of that. So there was a bit of that,' says the author of the book .
 Always hated beer, but I started drinking beer so I could hang out and socialize with people . So we started hanging out in bars to get to know people and going to local events . We're not drinking beer anymore, but we're drinking beer to socialize .
 Johnson "Great Society" anti-poverty program was set up under Johnson's 'Great Society' program . So one of us went to this meeting of the local group .
 "I remember the person who went to the meeting coming back and describing how it was just this whole bureaucratic thing. And we did meet a few interesting people that way, but I remember ... how it's just bureaucratic thing," she says .
 As it turned out, as we did more work there, we started working among all different kinds of people, women as well as men, Black people, Latinos, Native Americans . "Our goal initially was that we were going to hook up with poor white people," she says .
 "The first people we started drawing around us were a number of these young white working class guys, poor whites who lived in the area where we were. And so the first people ... who lived with us were poor whites," she says. "They were poor white working-class guys
 We lived in this house where the bedrooms we were slaying in were upstairs and the living room was downstairs . We used some other rooms downstairs for a mimeo machine . Back in those days, that's how you did things, you ran off flyers on mimeograph machines .
 "We clipped out everything we could find where people had gotten into it with the police, like a police attack on strikers in Newport News, Virginia, cases of police murder, cases where the Panthers were defending themselves and Black people against police .
 All the way around the living room walls we pasted up these pictures . Then we put captions below all of them .
 "Some of these guys we were hanging out with came over to our house. So one day, okay, here it goes," she says . "So one day ... here it went," she recalls .
 Children's eyes went really wide and they started walking around the living room almost as if they were in a museum, quietly looking at these pictures from beginning to end . We opened the door and welcomed them in, and their eyes went very wide .
 "This broke the ice politically. They identified with the people who were being brutalized by the police," she says . "They identified with people ... fighting back," she adds. "They identify with the police and people who are fighting back"
 "More to make a statement that we were aware of this than to actually get it fixed, we called the phone company," she says . "We wanted someone to come out and see if our phone was being tapped," she adds . "So, more to make an impact that we
 We started increasingly to involve people we were meeting in various political activities . We started to involve them in demonstrations, political meetings, and things like that .
 Many different kinds of people were attracted to what we were doing, mainly younger people but some who were older, women as well as men . The group's initial mission was to go work among especially the poor white youth .
 We started developing a kind of a political center there and became known after a little while to the police in San Pablo and Richmond and the Sheriff’s office, partly because we were also doing support work for the Panthers .
 This was after the Huey Newton shootout incident, and his case had become a major political battle . The case was the subject of a national debate in the 1980s .
 "We started doing work around that in Richmond and that created quite a bit of controversy, but also brought forward some more advanced people," she says . "So we started . So we started doing ... that in . Richmond," she said .
 As 1 mentioned before, moving to Richmond was a big step we knew we had to take, and it had to be a situation where we were standing on our own in every way . We had to work to support ourselves. Practice and Theory As 1: Moving to Richmond is a big
 France was basically shut down by the combination of a youth revolt and younger proletarians getting into it, and this led to a general strike for a short period of time . The May '68 events became known as ‘the May ’68 events” in France .
 This was a major event in the world at that lime, and I brought a big article about it from one of the local mainstream papers in to work with me during the course of this. This was the first time I had worked with a major newspaper in a major city . This was
 There was this young Black guy named Leon who worked in the same part of the steel mill that 1 did, and I was becoming friendly with him . Leon was a young Black man who worked at the same time as 1 did . Leon is a young man who works at a steel mill
 I wanted to involve him in talking about what was going on in France, but under the circumstances 1 wasn’t going to go eat lunch with the group he was hanging out with, he said . I wanted him to talk about what he was going to do, but he wasn
 The May '68 events in France were actually what happened, and that’s actually what’68 . The May ’68 events were in France, and we all talked about the May ‘68 .
 "We were trying to do a lot of political work as we got to know people. So on the job, as well as in the neighborhoods," she says . "So on the . job, we were ... trying to . do a little political work"
 You’d drive them for a few months and junk them, buy another one for a couple of hundred bucks and do the same thing all over again . Then you’ll drive them after they’re junked, junked them and buy them again . You�
 "Some of the places we lived in, you’d go to bed and turn off the lights, and then if you'd get up and go in the kitchen and put the lights on—roaches everywhere," says the author . "Some places you lived in ... you�
 Some places, the roaches were crawling up the walls even before you turned out the lights . Some places were crawling even before the lights were turned off .
 These were the conditions that the people we wanted to work among had been living in and suffering under their whole lives . These were conditions that they were living in, suffering under . These are the conditions they had lived in and suffered under .
 We were reading The Wretched of the Earth, by Frantz Fanon, and reading a lot of stuff from revolutionaries of various kinds . We were also reading the Black Panther paper .
 "We started doing some deeper study, loo, from a lot of different sources at that lime. But we started doing more," loo says .
 Not only did we understand that it was important to go to the proletariat in the way we were doing, but we also recognized that you had to get a deeper theoretical understanding of everything you were doing .
 "We did appreciate from the beginning the importance of theory. So even though we were still in somewhat of a mixed bag ideologically at these beginning stages in Richmond, we did appreciate ... theory," he says .
 At the same lime as we were very active in a lot of different things, we were reading everything that we thought had anything to do with radical politics and revolution and socialism and communism . At the time, we thought that we had everything to do to radical politics, revolution and revolution .
 We still fell it was important to relate to all these movements—the students and the youth, the Panthers, and other radical movements in society . We still fall it out of love for each other, but we still fell .
 We still considered ourselves part of that whole broad general uprising, if you want to put it that way . We were still considered part of the wider general uprising," he said .
 The Panthers and Eldridge were interested in forming some kind of an alliance with the Peace and Freedom Parly, a radical reform movement focussed on electoral politics . In particular, this is actually portrayed briefly in the movie Panther . The Panthers were trying to get on the ballot .
 Its politics were directly in opposition to the Vietnam War and part of the general radical politics of the Lime . The Lime had mainly a middle class base and its politics reflected that .
 The Peace and Freedom Parly eventually ran Eldridge Cleaver for president in 1968 . The party eventually ran for president, but there was a lot of struggle . Cleaver ran for the first time in 1968, but it was a struggle .
 Time was running out to get on the ballot and they still were short of the signatures . They still needed signatures to get onto the ballot in order to qualify .
 Someone came to me and asked me if I wanted to be part of this tour that they were putting together to help make a final push to get over the top and get the necessary signatures . The tour will be a last push to make it over .
 A small core of people from the San Francisco Mime Troupe volunteered to do agit-prop skits as part of this crew, and then I was the speaker . I was a speaker at the event .
 One guy had bought an old farmworkers’ bus and converted it for his own use, and he volunteered to drive us around . The bus was converted into a farmworkers' bus .
 "We’d pull into an area and the musical group would get on top of the bus and play music and gather a crowd," says the singer .
 The Mime Troupe people would do a skit about the CIA and Vietnam and things like that . Then the Mime . Troupe would do the same skit as the Mimes .
 One of the interesting sidelights to this story is that the musical group who did this was actually Santana .
 This was just when they were starting out, and they volunteered to be part of this and they stayed with it for a few weeks under very difficult conditions . "They volunteered to stay with it," says one of the volunteers .
 A lot of limes we slept on the floor, or we slept in the bus, and they had to get up on lop of a moving bus and play music . "A lot of them had to play music. They had to sleep on lops, or sleeping in the
 "They even felt a little badly that they finally had to leave, so then they did a benefit for Peace and Freedom later, which also contributed to getting it on the ballot . They even felt that they even felt . badly . that they . even felt like they . had to go
 At the time, they were just starling out—so Santana, if i i 78 From Ike to Mao and Beyond, wasn’t Santana yet . Of course, at the . time, at . the time . They were just a starling .
 Carlos Santana and the band were literally there, but it wasn’t the Santana that it became . Carlos Santana was literally there and there was the band that it later became .
 Bakersfield is a very proletarian town but it's not what you think of as a center of radical political activity . The town is not a center for radical political activism, but it is a labor-intensive town .
 As we were heading out of L.A. for Bakersfield, we were going through Hollywood . We recognized that we had a few hours extra, so that we could relax a little bit .
 We had been going on the bus, sleeping on the floor, and often doing two or three rallies a day a day . We had to sleep on the ground, sleeping in the bus and sleeping the floor . We were going on rallies and rallies every day, and we were sleeping on
 "We said, “Let’s take a little lime out, have a little fun before we go at it again,” he says .
 We found a parking space for the bus right next to a high school about a block away from the movie .
 The bus driver needed a padlock for a door at the back of the bus to lock the door . The driver remembered that while he could lock the front door in the bus, there was a little door, almost like a trap door, in the back .
 The high school ROTC was put through its paces by a drill sergeant at a local high school . The drill sergeant was acting very much like a drill master .
 "We started chanting anti-war and antimilitary slogans. And of course, as we sat and watched this a little while, it was too much of a provocation," she says . "We were too tired to sit and watch," she adds .
 The ROTC is being put through its paces by the U.S. Army Drill Sergeant . So we’re singing these and other similar songs like this, quite loudly, while the ROTc is being tested .
 "This created a big uproar, and the drill sergeant guy comes over and starts yelling at us and telling us to get the hell out of there," says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "Drilling sergeant guy came over and started yelling at them and telling them
 We hadn't planned a demonstration, we were just frankly goofing a bit, but there was a serious side to it, too, because this ROTC marching around in our faces was a provocation . We hadn’t planned a protest, but it was a "provocation
 We weren’t really looking to get arrested that day, so we decided to get out of there and go to see the movie .
 "We had all this band equipment, people had all their belongings, and we often had to leave them on the bus overnight" "One or more of us would have to sleep on the Bus to protect all this stuff," she says .
 We did feel we needed to be able to defend ourselves in case we were attacked at night or something like that . But we did feel they needed to defend themselves in case of an attack at night .
 In California at that time, even though they changed the laws to try to prevent the Panthers from doing their armed patrols, there still were ways you could legally carry guns in the state, and we were very conscious of staying within those rules .
 "They were just pistols, they weren’t howitzers or anything, but they might make something out of it," he says . "It was just pistols. They were just pistol shots. They might make it out of them," he adds .
 "We made a difficult but in the end a foolish decision, which was that 1 and this other guy would lake the guns with us, and just get out of there with them so they wouldn’t be an issue. So we made a decision to go with them, and
 1 didn't want to put the gun in my pocket, or under my shirt, or anything like that, because then it would be a concealed weapon, which was illegal . So we headed off, but 1 didn’t want to carry the gun, or put it in my
 "I was holding it out where everybody could see it, which made it in conformity with the law, but also much more of a big deal," he says . "It was a big thing for me to hold it out," he adds .
 We're still naively thinking we’re going to go to this movie which, ironically enough, was Bonnie and Clyde . We’ve got a great idea of going to the movie, but it’s not a movie, it's a classic .
 A police car comes tearing around the corner and screeches to a halt in a police car . "We get a couple of blocks away and this police car ... comes tearing through the corner"
 He's trying to pull it out, but he's got this snap on his holster, and he’s having trouble undoing it, so he can’t get his gun out right away . Fortunately, he was able to get it out of his holster .
 He doesn't give a shit if it's loaded or not, let’s put it that way . But, of course, he doesn’t give a shiver if it is loaded . "I’m not sure," he said .
 "We slam our heads down on the hood of the police car and handcuff us. Then a bunch of other police cars come up and the cops take us," she says . "We were handcuffed and taken into custody," she adds .
 I'm getting into it with these cops even while they have us handcuffed and are holding guns on us. I’m getting into [police] even while [officers] have [cameras] with guns on them, he says . He says he's not afraid to
 A detective comes in and he starts giving us a bunch of shit —and I’m giving it back to him . So ihey lightened ihe handcuffs more and look us down lo ihe local precinct, and a detective came in and gave us a lot of shit .
 When we went lo trial we were charged with loitering around a school and disturbing the peace . We were charged by police with disturbing peace and loiting around the school . When we were arrested, we said we would be charged with disorderly conduct .
 "We were discussing our legal tactics and I said, “Look, 1 know all about relying on relying on the people and everything," she said .
 "We weren't intending to shoot anybody, and we didn’t do anything illegal with the guns," he says . "But our defense is going to be very technical because we got busted in the area of a school," he adds .
 A middle-class jury is not likely to be sympathetic to us in this situation, he says . The jury is likely not to be very sympathetic to them, he adds .
 The judge will be tried by the judge, without a jury, in a "bench trial" The trial will be held without the jury .
 "This, again, came out of the legal training I got year after year as a kid," he says . "This is the first time I've been in jail for a year," he adds .
 During the trial, every lime he got a chance, our lawyer would get up and remind the judge that we would appeal if we lost . So, during the trial he got up and . got up to remind the . judge that he would appeal . if he lost, he would remind
 "We ended up getting out of that whole mess, but it was a pretty hairy thing," he says . "It was a very hairy thing. So we ended up with that whole thing," the actor says of the incident .
 We went to San Jose State to do one of our Peace and Freedom rallies, but it turned out that there was a demonstration that day against Dow Chemical . Dow Chemical is a major chemical company in California .
 Dow Chemical made the napalm that the U.S. military used to terrorize the people of Vietnam . "Napalm is this burning jellied gasoline, just a horrific thing," says Dow Chemical . Dow Chemical was the company that made napalm .
 There was that famous picture, which was printed in Ramparts and many other places, of a small Vietnamese girl running naked down a roadway after a napalm attack .
 When we got to the San Jose State campus, we didn't even know about the demonstration, we were there to do our Peace and Freedom thing, but there was this rally, so we joined in . think that there were Dow Chemical recruiters on campus or something like that, so
 The police attacked the demonstration after it was attacked by protesters . The demonstration was a demonstration against the police .
 "Very early in this whole fracas that broke out, this one cop started going after me," he says . "I'm not sure what happened to me. Very early in the whole thing," he adds .
 "He threw a punch at me, and I blocked his punch," he says . "I managed to land a punch to defend myself," he adds . "It's not a fight, it's a fight," he said .
 Two other cops come from behind me and jump me, and then one of them put his nightstick across my throat . And before I have a chance to do anything, two other cops jumped me, then one jumped me .
 "This happened to other people as well, and a number of us, including myself, were very close to passing out from this, or worse," he writes . "The only thing that saved us was the presence of the media there," he says .
 "Just like in L.A., when they busted me, I started mouthing off them," he said . "They busted me," he added. "I'm not going to be happy with that," he joked .
 The cops were trying to instigate these Hells Angels to attack us, but that did not happen, police say . The cops tried to instigitate them to attack them, but they didn't happen, the officer says .
 "Birlhdale" was taken to a holding room to Lake Lake to take fingerprints . "They were taking down my "facts,""" like name, birlhdal, and all that kind of stuff," she said .
 When we were having our court hearings, we had these plea bargains— that’s how 1 got five days. When we had our court . We had to have these pleas bargains, that's how . 1 got 5 days. That's how how . One got five
 We’d get up before the judge and plead guilty, but unless they had something really big on somebody, the judge agreed to give light sentences, because it was a political demonstration and they kind of wanted the whole thing to go away . Still remember very vividly that there was one
 "That gives you a flavor of the times, not only the activism of people but also the intellectual, theoretical, and ideological ferment and debates that were going on," she says . "But that gives you an insight into the times"
 "It was a good thing they were becoming radicalized, but they also had their limitations," she said . "They were becoming more radicalized. It was good for them to be radicalized," she added .
 Early in 1968, the Panthers had a big rally for Huey in the Oakland Auditorium, to build political support on the occasion of his birthday . During this same time period, early in . 1968, Huey's birthday rally was held in Oakland .
 They had that famous chair that the Panthers had taken the picture of Huey silting in . They had made a poster out of that, and it was sitting there empty to symbolize the fact that they wanted Huey back among them .
 Many people who had been part of SNCC were there—James Foreman, Stokely Carmichael, Rap Brown . Rap Brown: "Rap Brown, Foreman and many others were there"
 Even Curtis Mayfield and the Impressions came there to lend their support . Curtis mayfield and others came to lend support .
 They couldn’t come there in their “official capacity” with a band because of contractual complications, but they came and sang “We’re A Winner” a capella .
 I went to a number of Huey’s court appearances and rallies outside . I happened to be there for some of the dramatic moments in the Huey court case . I also went to the rallies that were held outside .
 Someone pulled down a flag from a flagpole around the courthouse, and different people were passing it around . Some people tried to tear it, and others were trying to burn it . It turned out that it was very difficult to tear or to burn, but it turned out to be very
 Film of this rally, containing portions of the main speeches, is currently available in the videotape Black Panthers, by the French filmmaker Agnes Varda . The film is available in a videotape by the Black Panthers .
 There was an underground passage that went underneath the street, so you could go from the courthouse over to Lake Merritt. And there was this underground passage . It was a way to get to the lake .
 "I’ll lake this flag, run through that passageway, get over to Lake Merritt, and just throw the flag in the lake, and that'll be the end of it," he says . "I'll run the flag, throw it into the lake
 It will show the “appropriate respect” for the flag, but we’ll be done with it. It’s not the first time the flag has been used in the U.S. military .
 "I get about halfway through this tunnel—I’m running," he says . "All of a sudden I hear footsteps behind me," he adds . "So I get about . halfway through . this tunnel," he said .
 "I look over my shoulder and someone who is obviously a plainclothes cop is chasing me. I look over his shoulder and . someone who . was obviously a . plain-othes cop was chasing me," she says .
 At the other end of this tunnel, there are two stairways that go up, one to the right and the left, and they go out to the grounds of Lake Merritt . Two stairways go up to the left .
 This cop is running behind me, when all of the other plainclothes cops come down the stairways in front of him . This cop was running behind him, when he was confronted by two other plain-clothes officers .
 "I'm running with the flag, and I’m not going down, I'm not going to get tackled," he says . The NFL star says he's running "with the flag"
 When cops in front of me get to within a few feet of me, I lower my shoulder into them and, one after the other, they go down . So, when . the cops in . front of . me, he lower his shoulder into . them, he lowers his shoulder
 I managed to shake him off, but, unfortunately, as happens sometimes in football, too, I lost my balance and fell just at the crucial moment, and then they all three piled on me and busied me . The incident happened at the end of the first half of the World
 Huey Newton was found guilty of manslaughter, not murder . He was sentenced to something like fifteen years in prison . Huey was convicted of manslaughter but convicted of murder .
 Taking up this legal defense in a very politically aggressive way played an important part in spreading the politics and program of the BPP and helping them to expand . Ironically, this very expansion brought with it contradictions that they were ultimately not able to surmount, especially in the context of the vicious
 In April 1968, Eldridge Cleaver and Bobby Hutton were involved in a shootout with the police in Oakland, California . The Panthers were in the midst of an Oakland shootout in April 1968 .
 Bobby Hutton was shot down and murdered by the Oakland police as he was coming out of a house where he had taken refuge . The Oakland police shot him down and killed him as he left a house .
 "There was, of course, great outrage in the Black community and among people who were supporting the Panthers and progressive people generally," she says .
 The Panthers held a rally at one point in the aftermath of this, and Marlon Brando came and spoke . Brando spoke at the Panthers rally .
 The Lime Lime went on ‘Johnny Carson’ at this time, and created a tremendous uproar by telling the truth about what had happened, how the Oakland pigs had murdered Bobby Hutton . It was such an uproar that Johnny Carson invited the Oakland police chief on his show to give
 Marlon Brando came and spoke at this rally and then afterward a few of us went back to the rather small Panther community office . After the rally, we went to the community office, where we met Brando .
 "Just a few people could fit into the office and eventually the others there left to go off and do things, and Marlon Brando and I was sitting there. Just a few of them could fit in the office," she says .
 It was like the incident when I was sitting in the room with Muhammad Ali. "It was like a moment when I sat in a room with him," he says of Muhammad Ali .
 "I was just becoming a communist at that time, but anyway, that's what I said. Actually, I was just being a communist," he said .
 He looked at me and he launched into a long story which, as I recall, was a story of one of the Native American peoples, and I believe the point of the story was to promote the collective and cooperative way of life . The story was about a Native American story .
 There was a long silence after that, before people came back to take Marlon Brando to the airport .
 A jLjLL that Lime, there were just a few of us in our core group in Richmond, Richmond, who considered ourselves conscious revolutionary activists . Chapter Nine Becoming a Communist .
 People were starling to hear about some of their work and to call us from different parts of the Bay Area, and even other parts of America, asking about what we were doing . But we were meeting a lot of people, and people were starlings to hear .
 "We started hooking up with other people who had similar politics to ours," she says . "We were hooked up with each other," she adds. "We had a lot of fun fun together," she said .
 We were moving more in the direction of recognizing that we had to gel ideologically . We had to become more firmly grounded in communism and communist theory, he says . We were going to gel much more clear ideologically .
 "We were moving in that direction, and we were meeting with, talking and struggling with other people who had similar politics," she said . "So, we were ... struggling with ... other people," she added .
 At a certain point, we decided that we needed to form some kind of an organized group, not just in Richmond but more broadly in the Bay Area . We decided to form a group of people who want to be involved in the movement .
 1 wrote up a position paper, which we took around to other people, and it became the basis of discussion and unity, more or less, for drawing people together to form some kind of a group .
 It was still sort of a mixed bag ideologically, but clearly we were for revolution, as we understood it, he says . We were moving in a direction of being for socialism and communism, he adds .
 Khrushchev did this largely in the form of denouncing Stalin, but this was part of his renouncing the basic principles of socialism and communism . He renounced the principles of communism and socialism, but also denounced Stalin .
 Leibel had criticisms of Stalin, but we saw that just negating and trashing the whole history of the Soviet Union under Stalin’s leadership was going to lead you back into the swamp of embracing capitalism, he says . Leibel: "Just negating ... Stalin's leadership
 That’s one of the things that 1 came to understand through a lot of discussions with Leibel . That's one of many things that Leibel said was important to understand . Leibel: "I’m not a fan of Leibel, but I'm a fan
 He had written a paper criticizing this move on the part of the CP in the U.S., to take up this Khrushchev program . He had criticized this move .
 Khrushchev started promoting the idea that revolution was no longer necessary, that somehow through electoral parliamentary 17.1st, 17.2nd was the end of the revolution . In other words, he said that the revolution was not necessary .
 Shortly after his death, Nikita Khrushchev look the reins of power and instituted a form of capitalist rule under a fairly threadbare socialist cover . Shortly after he died, the Soviet Union was founded in 1953 .
 Bob Avakian: Stalin's overall positive historical role and accomplishments, along with his serious shortcomings and grievous mistakes . For more on Stalin’s evaluation of his accomplishments, see the book Conquer the World .
 Leibel rejected that, and he wrote a paper criticizing it . It got circulated in the communist movement not only in the U.S. but internationally . Leibel's paper was circulated internationally .
 He'd gone to China around 1965, and he was there when the Cultural Revolution broke out . So he’d gone there around 1965 . He was there at the time .
 'He thought I had the potential to be a communist, and he decided to work to develop me into one,' she says . 'He worked to develop him into a communist,' she adds .
 I was also struggling over big political and theoretical questions with Leibel. "I'm struggling with big political questions," he said .
 Leibel would struggle with me—sometimes subtly, sometimes sharply, sometimes quite sharply. Leibel struggled with me, sometimes subtly, and sometimes sharply . Leibel's work was published in 1998 .
 Angola was still a colony of Portugal at that time, and Angolan revolutionaries were waging an armed struggle for independence from Portugal .
 Leibel was there at the meeting, and afterward he talked to me about this . Leibel said, "afterward he talked about this. Leibel ... I'm not sure what happened to me"
 It's not a matter of what anybody, even the Angolan people, just thinks. It’s not a question of what anyone thinks, it's not what anybody just thinks . It's just what people just think, says the president of Angola .
 It is true that they are an oppressed nation, a colony, then they should be supported in fighting for liberation . And since it is true, they should support them in their struggle for liberation, he says .
 Around this time a book came out that had a lot of influence in the radical movement . The book was published in the 1930s and 1940s and '50s .
 Regis Debray, who is now a bourgeois functionary in France, wrote the book . It was called Revolution in the Revolution and was written by Regis debray .
 Castro-Che Guevara line on how you make revolution: "You didn't need a parly to lead it, you just needed a military "foco" "Foco" was a military force that would be both political leadership and military leadership .
 "I was very influenced by this book, so were many other people I knew," she says . "So were many others I knew. I'm very influenced"
 But the thrust of the book, the essential position it was putting forward, was not correct, he said . 'It influenced people in the wrong direction. It was not the correct position,' he added .
 I recall arguing vigorously with Leibel about this for hours, because 1 was being swayed by Debray’s arguments . Leibel: ‘I recall arguing for hours. I recall . arguing vigorously . for hours’
 "You know, you're an asshole," he slapped me on the thigh and said, "You're an asshole," he said . "I was being stubbornly resistant to his arguments," he says .
 The military is a separate force, which may do political work, but it can’t substitute for sinking deep roots and leading the people to carry out these transformations . The military will not be able to replace the political work of the people, he says .
 "That was a very profound point; it struck me very penetratingly at the time, and it has stayed with me since," he says . That was a profound point, he adds .
 Oil workers strike in 1969 became a big deal in the Bay Area and even had a big impact around the country . Then the next year, 1969, there was this major oil workers striking in Richmond, California . The strike was a major oil strike in Richmond .
 We were actively involved in that strike, and in building support for it, and I wrote a number of articles about this for a movement newspaper . 1 was also doing more theoretical writing because we were starting to form these collectives of revolutionaries which we then united into the Revolutionary Union .
 'I was writing a lot at that lime, as well as being involved in internal discussion and debate with others who founded the Revolutionary Union, including Leibel. So I was writing, and I was involved in ... internal discussion, debate," he says .
 In forming the Revolutionary Union, one of the things we recognized as crucial was the question of what kind of leadership is needed once you start confronting the fact that a revolution is necessary . You understand it has to be socialist and that the ultimate goal is communism .
 "I thought about this and discussed it with people I knew, and I think he discussed it," Panthers coach says . "And I thought ... and discussed this with people ... I'm not sure what I think about it," he says .
 By “multinational” we meant that people of all races, or nationalities, would all be united in this one vanguard party . By "multinational" we meant "people of all nationalities" would be united . We meant "Black, Latino, Native American
 The Revolutionary Union was formed to contribute to the development of such a multinational communist vanguard . And that was our objective in forming the Revolutionary Union .
 There were a lot of other significant forces out there at that time, like the Panthers, which had come out of a revolutionary nationalist current . There was a question of whether and how we were all going to make a leap to unite on a communist basis—which, when we formed the
 We tried to present what we were doing modestly, not in the bourgeois sense of being self-effacing or something, but corresponding to what we actually represented . The Revolutionary Union was formed by members of the Revolutionary Union .
 "We were just a fledgling organization that was putting forward these principles. We were just the fledgling organization," she says .
 We wanted to discuss and debate this with people, and we wanted to move to an eventual vanguard party . We wanted the party to become a 'vanguard party' and 'a party'
 "We were trying to move toward that and make as much of a contribution as we could to it," she says . "But we were ... trying to make ... contribution to that," she adds .
 We put forward our views of a communist understanding of U.S. society and of the world and of revolution . And we put forward views of the communist understanding, of the United States society . We are committed to a socialist vision of revolution, the party says .
 "I jumped right into it and talked about why we’d pul Stalin on the cover," he says . "I talked about the idea of using Stalin in the book," he adds .
 There were several hundred students and others there, and there was a lot of back-and-forth about this . Students and others were at the meeting to discuss the issue .
 Workers were opposed to groups like PL and Trotskyite groups who had a very narrow—what we call today ‘workerist’ and “economist”—position of “it’s just the workers against the bosses,” he says .
 PL (and most of the Trotskyites) actually saw revolutionary nationalism as a negative phenomenon . PL saw revolutionary nationalist nationalism as negative phenomenon. PL thought revolutionary nationalism was a bad thing .
 "They did not recognize that, although contradictory, it was mainly positive," he says . "They didn't recognize that ... it was mostly positive, even overwhelmingly positive, and in some ways representative of the most advanced revolutionary expressions of masses of people at that time," he adds .
 Black people are actually an oppressed people and indeed an oppressed nation within the U.S., and there are other minority nationalities in the United States which have a whole history of being oppressed .
 PL and the Trotskyites failed to recognize all that and denounced and opposed struggles against national struggles . From Ike to Mao and Beyond oppression oppression lhal were expressive of nationalist ideology . PL and Trotskyites—or at least the more ‘pure” Trotskyites .
 Regis Debray's Revolution in the Revolution is a classic example of a failed attempt to popularize the revolution . Leibel Bergman struggled to get me to recognize what was wrong with the basic position he was trying to promote .
 But there was one sentence in that book which still makes me laugh, though I became convinced that the basic line Debray was putting forward was fundamentally and seriously wrong .
 Debray was hitting at the idealist tendencies of the Trotskyites . Instead of proceeding from reality in the struggle to transform society, they seek to impose their fanciful notions on reality, he writes .
 The only kind of "socialism" that people like that will ever have anything to do with creating is a “socialism” that they imagine in their own minds . People like that won’t want to be involved in creating a ‘socialist’ that
 Their outlook, and actions flowing from it, actually works against the living struggle to bring socialism, and ultimately communism, into being, in the real world . And their actions, and their outlook, actually work against the . real world, they say .
 Debray: Concrete analysis of concrete conditions has never been the strong point of the Trotskyites . The Trotskyites were laughing uproariously in agreement when reading that line from Debrays .
 As we were forming our principles of unity in the RU, we recognized the importance of combatting these various trends . Revisionist and opportunist lines posing as “socialist” and “communist’s” while objectively opposing revolutionary struggles, and thereby doing
 We were putting forward a position sharply opposed to that and carrying out polemics and ideological struggle against these various trends . We were trying to carry out a polemical struggle against those trends, he says .
 By 1969, SDS (Students for a Democratic Society) formed in the early 18th century . SDS was formed by students in 1969 .
 Trotskyite groups were able to see the ways in which nationalism could take on an “againsl-the-syslcm"" character, even though it fell short in being able to provide a way for people to rupture with and overthrow capitalism .
 SWP uncritically tailed various expressions of nationalism and failed to acknowledge its shortcomings . With many Trotskyite groups it is a matter of fixating on one aspect -- the shortcomings of nationalism .
 Thousands of people who were in and around SDS debated questions of revolution and socialism and communism . Thousands of SDS members were debating ideas of revolution, socialism .
 All these different trends were contending within SDS, struggling over what direction this very broad revolutionary current among youth, in particular white youth, should take, he says .
 We felt it was important to get into these debates and try to influence them in the direction of communism, as we understood it, and we got involved, in a big way. And so we felt it . We got involved in the debates, and tried to influence [the debates]
 SDS had quarterly national conventions in different parts of the country . The first one that I went to was in Austin, Texas in the spring of 1969 . SDS was founded in 1969 .
 Three of us who were part of the RU got in a little VW bug and drove from the Bay Area to Austin, Texas, in a couple of days without slopping .
 PL was opposing struggles for ethnic studies on campuses, denouncing this as nationalist and bourgeois . At that time, the focus of the struggle was against PL, which was opposing ethnic studies .
 There was a lot of struggle against PLs attempts to take SDS in this narrow “bosses vs. workers...all-nalionalism-is-reactionary” kind of direction, says SDS .
 We were also working to expose that what PL was putting forward was not communism, was not Maoism. But not only were we trying to win people away from that, we were also exposing that what we were calling Maoism was not communist .
 PL was still identified in a lot of people’s minds with China and with Maoism until 1971 . PL denounced China and instead came out with the notion that you should leap immediately from capitalism to communism, without going through the transition phase .
 Of course, this was a leap—directly from capitalism to communism—that could only 19. But it could only be a leap that could only take 19.
 For further discussion of the problems in PLs approach on this, sec Bob Avakians “MLM vs.MLM’s approach, sec. “Bob Avakianians ‘MLM/MLM is a problem’.
 Revolutionary Worker #923, at rwor.org. Making Revolution for Real in the Real World,’s .
 PL were still identified in 1969 with China and Maoism even though, as exemplified by the conversation I had with that PL guy, they were not really defenders of the Cultural Revolution and of Maoism . They were not defenders of Mao, even at that time, even though they were
 PL would denounce any kind of national liberation movement that didn’t declare socialism as its goal . Some people might be drawn to it initially because it was always raising the slogan “fight racism”
 They posed the fight for socialism against national liberation movements and struggles . They posed . fight for . socialism against . national liberation movement and struggles.
 Many people thought PL line was communism, that this was even a radical communism, or Maoism, or what was represented by China. So this turned a lot of people off, but in being turned off, they thought this was communism .
 The next big SDS convention was set for Chicago, and everyone knew that this was going to be a major political event and that there would be a big showdown there . The SDS Convention was set to be held in Chicago .
 At that time it was already legal to make a right turn on a red light in California, though in a lot of other states, including Illinois, it was not yet legal .
 We stop and there’s no traffic, so we make a right turn while the light is red . We make the turn while there is no traffic . The light was red, and so we made the turn .
 "We go a couple of blocks down the road, and we get pulled over by these Chicago cops," he says . "One was a Black cop and one was Puerto Rican. One was a Puerto Rican."
 "Look, are you talking about when we pulled up to a red 20. So I turned to one of the cops and say, “Look, ‘Look,”” The officer said .
 "They finally let us off with a warning. I say, “You see, we’re from California, and in California it’s legal to blah, blah ...” "I say, "you see, "and in California...” and they
 SDS as an organization soon ceased to exist . But even then you could see that further splitting was going to go on, and it did .
 The bourgeoisie, and others who want to paint radical and revolutionary politics in a bad light, present this now as if this were just a case of people becoming dogmatic fanatics and eating each other up in these sectarian squabbles .
 SDS started off as a sort of radical bourgeois-democratic organization of students . SDS had developed together with the limes into a much more radical and revolutionary organization .
 These were questions that were bound to come on the agenda as the times were developing, says the author . The struggles in society were intensifying, and thousands and thousands of people were coming up against these questions .
 "Naturally, there is going to be debate and struggle, and not everybody will agree," says the author . "Not everybody will be able to agree. Naturally, there will be debate."
 This wasn’t because everybody overnight became sectarian or “the revolution was eating its own children” and all that kind of bullshit. And this wasn”t because ‘the revolution’ was eating itself children’ And this was because of the fact that the
 "People were running up against these big questions because they had made advances," says CNN.com's John Sutter . People were running into questions because of advances, he says .
 "They were moving beyond the position of seeking to reform an unreformable system," says Labour leader David Cameron . They were moving to reform the system, he said .
 What became the Weathermen, or the Weatherpeople, represented another trend . Then what was, broadly speaking, represented by the RU was a third trend . The Weatherpeople were the group of people who became known as the Weather People .
 These were the struggles of the day, and 1 would still say today that our position was, among the three, the most correct or the most in line with the actual way in which the struggle had to be developed . Even though our understanding was very undeveloped and was obviously not
 Our basic position was that we needed a socialist revolution, as part of the worldwide revolutionary struggle whose ultimate goal was communism . The proletariat would be the backbone force of this revolution, but at the same time it was necessary to build a broad united front, unifying many diverse forces fighting against
 Bob Dylan wrote that it's one thing for Bob Dylan to write that, but it's another thing for him to take that up as an ideological stand . "It’s one of the things that Bob Dylan did," he said .
 It’s correct to have a stand that we should not be armchair revolutionaries, that you actually have to change the world in practice . But if you throw out the need for theory and adopt that kind of pragmatic orientation, you’re going to be whipped around by many
 "I said okay, and we got together the money and got me an airline ticket," she says . "I'm not going to fly. I said okay. I got a ticket. I'm going to go to the U.S.
 I went back there and showed up and, since 1 knew some of them from SDS, I found out where they were staying and went and knocked on their door . I went to find out where the group was staying, and went to knock on the door .
 Even after that, when they split off and formed their own grouping within SDS, we continued to struggle with them . It was the view of people like Leibel and myself that there were many dedicated revolutionary-minded people among them who were going off in the wrong direction .
 During this period we still maintained our connections to the Berkeley movement, and in fact the RU had collectives in Berkeley . People’s Park was the center of the movement .
 When the oil workers strike broke out in Richmond in 1969, we went and talked about that to people in the student movement . We mobilized people from the campus and among other forces in Berkeley and around the Bay Area to come out to Richmond in solidarity with the strikers .
 There was a Third World student strike at San Francisco State, which was a very crucial struggle . Simultaneously, there was a similar strike at UC Berkeley, and there were a similar strikes at Berkeley .
 We developed ties with people in these strikes and also helped mobilize people from these struggles to link up with the strike of oil workers . We developed links with people who were involved in the strikes .
 People in the RU were continuing to build the anti-war movement in Berkeley, Berkeley and other parts of the Bay Area . And people in the U.S. continued to build a movement against war .
 Those of us based in Richmond at that time took part in that in various ways, both building opposition to the war in Richmond itself but also being involved in other protests and demonstrations around the Bay Area .
 As 1 recall, people associated with Jerry Rubin, 21 Stew and Judy Albert and some others, discovered this property that the university owned but was not using at that time . The property was located in the Telegraph Avenue area, which extends out from the south end of the campus .
 The university was planning to turn this parking lot into a parking lot . Activists took the initiative to turn it into a park instead . The park is now a park in California .
 University was determined to “pave paradise and make it a parking lot,” as the Joni Mitchell song says . This developed into a major battle because the university was completely unyielding and determined to keep the park .
 The university administration threw down the gauntlet, and the people who were building People’s Park refused to back off and carried forward what they were doing . It became a gigantic struggle, and it became a huge struggle .
 People who weren't actively involved at first or didn't think that was the main kind of activity that people should be directed toward would still see this, in a broad sense, as part of the whole movement that they were part of . That might sound a little improbable, but if you
 The university moved against People’s Park and brought the police down on it, people responded accordingly . And when the police brought it down on People's Park, people reacted accordingly .
 This developed into a major struggle in which eventually the National Guard was called out . The National Guard had to be called out in order to keep order in order .
 As a result of and through the course of this whole struggle, there was actually a form of martial law implemented in Berkeley during this period . Berkeley was a center of the struggle between the U.S. and California .
 If you gathered on the street corner, the police would come and break it up, police would break up it . The police would have to break up the gathering in order to stop it happening .
 People would come by on motorcycles with slacks of literature and throw them on the corner and then drive off, then other people would scramble, pick them up, and distribute them . You weren’t even allowed to do that. People would scramble to pick up, pick up and
 Jerry Rubin and Abbie Hoffman founded the Yippics, a group that tried to infuse radical and confrontational politics into hippie communities . Rubin and Hoffman played a major role in the Democratic Convention of 1968 and were subsequently tried for conspiracy .
 "So I got out of my car, and the cop wheeled and pointed the gun at my head," she says . "I got out my car and got out and got a gun pointed at me," she said .
 The RU decided that even though this wasn’t the form of activity that we would have pul our main energies into or focussed our attention on, it was important to relate to it . So things became very intense, and we in the RU decided to focus on it even though
 We put out leaflets and tried to mobilize as many forces as we could to support this struggle . So we put out leafletlets and put them out in support of this struggle, we tried to get people to help us .
 I remember we put out one leaflet to the National Guard itself, because a lot of the people in the National Guards were not really M gung-ho” types . Quite a few of them were sympathetic to the struggle and some were even people who had been involved in the
 We passed out thousands of copies of that leaflet, to people in the National Guard as well as others . We passed them out to National Guard members and others .
 We pul out a number of other leaflets as well, calling on people to support the battle for People’s Park . And we pul out other leaflets calling for support for People's Park .
 Even though 1 was living in Richmond at that time, I myself got actively involved as the People’s Park struggle crescendoed .
 At the high point of the struggle there were tens of thousands of people mobilized, with many demonstrating at the fence that the university had put up around People’s Park to keep people out . Many of them were demonstrating against the fence .
 National Guard was on the other side, inside the park, with their weapons loaded . "I remember being right at the fence, and the National Guard ... with their . weapons loaded," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 "It was very clear that had we brought the fence down, they were going to open fire," he says . "They were very clear" that the fence would fall down, he says. And it's very clear they would open fire if they brought it down .
 It was clear that people were not prepared to lake that next step, that it would have been a massacre that people weren’t prepared for . It was also clear that . people were also not prepared for the next step. It would be a massacre .
 James Rector was killed in one of the demonstrations at People’s Park . He was killed during the demonstrations .
 I was in that demon202 From Ike to Mao and Beyond slration, but a few blocks away from where he was killed . "I was in the demon202 slration," he says of Mao Zed Zedell .
 Thai police shot live ammunition at people and fired a lot of tear gas . The same day, the police also fired tear gas at people . Police also fired live ammunition and tear gas on protesters .
 "They had started using these tear gas grenades instead of just tear gas canisters," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 "These were more dangerous because they not only had the tear gas and all the effects of that, but they would explode, on a delay," says CNN.com's John Sutter . "They would explode," says Sutter. "These are more dangerous"
 "It took me about two or three seconds to work up the nerve to look and see if I still had a hand. I remember the same day that James Rector got killed, I picked up one of these tear gas grenades to throw it back at the cops, and it exploded
 "It was just a tear gas grenade, and my hand was still there. Then 1 discovered that it was just tear gas grenades," she said . "Then 1 found it was actually a tear-gassed grenade," she added .
 The deputy in his courtroom was a member of the county sheriffs who’d been mobilized as part of the police force attacking the demonstration that day . As a footnote to that story, my father was a judge then .
 The tear gassing affected thousands of people, and many people had this experience of these tear gas grenades going off near them, if not literally in their hands . The tear gas grenade incident occurred in the early hours of Sunday morning .
 James Rector murder by the police was yet another step, another outrage, beyond that . But the murder by police was another outrage beyond that. The murder of Rector by police is yet another outrage .
 "People had to confront the implications of this, but generally they were not freaked out by it," says CNN.com.com's John Sutter .
 "I knew that there were attempts to set me up to be killed. And, in fact, during that time I knew that . There was an attempt to kill me," he says .
 "I don’t remember, to be honest, a lot of talk among activists about dying or the fear of dying," she says . "But I don't remember ... talking about dying, or fear," she adds .
 "Most of the people I knew felt very joyous about being involved in the struggle," she says . "To tell the truth, 1 felt, and most of the . people I . knew felt joyous"
 "There was a feeling that you could die, but 1 don’t think that preoccupied people. So that’s what motivated you, and sure, I think there was the feeling that . Sure, sure, there was a . feeling that there was . a feeling
 "We weren't thinking that much about whether we might die. The thought would go through your mind, but we were motivated in a different way," he says .
 When we started taking up Marxism-Leninism, Mao Tsetung Thought, we recognized that in order for there to be a revolution, it had to involve and activate people beyond students and youth . Millions of people were actively involved in radical struggles and politics in one way or another .
 It had to spread beyond the Black people and Latinos, Latinos and Native Americans and Asians, it had to do so . "It had to be spread beyond only the oppressed peoples," says Rosa Fu Fu Fuerra .
 The revolutionary movement had to reach more broadly in the society, he says . "That was really what the call from SNCC to Lake radical politics to poor whites was about," he said .
 Originally, we’d gone to Richmond to work among the poor whites, but, as we became more Marxist, it was contradictory . We continued to work with poor whites as well as people of other nationalities .
 We understood we had to be more scientific about all this, but as we took up a more scientific, Marxist approach, we also took up some ideas from the international communist movement that had gone away from the revolutionary core of Marxism . The key thing is to center everything around the immediate economic
 The international communist movement has been influenced by a lot of economism and reformism since the 1930s . More and more identified socialism with trade unionism and gradualism . We picked up some ideas from the history of the communist movement .
 We began to see the more stable workers in larger factories as being the key force for socialism and communism and revolution, and put less emphasis on those proletarians whose life conditions were more unstable and volatile .
 The one thing that characterized us in the Revolutionary Union —and this is something that has sustained us all the way through— is that we knew you needed revolution. Now the one thing . Now, we know that you need revolution. We need revolution, we need revolution," she said .
 We knew you needed a socialist transformation of society and that the proletariat had to rule and lead society in doing that. We knew that you needed socialism . We knew we needed socialism to transform society .
 "We kept reading theory and carrying on ideological struggle and debates and polemics about what lhal meant and how to do that. We never let go of those things, and we kept reading theories and debates," he says .
 "Even when we made a lot of mistakes, which of course we did, we never let go of that fundamental revolutionary and communist orientation" "We were pulled in the direction of wrong lines, and in particular these “workedst"" or trade unionist tendencies," he said .
 In the U.S. at that time, the workers in the larger plants and the unionized workforces were relatively better paid and relatively well off, and were not the most readily radicalized sections of the proletariat .
 "But that’s something we had to learn through practice and also through continuing to study," she said . "That's something that we have to learn"
 Sometimes they meant that as a criticism, as if 1 were loo ideological or spent too much time studying theory and things like that . Sometimes it was meant to be a criticism of 1 being ideological or spending too much .
 "Even when we got off the track, we could eventually correct our errors by summing up both our own practice and historical experience much more broadly and by grappling with theory and ideological struggle . But it’s because we were very ideological and recognized the importance of theory, that even
 The Richmond oil strike was the first oil strike in the city's history . The city was still working its way through the oil strike . The oil strike is the first of its kind in the area .
 Their jobs were actually for the times relatively “high tech,” as we’d say now, even though it was manual labor . The jobs were for the time relatively ‘high tech’, as we'd say now .
 I remember at one point one of the workers who was actively involved in this oil strike, and with whom we were working, said something which captured the contradictoriness that I’ve been speaking about. It was something that captured the contradictions of what I was talking about. I
 He was talking to a group of students who’d come out to join the picket line .
 There was a battle with the company goons, and then we went back to the union hall. There was also a fight with the goons . The union hall was a union hall, and the union was a hall of honor .
 This was a section of workers that thought of themselves, but through this whole experience, not just of their own strike but also having these Third World students, as they were called—Black and Latino and Asian and Native American students, coming from Berkeley and coming from San Francisco Stale .
 We were trying to integrate, as Mao said, with these workers, at the same time as we were discovering, and discovered, that while it’s important to win over this section of the working class, this was not the force that was going to be the most radical backbone
 "These are things that you learn through the back-and-forth of theory and practice and the turmoil of all of that," he says . "You learn through ... the back and forth of theory," he adds .
 'We understood the importance of theory. But, as I said, we understood it was good to be very ideological,' he said . 'It was good for us to be ideological. We understood the important importance of summing up practice,' he added .
 We’d carried out a lot of practice, but we also saw the need to sum it up as scientifically as we could at any given Lime . We understood that this all had to be in the service of making a revolution and getting rid of this system . The final goal was
 Of course, the CP had a long history of being pulled more and more to reformism . It supported Roosevelt and the New Deal as far back as the 1930s . The CP had long supported FDR and New Deal .
 This was a long-standing tendency in the CP, but then it had gone completely into the sewer when Khrushchev came to power in the Soviet Union and put forward his ‘peaceful transition” and all that. So this was a . well-standing . tendency in
 The Revolution Comes to Richmond: People were following closely what was happening all over the country . Because of the whole upheaval that I’ve been describing, . all the back and forth over different ideas and programs, people were following .
 People in other parts of the country were very intensely following what was happening with things like People’s Park, and people who didn’t go to the Democratic Convention in 1968 were intensely following that . There were a lot of people who felt themselves a part of a whole movement
 There were over a hundred newspapers that eventually developed that were either written by or directed to Gls in the United States military—radical and revolutionary newspapers . As one important dimension of this, there were over 100 newspapers .
 In different locales around the U.S., a lot of people were putting out their own newspapers . The newspapers were put out around the country . CNN.com will feature iReporters from around the world .
 There were many different ways in which people were circulating their ideas and their experience, and many, many people were wrestling with all this . There were different ways of circulating ideas and experience, the author says .
 "Even where you had differences, you would still unite in a lot of ways," he says . "Of course, there were differences, but people were struggling out their differences," he adds . "People were struggling to find common ways to deal with their differences"
 "A number of people were attracted to that, and people would get in contact with us," says the BBC presenter . "People would get to contact us. We would be able to get in touch with people," she says .
 Some couples moved to Richmond and there were also individuals who’d come to Richmond . Some couples and individuals moved in and out of Richmond .
 A number of women came on their own to become part of this, and that was significant . "That was significant," says the author of the book .
 As 1 said, we sort of started out, a few of us, with this view of ourselves as ‘macho revolutionaries,” but we were changing—and being changed—in that, too . We were changing, and being changed, in that way, too,
 The women's movement was beginning to develop, and expressing itself in different ways throughout society . The women’s movement was starting to develop in the 1930s .
 International Women’s Day rally was held in San Francisco in 1970 . The event was part of the ferment and upheaval that we were part of, and that were influencing us in important ways .
 "There were a lot of things going on in Richmond. So we had sort of an inner core of people there in Richmond, but then there were broader groupings of people ... who were working collectively"
 At the same time, the RU was developing as more of an organization throughout the Bay Area . The RU was in San Jose and Stanford, in San Francisco and Berkeley, and in Oakland .
 "One of the most lasting and important things is that there are some people who got involved, who came to Richmond at that time, and who have stayed with things, in one way or another, all the way since then," she says . "There are some of the people who
 "All of that was important at the lime, but also made a lot of lasting contributions," he says . "So all of that ... ... ... it's important to the lime," he adds .
 We would meet adults who had kids, or we would just meet kids who were in junior high or high school . remember one great walkout where the kids in one of the junior highs in Richmond busted out and climbed over the fence .
 This was in support of the farmworkers, so they went down to the Safeway, which was being boycotted by the workers, and trashed it . The Safeway was in a support for the farmworker, and the workers trashed the store .
 Dozens of them were busted and the action was written up and denounced in the local paper . "Dozens of them busted"
 "We mobilized support for this, and they all got off without having to go to juvenile prison. But we mobilized support . They got off with no jail time. But they all had to go through the juvenile prison .
 Some of the kids we knew hardly ever went to school, and one of the rare times they’d go is when they could take our pamphlets or leaflets in and pass them out and stir shit up . In fact, some of these kids hardly ever attended school .
 In 1969 there was this anti-Vietnam “moratorium” declared, with big demonstrations against the war back east and in San Francisco . So we were doing a lot of that, and then in 1969, there was a big anti-war protest .
 As part of that, we got together with the Panthers, who were also in Richmond, and decided to call for a walkout and rally on the same day .
 "This had some really key elements that were missing from a lot of the other anti-war demonstrations," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 "We knew a teacher who taught at Richmond High. went to his class one time, not long after we moved to Richmond, and I gave this whole rap about Vietnam," she says . "I gave him the history of it, what the United States was doing and why it was
 Students in the classroom had never heard this kind of stuff. And 1 could tell that the students in the . classroom had . never heard . This kind of of stuff . It's not the first time the students have heard about it .
 Their teacher was progressive, but they’d never heard this whole thing laid out like this, he says . Maybe part of the reason he invited me to talk to them was that he figured I could do this more easily than he could . He could just say he was having visiting
 Vietnam is new to the U.S. military, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "I can see in their faces and their body language," he says . Sutter: "This is a new to them. So, while I’m laying out this rap
 "I was preparing myself for an argument, because I knew kids like this were bombarded with the standard pro-war propaganda," he says . "This was a new experience for me, too. Finally a guy raises his hand and 1 was preparing himself for a argument," he writes
 At the end of the rally about two to three hundred of us went over and surrounded the draft board in Richmond, which was drafting people out of Richmond . The draft board was also a good symbol of the whole war and the military, the author says .
 We found out later that the draft board was packed with pigs, just waiting for any excuse to attack, though things didn’t come to a major confrontation that day . The draft board didn't come to an end .
 "We made our point, and it was very important to those who took part, and the youth in particular, that they were part of this whole bigger anti-war movement," says the activist group .
 A little while later, when students were shot and killed at Kent State and Jackson Slate, 21, 21 we were already doing work at the junior college in Richmond, Contra Costa College, as well as other places . We were already working at junior colleges in Richmond and Contra .
 We had waged a struggle together with students at Contra Costa to get the college to fund a day care center . There were a lot of proletarian students there who couldn’t afford childcare in order to go to school .
 "That was an important battle, but we were also doing a lot of other kinds of political organizing and educational work," she says . "We were doing a number of different kinds of organizing," she adds .
 When Kent Stale happened, 1 remember speaking at a rally at Contra Costa College . 1 remembers speaking at the rally . 1 of the protesters was a student .
 "The level of unity there was very high. Basically the whole college, or a large part of it, had come to a standstill," he said .
 "On that day we were all very tight in our outrage and our support of the students at Kent Slate. There were some students there, including some veterans of the military and the Vietnam War, who had some differences with us, but on that day, we were very tight"
 The murders of Black students at Jackson State and others in Richmond are a question . "That became a question that we look to the students and others" in Richmond as well .
 The campus at Contra Costa College came to a standstill . It was a very powerful day, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "It was a powerful day"
 "Because of all the weight that proletarian people have on them, Contra Costa College, 21. That's because of all of the weight . That's the weight you have on people, and that's what you need to do."
 State troopers killed three Black students demonstrating at Jackson State, in Jackson, Mississippi, on May 15 . Shortly after that, three students were killed by state troopers . State troopers also killed three students in May 15 incident .
 The killings sparked a nationwide student strike, massive demonstrations and, in many cases, further balding with police and National Guardsmen . The killings led to a nationwide strike and massive demonstrations .
 People weren’t coming to them to bring them an understanding of these things and to enable them to learn about the world. And, as that high school student had spoken to, people weren't going to them . People weren't coming to people to bring these things to them,
 "But this was changing through our work and through the general upheaval that was going on," she said . "This was changing," she added. "but it was changing"
 Mao wrote about revolutionary youth going to the masses of working people . Mao learned a great deal more from them than he brought to them, even though obviously what he brought was very important .
 "This is also our experience in Richmond and my personal experience. And this was also our ... personal experience," she says . "This was also also our . experience," the mayor says .
 We made not only many political lies but deep personal ties, friendships and relationships with people that 1 still look back on very fondly . We made a lot of political lies, but also many personal ties and friendships .
 "I think of the people often and feel strong bonds with them, even today. I think of them often," she says of her friends and family .
 There were many people who taught me many deep lessons. remember this one white proletarian youth who was really just a beautiful guy. remember him as a beautiful man .
 "He was open to learning a lot of things, but he also taught me a tremendous amount," she says . "He also taught us the difficulties of becoming politically active with the weight that was on him and on his mother," she adds .
 "I still think about him a lot, and I remember very sadly, the last time I saw him," she says . She says she still thinks about her father, who she says he was a great friend .
 He came forward and became very revolutionary-minded and, as 1 said, he taught me a lot, but he was pulled down by drugs at the time . He confided in me that he was hung up on heroin, and therefore he couldn’t stay active in the revolution
 There were some individuals in particular with whom I developed very deep bonds, people who mean a lot to me personally, and from whom I learned a great deal . There were also some individuals with whom .
 William Hinton wrote this book Fanshen about the experience of the Chinese Revolution . Hinton used to read that book to some people in Richmond who didn’t have a lot of formal education .
 After a while, when I was reading to them, I would be looking out for this and I would change some of the wording . I would break words down into other words, while keeping the meaning so that they would get the essence of it. So, after a while I would
 1 was changing the language as I read, because the people I’m talking about had been denied almost literally any kind of formal education because of the poverty and difficulty of their circumstances . I wasn’t watering down what was being said, but I was changing it as I
 "I had to break this down into language that would convey the same meaning, but that they would be able to get," she says . "So I had to ... break it down into . language that convey the . same meaning," she writes .
 "I would always do my best to read in a way that wasn’t leaving them behind," she says . She says she was always doing her best to keep people in mind .
 I still remember this vividly and fondly to this time, and I also learned a great deal from it . I still . remember this very vividly . Remembering this vividly, fondly, to this . time, he says .
 "I would cite this experience as one of the main ways that I learned the importance of doing that," she says . "I'm not going to be able to do this again. And I would cite it as an example of how important it's important to do it," she adds
 This is mainly a question of your political and ideological understanding, as we say, and how to actually understand things well enough to be able to break them down and popularize them . But there was this dimension as well that was crucial for me, he says . He says .
 "This was also a great learning experience for me. Along with the deep personal ties I made, this was also an important learning experience," she says .
 I was very fortunate to have this experience where I had these kind of ties and personal relations with people where they would speak honestly with me, let me know when what I was saying, or reading to them, was getting across to them .
 "I still have very fond remembrances and strong deep feelings of affection for the people I was so close to then," she says . "And, on a personal level, I still have . fond memories and strong feelings of . affection"
 It was the Panthers who turned me in the direction of revolution and turned me on to Mao . The Panthers themselves were a mixed bag ideologically, with revolutionary nationalism mixed in with some communist inclinations and communist tendencies .
 In 1968 and '69, Leibel Bergman was the person who steeped me in Marxism and actually helped me make the leap to taking up the ideology and the theory of communism . Then, in 1968 and 1969, in a more systematic way, Bergman helped to steepen me
 "Overwhelmingly, his role was a very positive one, even with some of the views and tendencies that he still carried from the old CP, which would later grow and come to eat up his better side in the context of new challenges .
 As I developed more as a communist, 1 also began to develop some differences with people like Eldridge, Bobby Seale, and other Panther leaders . Still respected them greatly as revolutionaries, and had tremendous appreciation for the kind of vanguard role they had played .
 As I was making that leap, I developed differences and struggled with them, even while 1 was still actively working with and supporting them . And, as I was . working with . 1,000 people in the world, I struggled with . them, and struggled to cope with them .
 The CP was sending members into the Panthers at the same time as they were viciously attacking them in their official capacity as the CP . The CP would work to influence things in many different ways; for instance, it would help with legal assistance, but then use that to try to exert
 The fundamental thing is that you have to make a leap and a rupture to become a thoroughgoing communist . Lake up Marxism-Leninism-Maoism, as we say today. The problem was all the CP or mainly the CP More .
 The Panthers were at the leading edge of the revolutionary current and force that was developing . And if you don’t make that leap and rupture, then you gel pulled by a thousand different influences and forces, says author .
 "When you face that kind of repression, that can make it even more difficult for you to make crucial ideological leaps and ruptures," he says . "And, in turn, when you face ... repression, it can make you feel uncomfortable," he adds .
 As I was moving more fully in the direction of communism and they, frankly, were not, naturally our differences became more pronounced . As I moved more fully . in the . direction of . communism and . frankly, they were not . as well as . communism, they said .
 By 1969, the Panthers came up with the idea of building a united front against fascism . The idea was partly at the suggestion of the CP and partly from the Panthers’ feeling a need generally to deal with the repression they were facing .
 They were basically saying that United States society was already fascist . I didn’t agree with that. I remember having a discussion with Bobby Seale where he put that forward .
 "I didn’t think it was scientific analysis. knew there was tremendous repression the Panthers in particular were facing," he said .
 But it was not scientific and correct to say that the society as a whole was fascist, he said . "But it's not scientific" and correct, he added .
 Taking that position, and calling for a united front against fascism, was a way of trying to build a broader united front . But doing it, frankly, by watering down the political stance somewhat and appealing to people more on the basis of bourgeois democracy .
 "It's not wrong to appeal to people whose viewpoint is still in the framework of bourgeois democracy to unite with you against repression," he said . "Now, it’s not wrong. Now, it's not right to appeal ... to people ... who are still in bourgeois democracy
 There was a meeting in Oakland that the Panthers had called to organize for this conference to build a united front against fascism . But essentially to make upholding upholding democratic democracy the basis of unity, in the name of fighting fascism, represented a backing off of some of the more revolutionary positions the Panthers
 We in the RU had decided to take part in this and to fight to bring a more revolutionary and anti-imperialist line into this conference, as opposed to the more bourgeois-democratic line that the CP were pushing .
 1 came into this meeting in Oakland, Oakland, and Bobby Seale was leading the meeting . So 1 came to this meeting, 1 came in and Bobby led the meeting, and 1 came out . Seale led the Oakland meeting .
 "My heart just sank because I knew what that represented. As I walked in, 1 recognized a number of Black people that I knew were members of the CP," she said . "As I walked into the room, 1 of the Black people I recognized were members, and my heart
 Many people regarded me as “very ideological,” and sometimes used that as a point of attack, as if being very ideological were somehow bad . As I said, many people regarded him as ‘very ideological”
 "There was a tense pause before we went on with the meeting. And then it seemed that the temperature in the room dropped twenty degrees," she said . "Then it seemed . that the room in the . room dropped 20 degrees, and there was a tension pause," she added .
 Fred Hampton was killed by the pigs in Chicago while he slept . L.A. police launched a massive assault on the Panther office in that city and sparked a shoot-out lasting several hours when the Panthers inside defended themselves .
 The national headquarters of the 23.C. Panthers is in the Bay Area, where the national headquarters are located . The Panthers are based in San Francisco .
 At that particular lime no attack came on the Panther national office in Berkeley, but while we were there some of the Panther members decided to do some political education . The Panther members were doing political education.
 Eldridge Cleaver, who had gone into exile, had gone to North Korea and sent back word about how great it was . This was after he had gone back word of how great North Korea was . Cleaver was in exile from the U.S. when he went to North
 Kim 11 Sung is more like a feudal monarch than anything having to do with socialism and communism, says 1 . 1 didn’t agree with this at all, because I’d done some reading about North Korea and North Korea, and I viewed him as more than a feudal
 Eldridge has told us that Kim 11 Sung is the real revolutionary—he’s much more revolutionary than Mao Tsetung,” I just couldn’t let that go. So when this Panther guy stood up in front of a packed room of people in the Panther
 "Even though I was there to do whatever it look to defend the Panther office if it were attacked, I had to speak up. Even though I . had been there to . defend the . Panther office . Even though he was there, he said he had to . speak up .
 Kim 11 Sung is not more revolutionary than Mao. So I said, “Well, I just don’t agree with that, Kim Jong-won,” he said . “Kim 11 Sung’s [Mao] is not a revolutionary,’
 "A lot of tension resulted from this, and it carried over beyond this particular situation. So, of course, a lot of tensions resulted," he said .
 We were developing some differences with the Panthers, but when it was a question of defending them, "there was no question that we were going to rally to their defense," he says .
 Some of the Panthers’ thinking about what section of people are the revolutionary force, what they called the “lumpen proletariat,” was a matter of their thinking . The youth among them are a driving force and a key force in revolution, especially among them, says
 We in the RU at that time had this view of going more to the organized, unionized workers in some of the larger factories and plants . And, as 1 said ear216 From Ike to Mao and Beyond lier, we had a lier .
 In one sense their idea of who was the revolutionary force might have been closer to reality than ours . But the ideology that they were mobilizing or seeking to mobilize people around was not a scientific revolutionary ideology and couldn’t lead all the way to revolution, and definitely not to socialism
 The Panthers participated in the united front against fascism conference that the Panthers held, and 1 spoke there, struggling for an anti-imperialist and revolutionary line in opposition to particularly the influence of the CP .
 By 1970, it had been been a couple of years since the RU had been formed . The RU went national in 1970 .
 The RU had developed into a significant disciplined, organized force of revolutionaries in the Bay Area . The RU was a fairly significant disciplined force of revolutionists in the area .
 Forming such a party was still our objective, but we realized that we would have to play more of a role in this than we’d recognized before or were capable of playing before . We realized that they would have had to play a bigger role in the party than they�
 All around the country, there were people who had formed revolutionary collectives and generally associated themselves with communism . We saw that, all around the . country, we saw that . there were . people who formed revolutionary . collectives .
 Millions of people were sympathetic to and supportive of the idea of revolution at that time . Millions of those who supported revolution were sympathetic or supportive .
 Hundreds of thousands of people actively involved in the struggle had revolutionary sentiments and aspirations . "There were literally not just hundreds of people ... who were trying to organize themselves in some kind of revolutionary way," she says .
 If we didn’t take more responsibility for this struggle to form a new, genuinely communist and revolutionary party, however long that took, it would be greatly set back . People of all different nationalities who could be united on the basis of a communist line would be set back,
 There was a political upsurge and crisis around Kent State and Jackson State, which came in response to the Nixon administration’s expanding the war more fully into Cambodia, bombing and invading Cambodia .
 This was in the face of years and years of protests and rebellions . Johnson had even been forced to not run for reelection . Yet here’s the government escalating the war again .
 This radicalized millions more people and helped—or propelled—them to make another leap . Millions more people have been radicalized by the radicalization of their beliefs .
 This was on top of all the protests and rebellions that had gone on, and reached a high peak, for several years, throughout different parts of society . And this was on the top of many of those years, says the BBC's John Sutter .
 The situation was very ripe, but partly because of our own primitiveness, ideologically and politically, we in the RU didn’t fully recognize the potential right then . So the situation was . ripe, he says . The country's primitiveness and primitiveness was partly to blame for
 In order for a revolution, there needed to be a vanguard force, a united revolutionary communist party . People of all different nationalities and groupings, who had come forward in different parts of the country, had to be pulled together .
 We recognized that it wasn’t yet time to form the party, but that a crucial next step had to be made . We recognize that it was not yet time for the party to form, but it was a crucial step to make .
 A key step in laying more of the groundwork for the formation of a vanguard party that could lead the revolution, he says . That would be a key step for the creation of a new party, he adds .
 Leibel Bergman proposed that we go on a nationwide tour of the Soviet Union in 1970s . The tour included a car, a few of us, and drive around the country and try to win over revolutionary forces .
 We'd borrowed a car from one of these newer comrades in the RU, but it wasn't a very big car and it was so loaded down that when we got a few miles out on the highway it started rocking from side to side, and when we put the brakes on, it
 "That wasn’t going to work, so we went to another comrade and borrowed his car," he says . "We borrowed a comrade's car and borrowed another comrade’s car. That was going to be a problem," he adds . "That was a problem,
 1 had to gel underneath the car and get a screwdriver and pul it to just the right spot on the starter motor to get the thing to spark .
 We stayed in Baltimore, where we stayed in an apartment that was too small for all of us, so a bunch of us slept on the floor, including Leibel, who wasn’t that young then .
 "We slept on the floor and stayed with these people who had a collective in Baltimore," she says . "We stayed with them in Baltimore. But we slept on a floor," she adds .
 There were four of us, Jane Franklin, Leibel, another comrade, and myself. There were only four people in the group, including Jane Franklin and Leibel .
 We'd stay at people’s places, we’d get into a lot of discussion and struggle, and sometimes it went better than others . "Sometimes it went worse than others," she says of the trip .
 When we went to places like Jersey City, 1 remember being struck at the time by the devastation of large parts of the city . When we were in Jersey City we were struck by the destruction .
 Even at that lime, three decades ago, there were just huge numbers of burnt-out buildings that looked like they’d been through a war or just allowed to rot . Even in the 1980s, many of the buildings were just burnt out .
 In Ohio, we met with a group of people based at Antioch College who had formed a more or less communist collective . The group was based in Ohio, Ohio .
 It was a newly formed collective and they were still going through a lot of changes themselves . But it was a new collective and it was still going to be a new group of people .
 He came out of the tradition that he came from, even though he broke with it when they followed Khrushchev all the way into the swamp of just totally betraying revolution, socialism and communism . But that was the CP and that was . That was the .
 "This came out when we were meeting with this collective of people at Antioch. And this came out," she said . "This was a meeting of people," she added .
 We started getting into this discussion, and the question of Stalin in particular was very controversial . We started discussing Stalin's role in the Soviet Union in the 1930s .
 Stalin was the leader of the first historical experience in building socialism, in the Soviet Union . The RCP didn't uphold Stalin uncritically, but they had many criticisms and we've since developed them further and deepened them in the RCP .
 "It is completely ahistorical and nonmaterialislislisl to ignore" the circumstances in which this took place in the Soviet Union, the authors say .
 This was an unprecedented struggle, there was no prior experience in building a socialist society, and it had to be carried out in a situation where the Soviet Union was, from the beginning, surrounded, threatened, and outright invaded and attacked, by imperialist powers . More than 20 million Soviet citizens
 "All this was a big issue in general in the movement that developed during and out of the ’60s," she says . "It was an important question for the people in this collective at Antioch," she adds .
 "We finally resolved that, on the correct basis, through further discussion and struggle, over the question of Stalin and other important questions," he said . "Well, we finally resolved this, and it was a struggle," he added .
 The Soviet Union was founded on the basis of unity on which we built the Soviet Union . It was important, as a matter of principle, that the unity be deeply founded and not just superficial .
 1 was becoming increasingly aware then, by the fact that differences were beginning to develop inside the RU itself . The importance of this was further underscored, as 1 became increasingly aware .
 Bruce and Jane Franklin had been part of the RU since shortly after its formation . These differences centered around a range of ideological and political and even organizational questions .
 The Franklins claimed at the lime to be upholding Mao and to be organizing people on the basis of the RU’s principles, but increasingly they were doing something different .
 The Vietnamese seemingly maintained an independent stance, siding with neither China nor the Soviet Union in the great struggle and split that had developed in the international communist movement . Khrushchev had come to power and began pushing his revisionist theses and in fact moving to restore capitalism in the Soviet
 Despite their seeming “neutral stance, the Vietnamese were largely and increasingly in the Soviet camp . But in fact, despite their seeming "neutral" stance, they were largely in the USSR camp .
 There was a lot of turmoil about that kind of thing, because those of us who wanted to be consistently Maoist, as we say now, didn’t want people coming into the RU who would be bringing in these seemingly centrist but in reality pro-Soviet revisionist positions .
 At that time, most people who were coming forward as radicals and revolutionaries were very turned off by the Soviet Union . They could see that there was nothing revolutionary about the Soviet Soviet Union, says historian .
 They saw the Soviet Union as just another world power contending for its interests . They recognized that its interests and what it was doing in the world had very little, or really nothing, to do with revolution .
 Revolutionary-minded people were turned off by that, but then these other countries like Vietnam, which was standing up to the U.S., or Cuba, were more attractive to people who were radical but hadn’t really gotten deeply into communist philosophy .
 A lot of ways in which the Soviets tried to influence people like that would be through the Vietnamese or through the Cubans . So a lot of . ways in . which the . Soviets tried . to influence . people like . that . would be . through the . Vietnamese or . Cub
 Cuba was an important vehicle for people in the U.S. to get involved in the Cuban revolution, historian says . Hundreds, probably thousands of people, mainly youth, went down to Cuba on these Venceremos Brigades .
 Around the same time as we were doing this tour around the country, the RU sent a few comrades to be part of one of these Venceremos Brigades and to struggle with people .
 "We wanted to influence them toward Maoism, as we would now say. Since we recognized that a lot of radical and revolutionary-minded people were being drawn to these Brigades, we wanted them to be Maoists," says the group .
 "When you are among other people, you may influence them but they influence you as well," he says . So we sent these comrades down there, but when you're among others, you can influence them as well, he adds .
 And that is what happened with the comrades we sent on this Venceremos Brigade. And that's what happened . And that was what happened to the comrades sent to this Vencesremos brigade .
 This came out when we had a meeting with these comrades after they had come back from Cuba . This was when they had met up with comrades after returning from Cuba. This was the first time they had seen each other in Cuba .
 The struggle was developing inside the RU itself at the same lime as we were setting out to spread the RU around the country. So this was the situation and the struggle that was developing in the RU .
 As a matter of general principle 1 was concerned that we not bring people into the RU on the kind of pragmatic, ‘whatever works,” basis that Leibel Bergman was pushing, he said .
 I was very concerned to ensure that, when we went on this Lour to spread the RU around the country, we would be spreading communism, not some centrist, eclectic mish-mash of communism and revisionism, which wouldn’t have any solid foundation and would fall apart
 There were no clear lines of demarcation over some fundamental matters of principle at the time of the 1960s . "One of the characteristics of the movement at that time was a lot of eclectics," he says .
 People were newly coming forward and hadn’t sorted out a lot of these things. People were coming forward,’s lawyer said. ‘People were newly . coming forward’
 Anything and everything that was more or less opposed to U.S. imperialism was often thrown together by people, or seen as all part of the same thing . Anything or anything opposed to the United States imperialism was thrown together .
 It was very important to draw the distinction between what characterized the broader movement, on the one hand, and what characterized those who were uniting on the basis of communism, and seeking to build a new, genuinely revolutionary and communist party .
 Many different ideologies and programs contending, and even mixed up with each other, was natural and, in a basic sense, fine . Within the broader movement, to have many different ideologies ... was natural, it was fine, she says .
 'To have that within a communist organization was the kiss of death. But to have . that within . a communist . organization was . The death penalty was the 'kiss of death' for a communist leader .
 "In the RU, as a communist organization, we had already drawn certain clear lines of demarcation," says Vladimir Putin . Putin: "We are not going to go to war"
 Cuba's centrism actually served the Soviet Union as a revisionist power which was itself “social-imperialist,” says Julian Zelizer . Cuba was socialist in name but capitalist and imperialist in deed and in essence, Zelizer says .
 We’d drawn those distinctions and understood the role of Cuba in that way, he said . "We’ve drawn those . distinctions," he said of Cuba .
 People like the Franklins and others were trying to blur those lines and to bring people into the RU who were, at best, unclear about these crucial questions . At worse, they represented a kind of centrist, pro-revisionist position .
 "They were trying to come to an understanding of the “correct line,” as we say. They were ... trying to ... get to the correct line, as well as the ‘correct line” As a result, they say.
 Today, when 1 hear all these attacks on “political correctness,” 1 shake my head, because smuggled into this seems to be the notion that somehow being “politically correct” is a bad thing . As if being politically incorrect were somehow a good thing, as
 Of course, dogmatism is not a good thing, being unable to distinguish between what is really a major matter of principle and what is a minor matter is not good and can lead to bad consequences .
 Much of the attack on ‘political correctness’ is an attempt to undermine the very necessary opposition to and struggle against profound injustices and outrages which are in fact built into the system in the U.S. and its role in the world .
 By “line” 1 mean your analysis of reality and of how to change it . What kind of change you see as necessary and how you see going about the realization of that change .
 "There was all that ferment at that time, as a result of the whole upsurge through the ’60s and into the early 70s," she says . "So there was all . that ferment"
 I and other leaders within the RU fell that if we didn’t dive into this ferment and struggle to win people to a communist line, then we would lose a lot of these people, he says . ‘A lot of them wouldn't get clarity on these questions.�
 "It's very difficult to maintain yourself as a communist organization with just a small number of people isolated from others in pockets around the country," he says . "If we didn't bring people together in one organization, then even if some people got more clarity on these questions, they would
 "It was necessary for people to become part of an organization nationally that could all pull together and struggle out some of these questions together, and on a certain foundation"
 We really felt we’d be dissipating a lot of this development if we didn’t expand. So we really felt . We’ve been dissipating . A lot of the development is happening in the U.S. right now .
 All these big questions were getting thrown up by the development of things, and lots of people around the country were forming groups and collectives of various kinds to try to grapple with them . "Lots of people are forming groups, collecting groups and collecting collectives to try and grapple with
 "There was opportunity but also a necessity to go out and link up with and struggle with these groups," says coach . "We felt that, in a real sense, there was opportunity to link up"
 "Just because you have principles that you united around at one lime doesn’t mean that that’s the way things stay. But just because you’ve principles that . you united . around at a one lime, it doesn't mean that . that's the way
 Different trends develop and take shape within any organization, and especially if you’re engaged in practical struggle and engaging with other trends and other forces in the movement, it is once again a matter where you influence them and they influence you . Struggle develops, different things happening in the world
 You’re not existing in some sort of rarified, “pure” situation, sealed off from the larger society . These trends penetrate into your organization and exert their influence, he says .
 At this lime, in the summer of 1970, this hadn’t yet come to a head. But at this lime this year, in this year’s 1970s, this wasn't fully developed yet, but at this time, it hadn't fully develop yet, it
 If we had been right in the midst of an all-out, full-blown struggle between two different lines, two fundamentally different positions and analyses, then we wouldn’t have been able to go on this lour to spread the RU, or it would have been a big
 Rugby Union tour was a good thing to embark on this tour, says Stuart Lancaster . But things hadn’t yet ripened to that level, he says . ‘We were mainly able to win people to the correct position, in accordance with our principles of unity,’
 The tour itself was full of interesting and challenging experiences, which shed more light on key questions of line . Nationalism...and Marxism .
 Within the CP some sort of a caucus, or a sort of semi-secret group, had formed that was supposed to be more radical than the CP itself . The group was meant to be a more radical group .
 DH had been part of this grouping in a loose sense, even while he was also part of the Chicago area Panthers for a while . DH had also played for the Chicago-area Panthers in the past .
 DH’s father had been in the CP, and Leibel had known his father, and so, when we went to Chicago, DH was one of the people we met with . Leibel's father was a member of the CP .
 We got into a discussion about the RU principles and how we were based on Marxism-Leninism and Mao Tsetung Thought, as it was then called . We got to discuss the RU's Marxist-Leninist principles and Mao's Thought .
 CNN.com's John Sutter talks to CNN iReporters about the U.S. anti-Muslim ideology . Sutter: "We started discussing and debating how this ideology applied to different questions in the world and in the United States"
 We were talking about the oppression of Black people and other oppressed nationalities, what the socialist revolution represented in terms of ending that oppression —and how the RU approached that . And, at one point, we were discussing the national question—that is, . that is, the . oppression
 "This was directed at me, because he and I were getting into some struggle about certain aspects of this," she said . "This is directed at him," she added .
 What 1 was saying was, “Look, if you want to talk about the direct aspects of this experience—what it feels like, what it means in that sense, to be Black in America, of course what you’re saying is true,’s 1 was
 Somebody who is not Black is not going to be able to know that in the same way and experience that directly in the . same way . "It's not just a matter of people who are not Black," she says .
 "identidentity politics" is a form of identity politics, says Julian Zelizer . "You can’t unite people around a larger program to transform the society as a whole and uproot all oppression," he says .
 DH did decide to become a part of the RU, and then later a struggle sharpened up with him and others over some of these same questions . That is what we were battling out—and the same question, of course, is being battled out now .
 Anarchism...and Marxism... was one of many . That was one important experience of this lour, but it was also many others .
 With different groups and different collectives there were different experiences and different questions that came up as key things to dig into and struggle over deeply. With different experiences, different questions were different .
 Questions of this kind had to be battled out in order to unite people on the basis of a communist line . Questions of which questions of which people would answer were to be answered by the Communist Party .
 New elements will emerge within socialist society who don’t want to see the socialist transformation of society carried out . These forces will jump out to oppose the advance of the socialist revolution . You have to have a state that prevents them from seizing power, or else the old society will be
 Many of these questions got battled out on this tour, and it was a very lively and exciting process . Dogmatism...and Marxism ... were some of the issues discussed .
 There were just the four of us out there on the road, and besides all the ideological struggle, we had some hairy experiences driving late at night, or early in the morning .
 One time Leibel took a wrong turn and was going the wrong way on an interstate highway in Ohio . Leibel: "I'm not afraid to go wrong. I'm glad to be able to get back on the road again"
 "We managed to turn the car around quickly and avoid a disaster. Somehow, we managed to get back to the road quickly," he says .
 In Maryland we heard about this guy named Robere who had committed to memory a large body of the “scripture” of Marxism, as he treated it . In other words, he’d memorize it and then recite it and try to intimidate people .
 These people in Maryland told us how he’d come in and destroyed their collective with his dogmatism . These people said they’ve come in . He’s come in with a dogmaticism. These people have told how they feel about him.
 Most of these people in this particular collective were white and Robere was Black, so they were reluctant to struggle with him . Most of them were awed by the fact that he could regurgitate long sections of what Mao or Lenin had written, he says .
 People, of course, did need to grapple with theory at that point, and many were . People still grapple with theories at that time .
 People were also studying things by Marx, including the Communist Manifesto and perhaps some other writings by Marx . Maybe a very few people had read Capital Capital .
 Thai’s why this guy Robere was able to influence and awe people— they had some appreciation of the importance of theory, but some of them had a hard time distinguishing the living study and application of theory from an approach that reduced theory to dogma, and even went to ridiculous
 Marxism is not a scripture, it's not a religious dogma, it’s a scientific approach to reality . Marxism not a dogma, Marxism is a way of understanding reality, says Julian Zelizer .
 At that time, many people were new to this theory, and there is a tendency, whenever you’re new to anything, to be somewhat mechanical about it . At the time, there was a tendency to be mechanical about the theory .
 If you recognize at a certain point that you need to take up theory, there can be a tendency to take it up somewhat mechanically, to not really have a correct approach to theory itself or a correct understanding of the relationship between theory and practice .
 "You can get into a kind of dogmatic tendency yourself, and then if somebody comes along who is even more dogmatic than you are, or has committed to memory and can regurgitate a lot of theory, it might seem as if they are really deeply steeped in it
 This is a wrong and harmful approach to theory in general, and it is especially harmful to Marxism . This is an especially wrong approach to Marxism, says David Frum . Frum argues that Marxism is not Marxism, but Marxism is Marxism .
 Marxism is, and must be, a living, critical, creative, scientific approach to reality . Marxism is not a dogma. Marxism is not dogma, it must be a living and critical approach . Marxists are not dogma. Marxists must be critical, critical and creative .
 "If it gets turned into a dogma then it becomes something very bad instead of something very liberating," he says . "It's very liberating. It's very important that it's not turned into dogma," he adds .
 This Robere was a peculiar case, but among other people, including some students and intellectuals who take up Marxism, there can be a tendency toward a “scholastic” approach to Marxism .
 1 knew someone who was reading all forty-plus volumes of Lenin’s Collected Works . For example, 1 knew . someone who had read all . of Lenin's Collected works .
 He was reading all of Lenin’s works, but he was doing it in a way that was divorced from practice, he says . So it was turning into its opposite, he writes. He says .
 They didn't recognize or appreciate the need lor revolutionary theory to guide what they were doing . They didn’t recognize the need for revolutionary theory, he says .
 A few veterans of the communist movement helped us develop an understanding of the importance of theory, and of linking it with practice . These different tendencies existed within the various collectives we met with, and we were struggling through all this at the time .
 A couple of years later, we in the RU had an encounter and confrontation ourselves with Robere . A few years after, we had a confrontation ourselves ourselves with him .
 We had decided in the RU that, while it was good to have these broad-based demonstrations, there was a real problem in that the leadership of these things was generally pretty mainstream . A lot of mainstream politicians and other similar types featured as the spokespeople of these demonstrations, and this
 We knew that there were a lot of people who opposed the war with more advanced sentiments, and that it was important to organize a more advanced or more radical expression within this larger demonstration .
 There were something like five thousand people in this contingent, and it was bordered by red flags . "When it finally all came together on the day of the demonstration it was really beautiful," she says .
 This contingent put out very advanced slogans in support of the Vietnamese people, calling for their victory in the struggle against U.S. imperialism . The Vietnamese people are called to victory in their struggle against imperialism .
 There were thousands of people chanting these slogans, people in the contingent and others among whom these slogans resonated and caught on . As we marched into the stadium where the rally was being held, the sounds of these slogans were reverberating and the red flags were flying, and it was very
 'In building this contingent we got into a lot of struggle with people who wanted to turn this into a very sectarian kind of thing, in the guise of being super-revolutionary. But in building this . We got into . struggle with . people who . wanted to . turn this
 They were running this dogmatic kind of nonsense that would have been laughable if it weren’t so potentially damaging . They insisted that there be something against feudalism in the name of this contingent, even though that did not make any sense in the context of this demonstration . They were
 "We had to fight to defeat this kind of dogmatism," he says . "Robere" is Robere, a character from a collective that he wrecked in Maryland .
 He had come into the Bay Area and was part of this whole dogmatic, sectarian effort to in effect wreck the anti-imperialist contingent we were building for this anti-war demonstration . He had been part of the effort to "in effect wreck" of anti-Imperial
 Robere, the man who appeared on the show, was actually Robere . Robere is known for his role in a series of events in the U.S.
 "We were able to defeat these efforts to turn this contingent into a sectarian fiasco," he says . "These are the kinds of things you have to deal with," he adds .
 "We had learned that he had a whole history of leaving groups in shambles around the country, playing on people’s egos or intimidating them," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 As soon as we recognized what this was, we were able to repulse and defeat it . We had certain fundamental principles that we were united around, including that when there were differences you had to struggle things out in a principled way . We were about trying to mobilize people as broadly as
 It's one thing to challenge people with revolutionary politics in a lively way, but it's another thing to come to them like a religious sect and turn them off in the name of revolution . It’s one thing for people to be turned off by religious sect like a revolution,
 Party leaders discuss organizational principles for a communist organization or party . They also discuss the question of what kind of organizational principles a party should base itself on .
 "Because we'd fought some of this through, this kind of assault on our organization didn’t have the effect of disrupting it and reducing it to a shambles, as it had with some groups," she says .
 Despite the negative character of all this, it did provide another valuable experience in recognizing the real destructive effect of sectarianism and dogmatism . That really has nothing to do with making revolution and nothing to . do with . making revolution .
 There were also other influences—the women revolutionaries that I knew, the beginning upsurge of a women’s movement . There were other influences, including the women revolutionaries .
 "The whole tradition and theory of communism had a big influence on me," he says . "But it was particularly the whole theory of Communism," he adds . "I was particularly influenced by the whole tradition of communism"
 There were certain influences from the history of the international communist movement that were in the direction of trade unionism and reformism, but there were also some very important positive traditions and influences . International Women’s Day was institutionalized in a positive sense and made a significant part .
 There was a whole analysis, from Marx and Engels, down through Lenin and Mao, about the emancipation of women and how that was an integral part of the whole socialist revolution and the struggle to reach communism . And there was the whole analysis .
 'I began to undergo radical transformation myself on this question. Becoming a communist and taking all that up was the central way in which I began to become a communist'
 There were women who came to Richmond, sometimes as part of couples who moved there and sometimes on their own, and that had an important influence . There were also many women who moved to Richmond as well .
 "Some of them were very strong and independent, both in terms of their thinking, but also just in the whole way they dealt with everything," she says . "They were very independent, and some of them very strong," she adds .
 There was the radical development inside the movement, as well as more broadly in society, of what became the feminist movement . Some of it wasn’t just more narrowly feminist, some of it had a communist perspective, at least in a general sense .
 A communist understanding of the oppression of women played in the development of class divisions, class divisions and oppressive society overall, on the one hand, and the other hand . The pivotal role that abolishing all that and completely emancipating women played . in the struggle to end all oppression and
 When you start studying and learning more about the Chinese revolution and the experience building socialism in China, you quickly come to see what it meant that this was a society that was feudal oppression before the revolution triumphed .
 Women's role and status of women in the society is being questioned in the U.S. And not only in an overall sense, but specifically with regard to the role and Status of women .
 Barbara Walters did a segment on shoes from all different parts of the world on a morning talk show in the early ’70s . Barbara Walters' shoes were a big part of the show's early '70s and '80s .
 The shoes were worn by women who had bound feet in the old feudal Chinese society . The feet of women would be bent under and their bones broken to make their feet petite and ‘dainty,” and supposedly sexually appealing .
 The contrast not only with feudal society but with a “modern” bourgeois society like the U.S. was very striking . Still, the transformations they had carried out were very striking, writes David Frum .
 Relations among people, and particular between women and men, were so radically different from anything I'd seen before . This was true on every level— the relations among people were radically different .
 Hotel workers and waiters in the hotel where we were staying would talk about world affairs and what was happening in the U.S. and China, as well as China .
 Some young women who were university students from another part of China were spending a certain amount of time working as staff in the hotel . There was no subservience in their relationship, nor was there any standoffishness, says author .
 "They came up and were very interested in who we were and what we thought about all kinds of things," says the band . They came up with questions about who they thought about and what they thought .
 "Everything is this fucking commodification of sex and in particular of women’s bodies," she says . "I remember that when I came back from China and put on the TV in the U.S., how starkly it stood out"
 Summer 1970 tour to expand the RU had been very successful . The summer 1970 tour had been a success .
 We had engaged in many important discussions and struggles, influenced many people and deepened our own understanding in the process. We had had many important conversations and struggles .
 A struggle was ripening right within the RU and came to a head only a few months after this tour was completed, in the fall of 1970 . And yet, at the same time, a struggle was growing within the Rugby Union .
 A 11s we developed the RU as a national organization, we were still looking beyond that to how we were going to get to a single unified party that could be the leadership of the whole revolutionary movement that had emerged, and could go out .
 The RU had now spread throughout the country and had an organized, structured way of relating to the people and collectives in other parts of the country who had joined it . The RU now had a structured way to relate to others in the country .
 Leadership of the RU was still centered mainly in the Bay Area . But the leadership of the U.S. was still in the San Francisco area .
 People grouped around the Franklins had a vision that we needed to go over to the armed struggle against the system more or less immediately . And that the parly had to be built in accordance with that, he says .
 There were millions who were generally favorable to a revolution at that time, but there were still millions and tens of millions more who were not . Not necessarily that they were opposed to it, but they hadn’t been brought into the stream of struggle and upheaval of the time .
 You needed to go “lake the revolution to them,” so to speak, he said . Not in the sense of actively “getting it on” right then, but by spreading the message of revolution and uniting with them and leading them in struggles that they were
 "Third world peoples in the U.S. were already ready to get it on with the system right away," he said . They argued that the “third world peoples” in the United States were ready to fight .
 “Third world” forces had to be declared and institutionalized as the leadership of the revolution. Furthermore, those “third world’s forces” must be declared, institutionalized . The revolution will be a revolution in the United States .
 That’s what revolution in the U.S. was about, as they presented it. That's what Revolution in the United States was about . That's the reason for revolution, they said .
 There was a revolutionary mood broadly among Black people, Latinos, Native Americans, Asians and so on, but that wasn’t uniformly true, he says . He says, "Yes, yes, there was a revolution broadly among people, but not uniformly true"
 There were definitely revolutionary elements and revolution had a lot of initiative among these sections of the people, but even there, in their broad masses, people were not yet won to revolution, especially as something to be immediately fought for .
 'They existed within, and were aware of existing within, the larger society where people were not so much in a revolutionary mood. And more than that, they existed within . They existed within and around the larger . society . People were aware that they existed in a larger society, not
 There were sections of the youth, including youth and students among white people, who were radicalized and in a revolutionary mood . Yes, there were sections . But there was also a radical mood in the youth of the 1960s and '60s .
 You have a sense that unless more people are brought to the revolutionary side, you will be crushed . And even if you haven’t studied all kinds of theory and thought it through in that way, you still have a certain sense of this, and you have a feeling that unless
 "Even that tends to Lemper your revolutionary mood," he says . "You don’t burn to get this oppression and the whole long history of that off your back," he adds .
 We felt that even that revolutionary inclination, if you will, among large sections of the oppressed couldn’t be given full expression . And we felt that we won broader sections of people to revolution by taking revolution to them, linking up with them in struggles that they were more prepared to
 The Franklins were saying that “third world people in the U.S. were ready for revolution, they were going to lead the revolution . The vanguard had to be built and structured in accordance with the vanguard, the Franklins said .
 When you're talking about how to make revolution, how to understand the society and how to change it, that’s something that has to be studied, wrestled with and struggled over by everyone who is willing and anxious to lake up that challenge .
 Coming to that understanding is a matter of taking this up scientifically and getting into the theory of it, studying society and the world in a deep and comprehensive way, he says .
 Everybody who wants to bring about this kind of change should be brought forward and unleashed to take up this challenge . "Everybody has to pitch in and do that. Everybody must pitch in, and everybody has to do that," she said .
 There are no people who, merely by virtue of being part of an oppressed group or nationality, are “automatically” able to do that . nor, on the other hand, are there people who . merely by . virtue of . being from the dominant, oppressor
 The Franklins were a key part of the struggle we had with the Franklins. So that was part of that struggle, we had to deal with them. We had to work together to find a way to get back in touch with each other.
 It wasn’t just the RU that was going through this, nor is it just some sort of inevitable feature of communist formations that they turn inward and fight among themselves . The RU was not the only communist formation in the Soviet Union that went through this .
 "Big questions were up, which I’m speaking to here, about how to actually Lake up the challenge of making revolution and transforming society," he says .
 Making a radical change in a society like the U.S., completely overturning the system and bringing into being a socialist society, is a big challenge . Getting to a communist world is a "big, big, big challenge," he says .
 People who had become radicalized and revolutionary-minded through the whole ’60s experience were coming up against these problems . People who became radicalized in the '60s had to deal with these problems, the author says .
 "Let's say you start out among Black people and you’re building the struggle there. Let’s say you started out among black people," she said . "I’m not going to be able to say yes," she added .
 "You come to realize that you can’t solve these problems within the confines of this system," he says . "And you come to ... realize that ... you can't solve these . problems within this system"
 Lots of different forces were confronting the same objective problems of making revolution, especially in a country like the U.S., that the RU was running up against . The split in the Panthers was the result of a split between the Panthers and the United States .
 The Panthers weren’t founded on thoroughgoing communist principles, but nonetheless they were coming up against the same contradictions . Their ideology was a mix of communism and other ideologies .
 "They were trying as revolutionaries to figure out what to do. Although they were not proceeding systematically and thoroughly as communists, they were ... trying as communists," he says. "They weren't proceeding systematically"
 With that orientation, it wasn’t just a matter, on his part, of recognizing that revolution was not immediately on the agenda, but it basically got pul off the agenda into never-never land . With that, it was basically a matter of realizing that revolution .
 The politics of Huey and those who followed him became essentially reformist and based on meeting the needs of the people within the system, which you can't do on a mass level . If you could, you wouldn’t need a revolution; and if you approach it in that
 The important point here is that these struggles were not a matter of a bunch of communists and other revolutionaries fighting among themselves simply for petty and sectarian reasons . The struggle was not just for petty or sectarian reasons, it was for the sake of the revolution .
 We were running into big questions, big contradictions as we say, in terms of how to make revolution in a powerful, imperialist country like the U.S. The whole movement was running up against them and struggling out these questions, in one form or another, he says .
 As this struggle was going on, there were some peo242 From Ike to Mao and Beyond pie who were firmly in the camp that myself and some other leaders of the RU were in, and there were other people who were in the Franklin group . Then there were a number of people
 While the RU was a communist organization, there were also some of the influences of what was called the “New Left” at that time . But waging this struggle was complicated by the fact that while the . RU was founded on communist principles, .
 It also had some influences from the mainly middle class forces among which it had emerged and in which it was mainly based . But it was also influenced by the main class forces in the country .
 The political unclarity and differences merged with a certain antileadership tendency that existed more broadly in the movement, but was reflected inside the RU . There was a widespread feeling among RU members that they didn’t want ‘the big leadership honchos” battling
 "I wrote many of the papers that refuted and polemicized against the Franklin position," he says . "They, in turn, wrote up their position papers, and then we circulated all these papers in the organization"
 Our forces were mainly centered in the East Bay, in Oakland, Berkeley and Richmond, as well as San Jose . We would meet with the people on the next levels or the basic levels of the organization, have sessions with them to go deeply into the questions . Then they would go to
 Franklin and a few others formed a group called Venceremos and tried to pul some version of their line into practice . Franklin and others have tried to make their own version of the Franklin trend .
 This didn’t last very long and, while it lasted, it had a negative effect in a number of ways . It had a positive effect on the economy in the first half of the year .
 Dad Spurgeon, older sister Marjorie, Bob, his mother Ruth, and younger sister Mary-Lou . Bob Spurgeon was also a member of the family .
 Traffic boys “being put through their paces”; the author in inset photo . Traffic boys put through paces by traffic officers .
 On the docks, Shanghai, 1971; the author in the center, and Leibel Bergman, second from left, are the author of the book .
 Bob Avakian outlines his analysis of the massive changes in China following Mao's death . He outlines the changes in Mao's reign in China .
 Bob Avakian’s defense against felony charges as a result of the demonstration against Deng Xiaoping . Posters build support for the defense against the felony charges .
 The author on a nationwide speaking tour as part of the effort to politically defeat the charges and develop a revolutionary movement, 1979 . The author was charged with conspiracy to commit murder, murder and murder .
 The author in exile, in front of the Wall of Communards in Paris, 1981, is the author of a book in France . He is currently living in exile in Paris .
 Revolution or Adventurism 24. 24. and basically nothing positive came out of that. Nothing positive came from that. It was basically a disaster for Adventurists .
 Franklins were in the RU and there was a chance to win them to a correct line, says Stuart Lancaster . But so long as they were there, there was no way to publicly air the debate, he says .
 If Franklin group could have been won away from their position, that would have made it possible to unite virtually the whole organization around the correct line . The Franklin group would have been able to unite around their position .
 We thought it was very important to pul out these documents, as a way to enable people very broadly in the revolutionary movement to grapple with the issues more deeply . But once the struggle within the RU had been resolved, we thought it would be important to publish these documents .
 Even though we were essentially correct, and the Franklin group was fundamentally wrong, our position was contradictory . We were essentially right, but we were fundamentally wrong . We are now in a position that is contradictory, and our position is contradictory .
 "Even looking back on it now, more than 30 years later, with everything we've learned since, I would say we were overwhelmingly correct and positive. On the one hand, even looking back at it now," he says . "Even after 30 years, we're overwhelmingly positive,"
 "In other words, we were correct about what was necessary to make a revolution in basic terms," he said . "We were correct" about what needed to be a revolution, he added .
 We were correct in rejecting a path that would lead people to getting isolated and crushed, no matter how good or even heroic their intentions and desires might be . And we were correct, we were right in rejecting the path that led to isolation and crushed .
 At the same time, in carrying out this struggle, we had gone more deeply into the history of the international communist movement to draw lessons to apply to our situation . We had gone to the world to learn lessons from international communist movements .
 Lenin: Communist Party had tendencies toward reformism under Stalin's leadership . Lenin: We were essentially and overwhelmingly correct in this, but we also got from the international communist movement . Stalinism was a basically trade unionist approach of centering the struggle of the workers around economic demands .
 Workers who were in more stabilized employment situations and in larger factories were the most important force for revolution and socialism . In this there was a significant aspect of a mechanical approach that we’d taken from the international communist movement .
 One of the distinguishing and most controversial features of the RU, which I’ve spoken to, is that we upheld Stalin. The RU’s most controversial feature of the country is that it upheld Stalin, says the Russian president .
 Of course, we did not uphold Stalin uncritically, we recognized and spoke to serious errors that Stalin made, and since then we have continued to deepen our understanding of that . We have upheld Stalin with historical perspective, but we have upheld him with historical context .
 Stalin led the first attempt to build socialism, under very difficult circumstances . Stalin led important advances in building socialism in the Soviet Union over several decades . Stalin's first attempt was under difficult circumstances, but he led important progress .
 There were many mistakes made in the Soviet Union under Stalin’s leadership, some of them grievous . But there were also many great achievements, including great achievements . The Soviet Union was one of the most successful countries in the world .
 Stalin had basically undone a great deal of Leninism in the international communist movement . Stalin's role in the building of socialism in the Soviet Union led to the collapse of Stalinism, says historian .
 Lenin had said that the model for a communist should not be a trade union secretary but a “tribune of the people” someone who exposes the system in all its manifestations . On that basis shows people the need for socialist revolution and leads people in that direction .
 Stalin made the model of a communist a good militant trade union leader, who talks about socialism . But, to a significant degree, Stalin made it a model for a communist . Stalin's model was that of a union leader who talks socialism .
 Stalin’s influence was not instant and immediate, but over a period of decades, that had been a significant aspect of Stalin‘s influence . Not instantly and immediately, he had been there for decades, he said . He added that Stalin had been influential over the years .
 "While we never abandoned the goal of revolution, nor failed to do agitation and propaganda about the need for revolution, socialism and ultimately communism" "These economist tendencies exerted a significant pull on us. And while we never look this up in its crudest form, or simply reduced our
 In World War 1, the Bolsheviks were literally the only socialist parly of a major power who held to and applied that internationalist and “revolutionary defeatist" position .
 Workers in the imperialist countries had actually gotten a stake in the fatherland after World War 1 . They'd won certain concessions, they’d formed trade unions and won more democratic rights . So they actually had . something to defend in the . fatherland .
 Stalin and the Communist International put forward in the period leading into World War 2 . The Soviet Union was invaded by Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union became a major battleground of the war .
 In other words, what we were getting from the international communist movement was contradictory, very sharply so in some important respects . The international Communist Party was contradictory in some respects, he says .
 We got the basic principles of communism, which we have kept and which have kept us going in a revolutionary direction . But we also got a lot of things that were corrosive of those correct communist principles, and they influenced us in the direction of trade unionism and even reformism .
 As Maoists we say, ‘things divide into two" - that is, into their contradictory parts, or aspects . You have to determine what is the principal and defining aspect, Maoists say .
 "We were correctly assessing this, in the main and in essence, even though our understanding was primitive, and even though it was significantly influenced by these negative tendencies," he said . "Even though our knowledge was primitive and our understanding of these tendencies was primitive," he added .
 Both of these holidays had been popularized and given expression throughout the world by the international communist movement . We revived these as communist traditions in the U.S.
 In 1970 the RU sponsored and organized the first International Women’s Day rally in San Francisco in many years . The RU organized a rally in 1970 .
 It was a real revival of this as a revolutionary holiday, which was taken to working women, as well as men in the working class, and to other sections of the people as well .
 As I recall, it was in Delores Park in San Francisco, and it was a powerful and moving, revolutionary International Women’s Day of several hundred people . Several hundred people attended the event .
 It consisted of theoretical and strategic analysis of the oppression of women and how it can only be ended through revolution and advancing to socialism and communism, as well as reports .
 In 1971, we had a May Day rally, and it was the first time that May Day had been taken to the working class, especially as a revolutionary holiday, in quite some lime . We had a rally in 1971, which was first time we had taken May Day to working class
 1 was mainly organizing in San Francisco for May Day, but the actual celebration was set for a park in Oakland . 1 moved to San Francisco at that time to help provide leadership for the RU as a whole in the Bay Area .
 "We came up the hill, and the road leveled off, and there was the park," she says . "We could see there were already a couple of hundred people gathering in the park"
 The Communist Party had to take revolution and socialism and socialism broadly to the working class, he says . So that was one of the fruits of our generally coming to a communist position, he adds .
 Going to China nder the influence of first Eldridge Cleaver and then, much more deeply, Leibel Bergman, I had really studied Mao .
 When I get into something, 1 like to get into it deeply , and this was no exception. When I . get into . something, I like to go deeply . This was an opportunity to get back into the story .
 The more I got into this, the more I began to get a sense of how you could make a revolution and prevent it from being sold out and betrayed . 1 was far from unique in this. But even more, what was compelling to me was that the more . 1 got into
 Tens of thousands of people in the U.S. and millions worldwide looked to China as a beacon . Millions of people had some sense of the importance of the Cultural Revolution .
 If you were living in the U.S. back then, the possibility that you could actually go there and see it for yourself didn’t seem in the offing, so to speak . But if you were . living in . the United States back then . back in the
 Nixon would make his first trip to China the next year, in ’72 . Henry Kissinger had made his secret trip to the country . Nixon would visit China the following year .
 A greater possibility of going to China was opening up in the U.S. because of the changes in the relationship with China, he says . He says he hopes to see more people in China in the future .
 Someone from the Young Lords Parly, Pablo Guzman, was also a part of this delegation of people that went to China in the fall of 1971 . Yoruba, who at that time called himself Yoruba .
 In fact, 1 think we actually left for this trip just before the Attica uprising came to a head with the bloodbath that occurred, unfortunately, when Governor Rockefeller called out the state troopers to put down the uprising . The state troopers murdered dozens of prisoners in cold blood and even killed
 There was still a lot of revolutionary upheaval going on at the same time as we were embarking on, and extremely excited about, this trip to China . remember we had to wail and wait and wait to go, and up to the last minute there was the question of whether the
 We took the long way around on an Air France plane that stopped in places like Athens, Cairo, and Karachi, which was then the capital of Pakistan .
 The anticipation and excitement was building up as we flew from one place to another, touching down for a few short hours, then taking off again . It reached a high peak as the plane came down over China .
 A large portrait of Mao greeted us at the airport in Canton, China . Then an airport came into view, I think it was in the city of Canton where we first landed .
 "Here we were finally, finally, in the People’s Republic of China," she said . "I was unbelievably excited—here we were, finally," she added .
 Big historical things were going on in China at the lime that hadn’t yet come to the surface . The struggle in the Chinese leadership was not yet known .
 Mao’s position was that China should stand up to the Soviet Union, but at the same time, and as part of that, it should try to deal with the Soviet threat partly by opening to the West and using that as a way of lining up forces .
 "We were coming in all excited, full of wide-eyed enthusiasm about going to China," he says . "We weren’t, by any means, fully aware of the struggle going on," he adds .
 Chinese government officials say they're going to do things differently this year . "Well, this year we’re going to go things a little differently," she says . "We’ve been here since October 1st," she adds .
 We were disappointed, because we weren’t going to be able to see Mao and masses of people in Tienanmen Square . We were all disappointed,’s father says. ‘We were disappointed. We weren't going to have been able to . see Mao
 You know, I laugh when 1 hear people talk about how everything is so tightly controlled in ‘totalitarian” societies, that the only source of information people have is the official government source .
 There was all this talk, rumors flying all around, among the Chinese people . Much of which proved to be rather accurate, says CNN.com .
 "I’d gone there full of almost naive enthusiasm, and then 1 was hit with this," says the author .
 "We got into these big arguments, because he was saying, “Oh that Mao—anybody gets close to him and down they go," he said . "Oh Mao," he added .
 He could see that Liu Shao-chi’s policies would weaken socialism and that, in fact, they would lead back to capitalism . So fine, criticize him and knock him down from his leadership position, which they did through the Cultural Revolution .
 Leibel started looking at things the way the bourgeoisie does, as if struggles among communist leaders are all just a matter of personal power trips and ego . Leibel was familiar with this outlook, even from his own limited experience, because within the RU .
 It took a while to win people to see that, no, there were important, fundamental issues that were being fought out, different lines that led in very different directions, and the outcome had real consequences .
 We’d won these new people in the RU to that understanding, but it took a while . Here was Leibel, taking the same kind of stance toward what was happening in China, even though he had a wealth of experience to enable him to know better .
 Mao had to knock down Mao, and so Mao has to knock him down . Mao was responding to him by saying, “That can’t be the issue—just that somebody gels close to Mao, gets too powerful,” he said .
 1 was shocked not only to hear about this struggle in China but also to see indications that Leibel was abandoning a Marxist approach and falling into bourgeois theories and bourgeois theories in confronting what was happening in China .
 Of course, those on this delegation had all gone to China with great enthusiasm . But they were disappointed with the outcome of the visit .
 We wanted to see first-hand this vibrant revolutionary socialist society . The Cultural Revolution was going on and the Red Guards were going out to the countryside and linking up with the peasants .
 Six-week trip only lasted six weeks, but we did get to witness many of these great transformations . And within the limits of what you can do on a trip of this kind, we did witness many great transformations.
 "Even though 1 had been hit with this whole Lin Biao thing, 1 nevertheless continued to have tremendous enthusiasm for what I was seeing and learning there," he said . "I continued to be very enthusiastic and very enthusiastic," he added .
 "We had a lot of discussions with people, and we visited a number of different places in the country," says the author of the book . "We were able to talk to people in different parts of the country"
 We went, for example, to one of the rural areas, where they had built the Red Flag Canal . We went to the rural area, where the canal was built .
 A commune of people would have irrigation for their farmland, rather than just one or a few villages closest to where the river ran . They were diverting a river through a mountain so that a whole, larger commune, would benefit from the diversion .
 We talked to the Iron Women’s Team that had drilled through this mountain . They told us how they had lowered themselves, on cables, down a sharp rock face, so they could plant dynamite to blast through the mountain .
 This was in a society where, only a couple of decades before that, it would have been impossible to imagine people doing something like that . Only a few decades before, it was impossible to conceive of women doing anything like that, and especially women .
 We felt the whole spirit of ‘serve the people’ that was popularized throughout the society . We saw living examples of revolutionary transformations. We felt it was a living example of revolutionary transformation.
 We'd come upon situations where men and women would be engaging in friendly competition to do things like sweeping up in the house . We’d come into situations where . men and . women would engage in . friendly competition .
 China came from a feudal society less than Going to China 25. twenty-five years before that, and here you had these big changes in the relations between men and women. Again, you think about China .
 This captured both the ‘serve the people” spirit and the pervasiveness of the changes that were going on between men and women . Even though this was a small example, in a sense, many backward ideas and practices still persisted .
 We would have discussions in factories with workers who were reading Engels’ Anti-Duhring, which is a major theoretical work of Marxism, and who were . reading other works of Marxist philosophy and . debating all these big questions .
 Party members and administrative personnel from the factory, together with workers selected from the shop floor, made up the committee that led the whole factory . In a number of factories, members of what they called “three-in-one leadership committees,” or revolutionary committees, they said
 This was a very exciting development and a whole new thing even in the history of socialism, let alone in contrast with what goes on in capitalist society . This was an exciting development, and it was very new to the socialist world, says David Cameron . Cameron: "This is a very
 China has instituted the practice of doing anesthesia with acupuncture . The practice was instituted as a result of the Cultural Revolution .
 The Cultural Revolution was being spread throughout the countryside, where the vast majority of Chinese people live . The delegation went to three or four operations for things like stomach cancer . They were integrating traditional practices from Chinese culture into an overall system of medicine .
 China was still a backward country, it was only a few decades from feudalism and domination by imperialism . For generations and centuries, the masses of people in the countryside were barely hanging on and millions were regularly starving, even in the ‘better’ years .
 Things like movies and other cultural productions were known in the cities, although even those were overwhelmingly for the elite, well-to-do Chinese and foreigners . Almost none of this existed in the countryside before the revolution .
 Film projectors are being used to spread revolutionary culture in the countryside . The film projectors were being used by people on bicycles to spread socialist culture .
 Beginning in the late 1960s, the Soviet Union was developing plans, it seems, for a major attack on China, including perhaps perhaps the use of tactical nuclear weapons . The Soviets were developing plans to attack China in the 1960s .
 Chinese hosts took us through these air raid shelters that they had in Peking and other cities, including Peking . "Vast networks of air raids shelters under the city. I remember that our Chinese hosts . They had taken us through [Peking] and other places, vast networks
 This threat was very real—and increasingly it was coming from the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union was a threat to the U.S. in the 1950s and '60s . The threat was real, but it was growing, and increasingly coming from Russia .
 Lin Biao argued against an opening to the West and insisted that they should more or less conciliate with the Soviet Union . This set the context for what became a big struggle within the Chinese party, he says .
 Mao was still acknowledged as the ultimate leader of not only the parly but the army as well . Lin Biao was the Defense Minister, and he was formally the head of the army . Mao was acknowledged as a leader of both the army and the military .
 The army was led by the party, so really the party—and Mao, as the head of the party -- were the leaders of the army .
 While the army played largely a political role through the Cultural Revolution, it was after all the army, and after a certain point there was a tendency for the country to be turned into an army camp .
 'The whole society had the feel too much of an army camp. Not that they had guns pointed at everybody’s head, but from what a number of people have said, the whole society felt too much like a camp. The whole society, including those of the young,
 In the revolutionary days, when China was a socialist country, they didn’t have saluting and yes-sirring and all that absolute authority of officers . They didn't have all those stripes and fruit salad .
 Still, you don’t want the whole society to be run even like a revolutionary army . You don't want to run the entire society to run like a revolution army, he says .
 Mao said it was lime to move away from that, and to reduce the role of the army in everyday life and in the political affairs of society . At a certain point in the Cultural Revolution, Mao said that it was moving away from the army and society .
 "All these different issues were being fought out, and they’d just come to a head when we got there," he said . "They’ll just come out of the head when they got there. All these issues were fighting out,’he said .
 "I was tremendously inspired by these real-life transformations that we were seeing all over the country. On the one hand, I was tremendously . On the other hand, we were tremendously inspired," she says . "I'm very proud of the people that we're seeing in this country
 October 1st celebration in Tienanmen Square was canceled . "But, at the same time, I was learning about all this struggle that was coming to a head," she says .
 A Lesson 1 also got a lesson in what we communists call democratic centralism . The way in which issues, including differences within the party, are discussed and struggled out through the channels of the party .
 Lin Biao died in an apparent attempt to flee the country . He was found dead in apparent effort to flee China . He says he learned when he went back to China a few years later .
 This had happened by the time we arrived in China just before October 1st, 1971 . This was the first time we had been in China since 1971 . We were in China at the beginning of the year .
 Mao and Lin Biao were still being presented as close comrades . So we would go to a museum, for example, in a remote rural area, and here was a picture of Mao and . right next to that a . picture of Lin . Biao .
 Lin Biao was no longer considered to be Chairman Mao’s closest comrade-inarms and successor . Of course, at that point, Lin Bao was considered a successor .
 Lin Biao is being hailed in China as one of the world's most famous women . But that hadn’t gotten out to this remote rural area, so translators were dutifully translating all this talk about him .
 1 learned a great lesson from that about the correct way and the correct channels and means through which you do things, and the systematic way in which they do them, so you don’t have a parly degenerate into factions, and become a bunch of bourgeois cliques .
 "It is not a matter of keeping things from the people, but of finding the way that they can take them up systematically and dig into them deeply," he said .
 It was quite a jolt to learn this about Lin Biao, to be there less than a week and be confronted with this reality . But it was also quite a shock to learn that he didn't agree with the approach that Leibel was falling into .
 It didn't make sense to me that something of this magnitude could be reduced to just a matter of ego and personal power struggles . I wanted to know what the fundamental issues were. It didn’t make sense .
 "I wanted to know what was in contention, what were the different programs that different forces were fighting for," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Former England captain says he had a 'beginning sense' of how things go in the Rugby League . He had been through this kind of experience within the RU, in our struggle with the Franklins, he says .
 There are fundamental differences about the direction that people think things need to take, and what policies are needed to deal with what people are confronting . I won't say that ego never plays any part in it .
 I was trying to figure this out, in terms of what had happened in China, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "I was trying ... to figure out what happened," he says .
 It wasn’t discouraging to me, but it was a jolt and it immediately caused me to come to grips with the fact that all this is more complex than I’d understood up to that point .
 Running Into Huey: "All these exciting and inspiring things were going on at the same lime as I was learning about the complexity of it" "Running into Huey"
 As it turned out, Huey Newton was on a trip to China at the same time as our delegation . Huey was on the same trip as the delegation .
 "I was developing a friendship with Yoruba at that time," he says . "There were a lot of things we could talk about that we had in common, as well as some experiences"
 Huey Newton spotted walking around in a park in Peking, China, during a visit to Peking . The former NFL star was spotted in the park while in China .
 "We had developed our differences with the Panther Parly, and things were even a bit strained, but 1 knew Leibel was right. As 1 have discussed earlier, we had discussed earlier . We had developed their differences with each other, and we had developed differences with them .
 Yoruba wanted to go meet with Huey, too, because he’d always looked to Huey as a revolutionary leader and admired him . Yoruba said he wanted to meet Huey because he had always admired him. Huey was a leader of the South .
 "We arranged to go over to Huey's room where he was staying. So we approached Huey and approached him," he says . "We were able to get him to his room," he adds .
 It didn't feel like the same Huey Newton as he did at the start of the season . But as we were silting in Huey’s room talking, it didn’t feel like a different Huey .
 This was a very painful experience for me, because it just reminded me that this was not the Huey Newton that I had known and learned so much from a few years before . This was just a painful experience, because of the pain it brought back to me .
 "Just beneath the surface was a very troubled person, who did not seem comfortable in his own skin" "It seemed to me that, while he was doing his best to maintain a friendly and cool exterior," she says .
 The Chinese gave us their explanation for why they opposed the creation of Bangladesh in what had been East Pakistan . The Chinese were opposed to a separate separate state of Bangladesh .
 In essence, they were supporting the ruling class in Pakistan in forcibly and brutally attempting to suppress the breakaway of Bangladesh, which, partly because of the intervention of India, Pakistan was ultimately unable to prevent . India was ultimately forced to prevent the Bangladesh breakaway .
 We listened to this explanation and then, when we got back to the U.S., a number of us actually worked on a pamphlet that put forward the Chinese explanation, and we tried to defend it as best we could . Now this was a big, controversial issue in the movement around
 Chinese support for this oppressive government in Sudan, which had brutally repressed the opposition, was also discussed . "We tried to explain that too, on the basis of what the Chinese had told us," she said. "And there were also other issues, like other issues"
 The Chinese position came down to opposing whatever the Soviet Union was supporting . But basically the Chinese position was that of opposing whatever Soviet Union supported .
 India was a long-standing enemy of the Chinese revolution and there had been border clashes where India made incursions into Chinese territory . The Soviet Union had aligned itself to a significant degree with the Indian ruling class as part of an encirclement .
 China’s actions were dictated by a certain kind of realpolitik , to be honest, which was based on seeking to prevent their own country from being attacked, and dismembered, by the Soviet Union .
 "We actually got drawn into the logic of what they were putting forward —and so we publicly, and even somewhat aggressively, defended this" "We became convinced by their rationalizations"
 We put out this pamphlet and distributed it within the broader movement, and we boldly argued for it, and I guess it had some influence . The pamphlet was distributed within the movement and distributed to the broader .
 China was making errors in the face of very real threats and dangers, the authors said . But these arguments were really not defensible, they said .
 It was not a minor matter that you had the U.S., which was still antagonistic toward China as a socialist country, despite the Nixon visits . The Soviet Union, right on the border with China, regarded it as a thorn in its side and a threat .
 China had to deal with 'real threats and dangers' that China faced, he says . "These were very real threats," he adds . "So these were real threats, dangers that China must deal with"
 There was a genuine mass upsurge of people against the highly oppressive and brutally repressive rule of Pakistan . Nevertheless, the positions they took, and still more the rationalizations they developed, they were wrong .
 The Chinese were making errors and that we should not join in seeking to rationalize those errors . So we learned through that, we summed up fairly soon after that this was wrong, that the Chinese are making errors .
 We learned the importance of thinking critically, not blindly accepting or following anything, even in relation to China, which remained, despite some errors it was making, a genuine source of inspiration and strength for the whole revolutionary movement around the world .
 "We returned to the United States with an even greater determination to carry forward the revolutionary struggle and even deeper confidence in our cause," he says .
 I went back lo the United States and the Bay Area . Chapter Thirteen Consolidating the Revolutionary Union . I went to the U.S. and Bay Area.
 It became increasingly clear that we needed to establish a national leadership that wouldn’t be just what had grown up sort of “organically” in the Bay Area, but would be more able to act as a leadership for the whole country .
 The RU has established its headquarters and leadership in Chicago . The organization will be headquartered in Chicago, Illinois .
 The RU already had organization in Chicago, but we decided that it was necessary for me, and a few others, to make this move to Chicago . We decided to move in order to strengthen the RU as a national organization and in its ability to contribute lo the formation of a new v
 We didn't see ourselves as immediately moving to build the new parly, however, however. We didn’t see ourselves immediately moving . We’s not moving immediately, however .
 We thought there still needed to be a period where those who were basing themselves on communist principles accumulated more experience in applying that in practice, in taking it to the working class .
 1 moved to Chicago in the spring of 1972, and this was a big move for me . 1 moved into Chicago in 1972 .
 The Bay Area native recalls how dirty the city was when he was visiting Chicago in the '60s .
 It was a gritty, industrial city, and you could smell it from twenty miles away . It was also a gritty industrial city. It was the city where it lived in .
 We got one of these deals where you gel somebody’s car that they'd left in one part of the country and basically you could drive it back for them for free . You could drive somebody's car back for free.
 The owner of this car lived near Detroit, in Grosse Point, Michigan, but he’d left his Lincoln Continental in the Bay Area . So we drove it to Chicago, then drove it back to Michigan, and then dropped off the other person who was with me .
 I delivered this car to this exclusive residence in Grosse Point, where I couldn’t even get inside the guard gate . The car was delivered to an exclusive residence, where he couldn't even get into the gate gate .
 1 hadn't yet gotten an apartment in Chicago, so I didn’t have a place to stay . 1 turned his car over to him, and then got on the bus to downtown Detroit, and from Detroit took a bus back to Chicago .
 Although there were RU members in the Chicago area, 1 didn't know too many of them yet . 1 didn’t have their phone numbers or their addresses for the most part .
 I knew the general area of the city that DH lived in, so I took the “el” train up to that area and when 1 got close I called, to let him know my situation and ask if 1 could slay with him . When 1 got near, I called
 "Stuck out in the street at midnight at midnight, nowhere to go and no one else I could contact very easily," she says . "So here I was—stuck out at midnight," she recalls .
 "I walked over to his house, carrying a suitcase, and I could see that there were some lights on. knocked on his door," he said . "It was a great day for him, and he was very happy to be there"
 'I wandered around, feeling increasingly uneasy, because I was caught between whoever is out in the street at that time of night, doing whatever they are doing, on the one hand, and the pigs on the other hand. So I wandered around. I felt increasingly uneasy . So I
 "I had just enough money to gel a cab, and I went out to Maywood, west of the city," she says . " DH let me wander around in the streets in this kind of frankly desperate situation for hours," she writes .
 1 got an apartment in Maywood, a suburb a few miles west of Chicago . After a short time, 1 got a short-term apartment . The apartment is located in a suburb of Maywood .
 Maywood was about half Black and half white, and a very proletarian town . Maywood is a very interesting suburb of Maywood, California .
 Maywood also had this high school, Proviso East, about a mile from where I lived, that usually had a good basketball team, so 1 liked that, too .
 For three years while 1 was there Glen Rivers, who later played and then coached in the NBA, was on their team . Glen Rivers was on the team for three years .
 1 started hanging out there and 1 would play ball with some of the guys who were on the high school team or who had just graduated . I went to a lot of their games . Also found out where the playgrounds were that had good basketball, and 1 started playing .
 The negative side was that, in this midwestern setting, the town would like roll up the sidewalks at 9 o’clock . "The negative side of this is that it’s not easy for the town to roll up its sidewalks," she says .
 "I was used to a little more night life than that," she says of her career . She says she was 'used to be used to being used to having more vitality'
 Maywood had playgrounds with good basketball where he could hang out, he says . But the fact that Maywood's playgrounds made it easier for him to gel to know a number of people, and that kind of eased the transition .
 There were mainly Black people living in the apartment building 1 first moved into, but the discrimination was very blatant . 1 had no references or anything, and still I got the apartment. didn’t have a job at the time, 1 had . no references .
 If you were Black and wanted to live in that apartment building, you had to have employment and references, and so on. But 1 later found out that if you were ... Black, you would have to be employed, have references and have references .
 1 moved into this apartment and the unfortunate people living underneath were this working class Black couple . They both had jobs and they both had to leave early for work . The couple was a working class couple .
 When I first moved into the apartment above them, l didn't have much money, I couldn’t afford much furniture, and I certainly couldn't afford rugs in the apartment, she says .
 "I would have people over, and sometimes we would talk loudly, the way you do when you have a bunch of people all together," she says . "Sometimes we would have a lot of people over"
 "We would walk on the bare Boors right above these people who were trying to sleep, because they had to gel up early to go to work," she says .
 "I think I had been vacuuming the Boor, and obviously it was making a big racket. Finally one day one day, one of them came up and knocked on my door," she says .
 He went on to say that 1 was making a terrible racket and they couldn’t rest, and a lot of limes I kept them awake at night, and it was disrupting their whole rhythm, he said . He added that 1 of the limes he kept the pair awake
 When you drank this it just tasted like a real sweet fruit drink, then all of a sudden it would sneak up and lower the boom on you . When you drink this it tasted like an alcoholic drink .
 "I think DH wanted to get me drunk to see what would come out of me when 1 was in that state," she says . "He was that kind of an opportunist, with a real hustler streak," she adds .
 The more I drank these “black pearls,” and the more they affected me, the more I started talking, with unrestrained enthusiasm, about how great socialism was going to be, he says . But the more he drank the more, he started talking about socialism .
 "Things started getting really loud and raucous. Then, about two in the morning, after we had been drinking these “black pearls” for quite a while, things started getting loud . We were drinking the pearls at about 2:30 a.m.
 “Home Before Dark” and Jerry, who were both very big, started wrestling in his apartment, in a mainly friendly way . They were out in the hallway wrestling, and then, all of a sudden, my apartment door was open and they were out .
 1 was on the second floor, and there was this railing at the edge of the stairs and then a little space behind the railing where the wall was . And then, worse yet, they tumbled down the stairs .
 "Home Before Dark" went crashing through the railing and fell a whole floor down on his back, while Jerry was teetering there, about ready to fall . Jerry was helping him get back away from the edge of the railing .
 He was so drunk that he actually wasn’t badly hurt, just a little bit bruised . Ironically, because he was . so drunk, it turned out that he was actually not badly hurt . He actually wasn't badly hurt.
 "I felt badly about that, and it didn’t exactly improve my relations with my neighbors," he says . "But stepping back from this a bit, the whole thing was sort of funny," he adds .
 Fred Hampton was from Maywood, Chicago, and he had led the Panthers in the Chicago area . Hampton was a member of the Chicago-area Panthers .
 Mark Clark and Mark Clark were murdered by the pigs in Chicago in December 1969 . Mark Clark was one of the men who were killed by pigs .
 The newspapers and the authorities had put out this story that the Panthers were the aggressors, that they’d fired on the police and the police were only firing back in self-defense . The Panthers were not aggressors. They were only the police, the Panthers said .
 The Panthers led tours of people through the apartment where Fred Hampton and Mark Clark were shot . They showed that all the bullet holes were made by bullets coming from the outside in . What police and media claimed were bullet holes from inside out were actually nail holes .
 When 1 got to Chicago, 1 discovered, not surprisingly, that all the comrades in the RU had been influenced and inspired by Fred Hampton . Hampton was tremendously devastated by the way in which he was murdered .
 "Fred Hampton was a very positive one overall overall," says former player . "Even though we had developed differences with the Panthers, the influence of Fred Hampton was very positive," he says .
 He would openly proclaim that he was an all-lhe-way proletarian revolutionary . "He would popularize that stance," he would say .
 By the time I moved to the Chicago area, it was several years after he had been murdered, and the Panther organization wasn’t at the high point that it had been while he was alive, although there were still Panthers in that area . Some people who had been in the
 When people saw how he was just shot down in cold blood by the police, this caused even more people to make the leap to becoming revolutionaries . The police were just shooting him down, and he was shot down by them, police .
 The RU had taken up the orientation that you have to go to the working class . As I referred to earlier, from the international communist movement the RU had . taken up an orientation that the . working class is a key part of the communist movement .
 There was the positive side, and the main aspect of things, which was that we were taking revolution, and socialism and communism, to the working class, to working class . Black workers, Latino workers, white workers, and so on. There was a positive side .
 A lot of what we refer to as “economist” tendencies, tendencies toward narrowing the struggle of the working class to its own more immediate and narrow interests . On the other hand, our understanding of that and how to do that was colored by a lot of the influences that
 There were things of an explicitly communist character in them, but that wasn't their level of unity . There were articles about China, for example, as well as supporting revolutionary struggles around the world, including the Vietnamese people’s struggle against United States imperialism .
 We were mainly directing these newspapers to the workers in the factories, although we did sell them more broadly . We would sell them at demonstrations as well as in different neighborhoods . We were mostly directing them to workers in factories .
 This reflected the fact that, on the one hand, we had a national organization, but we hadn’t yet developed it to the point where it could put out a single newspaper that would be a unified voice and instrument, if you want to put it that way .
 These local newspapers had generally the same perspective, but they wouldn’t always have exactly the same take on different issues that arose, or they would all emphasize the same things at the same lime .
 The strength is that we were able to speak to local issues more, and there was a certain diversity that was good . The strength of the team was that it was able to focus on local issues, she said. The strength was that we could speak to locals more, she added .
 Monthly papers could not make an analysis of key issues in a timely way, because they were monthly papers . They didn't have a unified analysis coming out from a single center that the whole organization could pull together around .
 We were also continuing to work in the anti-war movement and among the students, although this was after the big upsurge of the ’60s, and after Kent State and Jackson State, the student movement was not on the same mass scale as before .
 There were still broad sections of students and youth who in various ways were in rebellion against the system, and we were trying to relate to that . Our focus was on going to the workers in the factories and taking revolution, socialism and communism to them, as best as we understood that .
 We didn't want to be, in effect, pre-empting some things by declaring a leader, in a public way at least . So we didn’t want to . be . pre-pre-empted some things . We wanted to be ... not, by declaring
 Developing theory—actually applying Marxism to the questions we faced, was essential at this point, says Julian Zelizer . "Developing theory" was essential, says Zelizer. "It was essential to develop theory," he says .
 In the movement of that time, no one had yet made a thorough and thoroughly correct analysis of this question . The question is still unanswered today, but it is still relevant today, says author .
 Other forces had gone with a view that focused almost exclusively on the privileges that had been granted to white workers as the heart of the matter . This was the "white-skin privilege” line .
 A few groups tried to claim the situation of Black people still fit into the 1928 resolution of the Comintern (Communist International), which characterized Black people as primarily peasants and said that the heart of their struggle revolved around their right to self-determination . By 1972 it was badly out
 A great need existed to arrive at a correct analysis of this decisive question . So clearly a great need exists, says the author of the book .
 It had a big impact within the RU but also in the movement more broadly . A lot of people and groups united with it, and there was also a lot of criticism and debate . This was one of the most important ways in which 1 was providing leadership at that time .
 The “Guardian forums,” which took place during this general period, were also part of the “pre-party ferment” that was going on .
 They were sponsored by the Guardian newspaper and billed as party-building forums . The forums are billed as part of a party building process .
 "We saw this Loo as an important arena to address and a way to sharpen up the big questions in the movement. We saw this as a way of addressing the big question," says Toni Morrison .
 The Guardian actually represented a form of “revisionism-lite,” 1 guess you could say . The Guardian represented a sort of ‘revisionist-lite’
 "Many people were obviously disgusted by that. I talked earlier about how the CP openly and viciously attacked the Panthers, for example, and many people are obviously disgusted with that," he said .
 The Guardian represented a slightly more left version of fundamentally the same politics . But the Guardian represented the Guardian's own version of the same .
 The RCP has held to this essential position ever since . It has modified and deepened its analysis as it has learned more and developed . RCP: "The RCP's analysis has never been wrong"
 One of the RU comrades spoke at one of the events . Other comrades also spoke at others . So we took part in these events .
 These forums were a part of the sorting out, if you will, of different lines . From our point of view, it was part of drawing a clear line of demarcation between real communism and phony communism . “revisionism” means revising the revolutionary heart out
 The RU did begin a monthly newspaper, Revolution, shortly after we set up our national headquarters in Chicago . Although we didn’t have a weekly newspaper at that time, the RU did .
 Revolution both wrote about struggles going on and tried to put them in a revolutionary context, and also did exposure of the imperialist system and carried out polemics with other trends and organized forces in the movement, and addressed important theoretical issues .
 This too became a critical element in our all-round efforts of the time. So this too became an important part of our efforts to get the best out of the world . We are proud to be able to do so, and we are proud of our achievements in our history .
 George McGovern came on the scene as a presidential candidate running on a promise to get the U.S. out of Vietnam . McGovern ran for president in 1972, but died in 1972 .
 Many people who had been drawn into supporting the ‘peace candidate” Eugene McCarthy or then Bobby Kennedy in the ’68 election had since become totally alienated from the bourgeois electoral process and become much more radicalized .
 In 1972, the McGovern campaign was drawing a lot of people in the movement back into the bourgeois electoral framework . But, in 1972, many of those who hadn’t moved to a full revolutionary position, but even some who had been inclined to that way, were drawn back
 We didn’t just say, “oh, McGovern, he’s a bourgeois candidate, end of discussion.” 1 personally agonized over this a lot; I did a lot of reading, a lot study, trying to understand in a general sense what
 "I came to the conclusion, and the RU as a whole was won to the position, that we should not support McGovern," he says . Whether or not the Vietnamese people would prevail in this war would not be determined on the basis of whether McGovern or Nixon got elected,
 In fact, Nixon was re-elected in a landslide, and a lot of people who were drawn into the McGovern campaign got very demoralized by that . Nixon was elected in 1972 .
 In January of 1973, the agreement was signed which began the withdrawal of the United States from Vietnam . And yet, within a few months after Nixon’s re-election, even though Nixon ordered a Christmas-time escalation of the bombing in Vietnam, the withdrawal began in January of
 The idea that only by electing McGovern could the Vietnamese people prevail and could the U.S. be forced out of Vietnam was proven to be completely wrong . So this whole idea was proven wrong, he says .
 "We had to study and wrangle deeply with this to come to a basic understanding of what was correct and would really represent the upholding of our internationalist responsibilities," says the British ambassador .
 Through that process, we united the RU around the position of “Victory through our struggle not through the elections,” says one of its leaders .
 "We actually wrestled very deeply with the concrete situation, as well as the larger questions that this was bound up with, to figure out what stand to lake. We actually wrestle very deeply" "We were very concerned about the situation, and it was very difficult to think how to
 So we "stood aside" from the elections in the sense of not supporting one candidate or another . So we “stood aside” from the election in the way we did not support one candidate .
 "Life is always changing, and you have to examine things in real life and not have a dogmatic approach," he says .
 Leibel came forward when Nixon started gelling in trouble, and there was a real question of whether he’d be impeached, or forced to resign . Leibel said Nixon was in trouble when Watergate broke out, and Nixon was impeached .
 He came up with the idea that we should pul forward the slogan “Throw the Bum Out, Organize to Fight,” which is what we did . The slogan was "Throw the bum out, organize to fight"
 If you take that kind of stand in the context of an election, you’re saying hold your nose and vote for a Democrat, whether you say it openly and explicitly or not . But if you do it, you're saying holding your nose, and voting for the Democrat,
 "When you do that, you essentially pul people in a passive, politically disarmed position," he says . "You're essentially pulging people into a passive position. And when that's not, you're effectively disenfranchising them," he adds .
 This was taking advantage of a conflict that was becoming very acute within the ruling class, in order to advance our struggle, says Leninist leader .
 By the end of 1972 we had made important progress in consolidating the RU as a national organization and laying the basis to form a genuine communist party . The RU was founded in 1972, but it was never fully formed as a party .
 An important aspect of this was a developing unity with other revolutionary groups . An important part was the development of unity with the Communist Party of Yugoslavia .
 This unity would pose new opportunities and challenges, though not precisely the ones we anticipated, says President Obama . This unity could pose new challenges, he says, but not exactly the ones he anticipated .
 In the early 1970s, we in the RU continued to work toward the development of a single multinational revolutionary communist party . A key part of that was focused in our efforts to link up with and unite, and struggle, with other forces that had come out of the different streams of the
 Yoruba from the Young Lords Parly had gone with our delegation to China . Among the most important of these streams were the struggles of the oppressed nationalities—Black people, Puerto Ricans, Chicanos, Native Americans, Asians .
 There was the Black Workers Congress, which grew out of the development of revolutionary organization among Black workers in Detroit . The Congress organized Black revolutionaries in other parts of the U.S.
 At this time, the Black Workers Congress was moving more fully in the direction of taking up Marxism and Maoism . The Black Workers' Congress too was taking up Maoism at this time .
 "We united around this as a common objective. And through the course of discussion, we united," she said .
 Liaison Committee had a significant effect in mobilizing masses of people, including around revolutionary May Day, but also in other struggles that were going on, on various fronts .
 There were a lot of contradictions that were yet to be fully confronted, and would have to be struggled through in order to unify all these forces into a single party . But within this there were a number of contradictions, says Labour leader .
 CNN's John Sutter sat down to discuss the national question . He says it was not surprising given the nature of U.S. society, the question was national . Sutter: "It's not surprising that one of the main questions on the table was national question"
 These were questions that the whole movement was confronting, and contradictions and conflicting views on these crucial questions remained within the broader framework of unity that was being forged in practice and in theory within the National Liaison Committee .
 I have to say that an important question arose when we were deciding who should represent the RU in this National Liaison Committee . Here I have a say that I have been asked to explain why I chose to be in this committee .
 DH joined the RU during our national tour in 1970 . He was pushing that he should be the RU representative on the Liaison Committee . He joined the rugby union during the national tour of the 1970s .
 Leibel was opposed to this, on what I later came to see was a correct and important basis . Leibel, interestingly enough, was opposing this, and it was on a correct basis .
 Revolutionaries of different nationalities were confronting the question of how to develop closer working relations and ideological and political unity . Revolutionaries faced the question: How to form a society of nations .
 People who had come out of a more nationalist framework and had then taken up Marxism were confronting what it means to be working in a common way with white people who had become communists . People who came from a nationalist framework were confronted .
 Leibel was arguing that we should confront this straight up, and that I should be the representative to the Liaison Committee . Leibel: "I should be a representative to [the Liaison] Committee"
 "Let’s get it right out there by having me there as the RU representative," he says . "Let's work together and work through this issue as part of the broader struggle"
 "Let’s not make it more complicated by adding the factor of myself, as a white communist, being the RU representative," she said . "I’m not making this more complicated."
 As it turned out, DH didn’t put forward our line, he put forward a rank reactionary nationalist line . Not even a revolutionary nationalist line, not even revolutionary nationalist lines .
 He was sort of a combination of a pseudo-communist revisionist from the CP and a very narrow, reactionary nationalist . He was a lot of racism and chauvinism toward other nationalities .
 There was tension because people who are not while have a lot of negative experience with while people, even white people who seem on a certain level to be friendly or comradely . But the other, and more fundamental, problem was that, even though everybody had moved to a position of considering
 Leibel was right to put me in the Liaison Committee as the RU representative, to confront this problem and struggle through in that context, rather than seeking to avoid or “soften’t this contradiction by having DH be the RU rep. Leibel said .
 I was confused about this and didn’t join with Leibel’s more correct approach, we ended up with DH as the RU representative . But, partly because of this, it was partly due to the fact that the World Cup was being held in England, Ireland and
 As it turned out, there was a lot of forward motion through the Liaison Committee . "As it turns out, it was a very good day for the U.S. Congresswoman," she said .
 The question was whether in the communist movement, and within the party that was to be formed, there needed to be some formal ‘guarantees’ or builtin structures to make sure that the Black people and people of other oppressed nationalities wouldn’t be sold out
 Just having people of a particular nationality in leadership, or having a majority of leadership drawn from the oppressed nationalities, doesn’t provide a guarantee that you will stay on the revolutionary road . No guarantee against selling out, as bitter experience shows .
 Staying on the revolutionary road is a matter of struggle—struggle to grasp, and win people to, a revolutionary line and to forge ahead on that basis .
 The problem is that seeking illusory “guarantees” of that kind, based on percentages of different nationalities in leadership and so on, undercuts the actual and essential struggle to grasp and apply the correct line .
 The “correct line” isn’t some abstract dogmatic notion; it involves developing your understanding in a living sense of the actual problems that you’re up against in making revolution and how you solve those problems . The "correct line" is not some abstract notion
 Questions and challenges of this kind are very acutely posed, particularly in a country like the U.S. All these are big questions that don’t get resolved on the basis of having so many people of one nationality or another in leadership, but can only be resolved by struggling to
 Party could be a communist vanguard out of this whole revolutionary upsurge that had occurred through the period of the 1960s into the early ’70s . Grasping and uniting around the correct understanding and orientation toward all this was the leap and rupture that needed to be
 This was the stumbling block that the leaders of the BWC and the PRRWO could not get over or did not leap beyond . And this was the rupture they would not or could not make, they say .
 They insisted that not only in the broader movement, but also institutionalized within the parly itself, you had to have structures in which a certain number of people, and even a majority, would be of the oppressed nationalities . To supposedly guarantee that they wouldn’t be sold
 Ideologically, this represented not rupturing with nationalism, it represented the expression of nationalism within a communist organization . It represented an undermining of the principles on which a . communist organization has to be based, he said .
 In the United States, one of the key factors in making a revolution is developing the struggle, including among white people, to take on and uproot the whole history of oppression of Black people, Puerto Ricans, Chicanos, Native Americans, Asians, and so on .
 "You are never going to make a revolution in this country without that being central and pivotal," he says . "You're never . going to have a revolution without that," he adds .
 A scientific approach to these questions will be required to make revolution, he says . But you’re also never going to make a revolution without a vanguard that bases itself on a scientific approach, he writes .
 This is what we were confronting at the lime of the National Liaison Committee . This is the problem we faced at the meeting of the committee .
 This is what we, in the RU, were fighting for as the basis on which the party and its leadership had to be unified, whatever particular individuals made up that leadership . This was the basis for the unity of the party, which is what the RU was fighting for . This is
 The BWC and PRRWO were still a mixture of communism and nationalism . And this is what the leaders of the BWC balked at . This is what they said was what they were doing .
 We criticized tendencies in our own work to limit our work with while workers to trade-union issues, and among Black workers to tail . We criticized some tendencies to just go along with and not challenge—and to confuse that with communist consciousness, we said .
 Both of these tendencies expressed a lack of faith in the ability of workers, whether oppressed nationality or white, to grasp their interests as a class . Not in a narrow sense, but as the class whose mission it is to do away with capitalism and abolish class divisions altogether .
 We also criticized a tendency that we had fallen into, to in effect put off the question of actually building the parly, and we said that now the different approaches had pretty much sorted themselves out and it was time to move more seriously towards an actual plan to build that party .
 Of course, these problems weren’t limited to us, and we gave this internal bulletin to the other organizations in the Liaison Committee as well, with the hopes of generating struggle with them .
 "Well, it did generate struggle, but of a rather antagonistic character," says the author of the book . "It was a struggle of struggle," she says .
 When this didn’t happen right away, they began casting about for something else “that would work,” and began pushing for a more nationalist approach . This is not the first time this has happened, and it's not the second time it has happened .
 They argued that they needed to build up their base before a party could be formed . 1 spoke to earlier, thinking that combining more nationalism into their communism was the way to do that . They argued they needed a party before they could form .
 In this we were drawing from the history of the Russian revolutionary movement. In this was drawing from history, we were drawn from history of Russia . We were drawing on history of Russian revolutionary movements.
 Russia, before the revolution, was called “the prisonhouse of nations,” because there were so many nations and different national minorities that were oppressed under the regime of the Czar . The Czar's regime was known for oppression of national minorities .
 Within the socialist movement in Czarist Russia there was a group based among Jewish workers that called itself the Bund . It wanted to be part of the overall socialist movement but said that it had a special role in upholding and protecting the interests of Jewish workers .
 He said communists have to base themselves on the interests of the proletariat as a whole . He pointed out that communists must base on the interest of the whole .
 The goal of socialism and communism is what all communists, of whatever nationality, must base themselves on, he says . Trying to have different communist organizations that see themselves as upholding the particular interests of a particular oppressed group within the proletariat would lead back to nationalism .
 This same basic line was finding expression within our movement, specifically within the Liaison Committee . Now this same basic . line is finding expression in our movement and specifically within our Liaisons Committee .
 DH, who was supposed to be representing our line, was actually pushing this nationalist line within the RU . This struggle also erupted very sharply in the RU because of DH's role in promoting it on the Liaison Committee .
 We insisted on the need to unify on the basis of analyzing reality as it actually is, in all its complexity and changingness, as the common scientific method and approach .
 BWC and PRRWO saw this kind of method and approach as a fetter . After the painful break-up of the Liaison Committee, they thought they would roar ahead on the basis of what was objectively a combination of pseudo Marxist and revolutionary nationalism .
 "The movement of the ’60s had ebbed, and it wasn’t going to be continuing forward on a high tide in the way it had" "nobody could predict when there would be another high tide," she says .
 BWC and PRRWO clung to and refused to rupture with their attempt to eclectically combine nationalism with a Marxism that was becoming more and more dogmatic, they didn’t go forward, and in fact they turned more than inward and began to get more sectarian and
 These were people with whom we’d worked closely, we had developed a real comradeship . We had hopes and expectations of uniting to form a party together with them—which would have been a tremendous thing, he says .
 They were supposed to get in touch with us to let us know about the arrangements for the meeting . The meeting was supposed to take place at the end of the month .
 "They were having trouble getting a place for the meeting. We waited and we waited, and waited and waited for them to arrive . We waited for a long time, and they had trouble finding a place to meet .
 "We were getting so tense, in anticipation of what we knew would be a very heavy meeting, that we decided that we needed some relief," she says .
 The Night of the Lepus is about a mutating gigantic rabbits that were going around rampaging and ravaging the people in the surrounding towns . We picked out the stupidest movie we could find, one of these schlock horror movies .
 The whole thing just unraveled and blew apart on the basis of the differences that were becoming extremely sharp in the context of needing to make the leap that was before everybody, in order to form the party . The leap and rupture to being communists, in a consistent and thoroughgoing way,
 There were a lot of people, particularly within the oppressed nations and nationalities around the world, who admired and respected Mao because he was a leader of an oppressed Third World country and had led the people there to stand up .
 PRRWO and the BWC could not or would not get over the issue . That was the question before people, and that was the stumbling block the leaders of PRWO and BWC couldn't get over .
 This was heartbreaking, and the meeting was wrenching, because that was the question on the table and it lay at the root of a number of bitter disputes . This is heartbreaking, says the BBC's John Defterios .
 "It would have been easy, on a certain level, for us to just accede to their demands," he says . But that would be forming an organization on an opportunist basis, not on a basis of everybody striving to be communists, he adds .
 We would just have had different “interest groups’ and factions within the party,’s leader says . That would either have ripped the party apart or turned it into a bourgeois mishmash masquerading as a communist parly, like the CPUSA .
 It was tempting to give in, because it would have smoothed some things over in the short run, and we could have all gone off together to form a party. It's tempting to go for a party, but it's not so easy to do so, says the writer .
 It would have been a serious setback to form a parly on that basis . But it would have prevented it from being able to play in the Premier League .
 Instead, we carried forward and deepened the struggle of Marxism vs. Narrow Nationalism . We carried forward to deepening the struggle against narrow nationalism .
 We were firm lhal, if we are going to form a genuine communist vanguard, then we have to unite on the basis of communism, not nationalism, even the most revolutionary kind, he said . He said: "If we are . going to . form a . genuine communist
 We can unite with all kinds of people in the practical struggle who are nationalists of various kinds, including obviously revolutionary nationalists . We can also unite with people who want to be revolutionary nationalists, he says .
 As communists , in forming a communist party , we have to unite on the basis of communism, he says . That has to be the common basis of unity and the common principles that everyone strives to apply .
 Many people were arguing that you could combine nationalism and communism, or that revolutionary nationalism was ‘'applied communism” if you were part of an oppressed nation or an oppressed national minority . Many people argued that combining nationalism with communism was 'applied communist'
 Within our own ranks there were some people who had followed DH, or on their own had gravitated toward the line of combining communism and nationalism . So we had to carry out an ideological struggle to clarify these questions and draw crucial lines of demarcation .
 A big controversy at that time was around whether the struggle to establish a separate stale in the Black Belt South was the heart of the Black people’s struggle . I remember, for example, a big controversy was around .
 The BWC was arguing that it was, while our position was that there is a right for Black people to do that, but that was not the heart of the struggle . To take up a nationalist position that led away from the objective of socialist revolution to transform society and uproot all
 The right to do something, including the right to set up a separate state, is not the same thing as the advisability of doing so under all conditions, the government says . We emphasized that the right not to set a state, but to set it up, is the right .
 Beginning around the time of World War 1, and then really accelerating during and after World War 2, Black people in large numbers were dispersed from that area . Black people were pushed off the land because the white owners were mechanizing and didn't need as many Black laborers on the land .
 Large numbers of Black people still lived in the Black Belt South, but even there they were now living mainly in the urban areas, not in the rural farmlands . Millions of people had left the south altogether and now living in urban areas in the north .
 The setting up of a separate state in the Black Belt South, while still a right of Black people, was not at the heart of the struggle . It didn't correspond to breaking the most decisive chains of oppression that were shackling them, in the conditions in which they were actually living
 Our understanding of this was greatly deepened as a result of extensive concrete investigation and analysis, and theoretical work . We have a lot of ideological struggle to get further clarity on this question. We hope to find out more about this issue in the future .
 During this lime, I had some interesting personal experiences which served as sort of a commentary on, or perhaps a counterpoint to, this whole ideological struggle we had been engaged in . On the Real During This Lime, I . had a personal experience that served as a commentary .
 When 1 moved to Maywood and I sought out and found the good basketball courts to go to, there were a number of occasions where people were testing me out . 1 moved into Maywood when he moved to the Maywood area and sought out the courts .
 There was this ice cream and hamburger joint in Maywood called the “Cock Robin” One of my favorite things to do, was to go to the Cock Robin, after a day of playing basketball .
 One day 1 was at the Cock Robin having a hamburger and a milkshake . "One of the guys I knew from playing basketball was sitting in his car. One of the things I did was at Cock Robin," he says .
 See “Living Socialism and Dead Dogmatism’s” The Communist, Volume I, Number 2 .
 There was another guy 1 knew from playing ball, and one day I walked into McDonald’s and he was working there . One day he walked in and found his former teammate working at McDonald's . The former baseball player says he was shocked to find out he had been working at
 I'm standing in line, the line is moving and I'm getting close to the cash register where he's working, but he's not saying anything to me or making any gesture to acknowledge me. know he's seeing me, but . know he’s seeing me . know
 "Obviously this was another situation where he was wondering if 1 was going to act all different and not even acknowledge him. And obviously this is another situation," he said .
 This guy who worked in McDonald’s, 1 think his name was Raymond, and he had an older brother named James . This guy worked at McDonald's and had a brother called James .
 James was a very good basketball player, he could really leap, and for whatever reason he liked to play on the same squad with me . James was the best basketball player in the world, he said .
 At about the time the struggle with the Bundists was coming to a head, James and 1 were talking about different things going on, and in particular what was happening with Black people .
 "Some people say that really, deep down," says DH . "Well, you know, some people say they do that deep down. And thinking of what people like DH were always arguing," he says .
 James replied, “Well, not really”—and then we went into a whole discussion of the complexities of this,” he said . "Not really," James replied .
 There wasn’t much going on at the basketball courts where I usually hung out, so I asked somebody where was another place to play ball, and they directed me to a park on the west side of Chicago . Another lime in the same period, for some reason there wasn�
 1 got into some games, and the team 1 was on won a few games, but then we lost so we had to sit down and wait until our turn came around again . I drove down there and 1 got in some games .
 It was a Saturday afternoon and a lot of people were playing, so we had to wait quite a while to get back on the court . I got into this conversation with this guy who'd been on my team about what was going on with the government and politicians, and how did you
 This guy was talking about how when Kennedy came in, it made a lot of difference for Black people, Kennedy did a lot for them, and so on. This guy said that Kennedy made a big difference for black people . He said that when Kennedy was in office, he did a
 It's not really that Kennedy did things for Black people, it’s just that there were changes he had to go along with . And 1 was arguing, it was arguing that Kennedy wasn’t really for Black .
 "I'm not saying that there were no changes made from the time Kennedy came in. I’m not saying . There were changes made, but there were some changes made," said President Obama's spokesman .
 CNN's John Sutter says it wasn't Kennedy who did this out of the goodness of his heart . Sutter: "What I’m saying is that it wasn’t Kennedy . What I'm saying is . That’s not Kennedy . He was not Kennedy
 We had tried to go down the road together with these other forces to forge the unity to build a party, he says . But that was blown apart for the reasons that I’ve discussed, he adds .
 The party had to carry forward with the building of the party, even in the face of the setback with the National Liaison Committee, then recognized that this had to become the main and central task for the period of time until the party was formed .
 We couldn't drag it out or we'd lose momentum and dissipate the people who’d come forward out of this whole upsurge of the ’60s and into the early 70s . We would lose the chance to bring them together as an organized vanguard force
 They concern the basis on which people are going to be and need to be united in order to form the party . They are concerned about the basis of which people will be and must be united to form a party .
 CNN's John Sutter says U.S. needs clarity and unity in the face of terrorism . He says it's important to be battled out, and to get the most clarity in the country . Sutter: It's especially important to get clarity, unity around .
 It is a major, even a monumental challenge to make revolution in a country like this, he says . He says it is part of the revolution to abolish imperialism and thoroughly transform all societies .
 You have to struggle to get clarity and to determine what really is the road that will lead toward that, even while you will continually have a great deal more to learn as you carry this forward .
 "You have to recognize and draw basic dividing lines, and sharply distinguish what will really lead to revolution from what will lead away from it," he says .
 In 1974, 1 went on a speaking tour around the country, representing the RU and putting forward our views on the building of the parly .
 In connection with this speaking tour, we organized private meetings and discussions with different people and groups in many cities across the country, from the northwest to the Bay Area to the midwest .
 As I said, we had to draw lines of demarcation clearly and sharply in order to unite people on a solid and correct basis to actually take up the challenge of leading a revolution in a country like this .
 Speeches would lay out the need for a parly and why that was a crucial thing to bring forward . But then they would criticize different lines that had currency in the movement, he says .
 They put forward that basically the only task was to build the party, and they made theoretical work essentially the beall and end-all in relation to building the party . The party's only task is to build, and theoretical work is to be the party itself .
 Lenin meant that when you're working among the masses, you shouldn’t just tail after their understanding and where they’re at, at a given time . Instead you have to, as he said, divert them and their struggles onto the revolutionary path, and through the course
 This was just a dogmatic distortion that was combined with their retreat into nationalism . This was the result of their retreat from nationalism, says David Cameron . Cameron: 'This was just the dogmatics distortion'
 Lenin polemicized against reformist reformists who would pul revolution off the map, he says . Lenin was polemicizing against reformists, he writes . Lenin: "There were also forces falling into the opposite error"
 In their view, you did have to completely immerse yourself in the day-to-day struggles, whatever they were, and leave the goal of revolution out of the picture, or talk about it only as a vague abstract thing . In the view of the French revolutionaries, you
 These speeches and public meetings were, as well as public meetings, were very lively . These speeches, as you can imagine, are very lively, says author .
 The question of the party was a big question among a whole section of people who’d come forward out of the upsurges of the ’60s and early ’70s . There would usually be hundreds and hundreds of people at the public meetings, because the question
 I’d give a speech, and it was very polemical, and then we had question-and-answer sessions, which were generally very heated . Many groups and tendencies would mobilize people to raise their questions and disagreements, he says .
 That was the level of ‘ideological struggle’ they often dragged things down to. That was a level of . “ideological . struggle” they often drag things down . That was . that was the . level of 'ideological struggles”
 There had been a big strike in the Bay Area, and my father had issued an injunction against the strikers, limiting the picketing . "There was a huge strike in Bay Area. There was no picketing. It was the first time I had seen a movie in a movie .
 Second, let’s put this into context and draw the most important lessons from it . Let’t put it into context, and let's put it back to context. Second, put it in context. Let's put this in context and learn about it.
 I happen to know this judge you’re talking about, and on a personal level he’s a good guy, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "On some issues like discrimination, and the rights of defendants, he's made some good rulings
 This is all within the framework of an oppressive system and a set of laws that serves this system . But the point is, this is all . The point is that the laws that serve this system serve this .
 In the final analysis, it doesn't matter whether he's a good guy or not, he's following the law . The law represents the interests not of the proletariat, the working class, but the interests of the capitalist class, he says .
 "Even a good-hearted person, which my father was, when acting as a judge was operating within the confines, and had to follow the logic and mechanisms" of a system that is oppressive and exploitative . So I tried to use even these personal attacks to make some important political
 A couple of other comrades accompanied me on this Lour, and they would also take part in private meetings with different people and groups . They would also meet with different groups and meet with people in private .
 Party-building had become the main task and we had to pul our main emphasis into that for a certain telescoped period of lime . But we also were continuing to carry out mass work of various kinds of .
 As 1 said, we rejected the dogmatist position that the BWC and the PRRWO were retreating into, which insisted that you should withdraw from the mass movements . The PRWO rejected the 'dogmatist' position they had retreated into .
 There were still mass demonstrations in the early 70s against the Vietnam War . The U.S. actually began withdrawing from Vietnam in the 1970s .
 The struggle we waged against narrow nationalism had unleashed comrades in the RU to more aggressively and dynamically take up the struggle against national oppression, in many different forms . Very importantly, the struggle . had actually unleashed the comrades in . the . comrades to more aggressive and dynamic .
 In the Bay Area, the RU took on a dragnet against Black men in San Francisco and the police murder of a Black youth in Oakland named Tyrone Guyton . In the U.S. the RU also took on the dragnet of Black men and police officers .
 We were able to both unite with the outrage within the community and help give that organized expression, comrades say . Workers mobilized workers in the factories, other workplaces and unemployment lines to take on these struggles .
 One of the main struggles that we were involved in, in the period of ’74-75, involved the miners in West Virginia . In the mines, the party was involved in the struggle to form a party .
 "We decided that we would, in fact, send some of these people who’d been in West Virginia before, as well as some other comrades, to the mines," he says . "We’ve been in the mines. So we’re sending some of
 It was really a tremendous thing that people volunteered to go to the mines. "It was really an incredible thing," she says . "It's really a wonderful thing to see people volunteer to go out of the mines"
 Life in those areas of Appalachia is not an easy life by any means . Working in the mines is a very difficult and dangerous job, and life is not easy .
 "A number of comrades, including the ones who made the suggestion to do work there, and others who volunteered, plunged right into this," says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "I'm glad to be able to get back on the ground, and I'm not afraid
 We set out to lake socialism and communism to what we saw as an important section of the working class . We wanted to reach out to the working-class, we said. We wanted socialism to reach them .
 We played a leading role in the formation of what became known as the Miners Right to Strike Committee, which led a number of major strikes in the area of West Virginia .
 There was a big “disconnect” between the trade union militancy of a lot of the miners, which was very developed, and their political consciousness and ideological outlook, which were not on a high level .
 "This was a rural area, steeped in a lot of religious, even fundamentalist religious tradition," he says . "This is not the first time I've seen a person in my life who has been in a state of this kind of rural America"
 The comrades who worked in the mines would talk about the raging debates they’d have with the other miners, some of whom were also part-time preachers, who would always be going around Bible-thumping . Some of the miners were also preachers .
 Working in the mines leaves people covered with coal dust, so at the end of the shift everybody heads for the showers and then people would hang around in the shower rooms afterward and there would be these arguments and debates . Working in mines leaves .
 He was able to argue very strongly about why evolution was a fact and lake on all this fundamentalist religious nonsense . So he argued very strongly against evolution .
 This gives you a sense of both the atmosphere and some of the ideological work and struggle that our comrades were carrying out within it . So this gives you an insight into the atmosphere of the struggle and struggle within it, says CNN.com .
 "I also know from talking to some of the women comrades who were down there that this was a very difficult area for them to try to live and work in," she says . "This was a difficult area," she adds .
 There were just beginning to be a few women coming into the mines as workers during the lime our comrades were there. On the one hand, there were just a few .
 Overwhelmingly, and almost entirely, this was a preserve of men . The men worked in the mines and the women mainly didn't work or sometimes had jobs, or part-time jobs .
 In general, it was a very suffocating atmosphere for the women who had grown up there, the women comrades who had come out of a whole different scene . The women comrades were actively involved in a lot things. In some ways it was even more .
 Women in West Virginia would tell stories of how they would meet women who had this hunger to know about the broader world, but who then retreat and pull back . Many of them didn’t see any realistic alternative to the narrow and suffocating confines of the situation .
 We did lead a lot of mass struggle and we were trying to do revolutionary work and bring forward socialism and communism . We were doing revolutionary work, says the Communist Party .
 The miners would unite mililantly with us in trade union struggles, but it was very difficult to win them to a revolutionary, communist consciousness .
 This work we did in the mines had its own particularities but it was also representative of the kind of work we were doing in many different parts of the working class . This work was also represented by the work done in many other areas of working class.
 We were continuing to take part in the broader political movements, although these were undergoing something of an ebb . And we were continuing our political campaigns, although they were undergoing a bit of a ebb, he says .
 The Vietnam War, or at least the massive involvement of U.S. forces in that war, had come to an end . Other struggles that had come out of the ’60s were also ebbing to a certain degree .
 There was a significant amount of unemployment in the early and mid ’70s. The economy was booming in the '70s and '80s .
 We were not only trying to organize people to fight for jobs and benefits but also, once again, seeking to bring broader political consciousness and the goal of socialism and communism to the unemployed workers .
 We would mobilize people who were unemployed not only to fight around that issue but to take part in broader political events and struggles . We would bring them to May Day and International Women’s Day rallies and demonstrations, as well as involving them in other political struggles .
 This was all part of our understanding of how to develop an all-around struggle in which the working class comes to the fore as the leading force and allies with and leads other strata and movements in society toward the goal of a socialist revolution .
 Several times I've mentioned my friend Billy, whom I’d known since high school . Billy was Billy's best friend in high school, but he died in a car crash . Billy's death was the first time Billy had been in the car .
 He had been in his younger sister’s class, a couple of years behind me, but we overlapped for a brief time in high school . We only casually knew each other at that time, although we only casually know each other .
 "I'd gotten to know him in a deeper way. Then, when I'd gotten sick and I’d gone back to do tutoring and working with some of the athletes in other ways at the high school," she says .
 Billy came right up to me and acted as if everything were just normal and there were no reason to be reluctant about talking to me. Billy acted like he was just perfectly normal .
 "I always had a very fond place in my heart for him. Something like that meant a lot to me at the time, and it stayed with me," he says .
 After Billy got out of high school, he got married right away and he needed to gel a job . Billy needed a job after getting married and needed to get a job, he says .
 Billy helped Billy get a job as a longshoreman, or at least got him into the longshoremen’s union . Billy got a job with the union, and Billy is now a member of the union himself .
 'When 1 saw him, we would often get into talking about what was going on in the world. But when 1 saw 1 he would often talk about the world,' he said .
 1 was running down to him what was happening in South Africa and how he was boycotting Coke . Coca-Cola played a role in supporting the apartheid government and oppressing African people there, he says .
 "Every lime I’d see him after that, he'd ask me, “Are you still not drinking Coke?” — and both of us knew that this was a metaphor for bigger things than just Coke, or even just Coke’s role in South Africa
 Billy had conflicting, contradictory sides, but he was always interested in what was going on in the world and supportive of the political things I was into . He was the one who introduced me to Huey Newton and Bobby Seale . Huey was introduced to Billy Ray Ray Ray, who
 He was someone I enjoyed talking with, someone I learned a great deal from, and someone who meant a lot to me . He was a great friend and mentor to me, I said, but he was also a great teacher .
 In 1974, when 1 was living in Chicago, one day I came home and there was a message that Wilma, the woman he’d married right out of high school, was trying to reach me . Wilma's message: "Wilma, a woman he'd married
 Billy was killed in a car crash in the early hours of the morning . Billy was the first person to be killed in the car crash that killed him in the crash .
 I used to go down and look for him there, that’s where he hung out a lot. remember being down there looking for him one day when the news broke that Martin Luther King had been assassinated. That day, he was looking to find him .
 There were these two guys parked in their car in front of Walker’s Pool Hall . Walker's Pool Hall is located in Walker's Hall of Fame .
 Billy was killed on Sacramento Street, a stretch of Sacramento Street . Billy was not the first person to be killed on the street in the area . Police say Billy was shot and killed in the early hours of Wednesday morning .
 As I later heard the story, he was in some kind of after hours joint, sitting at a table talking with somebody who’d gotten into some shit with some other people, and both he and the other guy were shot . Both he and another man were shot. As I
 It was something like an hour before the police and an ambulance came, and during that time Billy bled to death in this place . But what made it especially excruciating was that it was something . The police and ambulance came to the hospital an hour after the attack .
 "This was a deep personal blow to me. Even though I hadn’t been able to keep up with him the way 1 did when I was living in the Bay Area, this was a personal blow," she says .
 Since I had moved to Chicago, my relationship with my parents had also gone through further changes . Since moving to Chicago I had also had to deal with a number of other issues .
 "I largely cut off contact with them for a number of years. As I explained earlier, in order to make the kind of leaps that we had to make in moving to Richmond and going to the proletariat, our relations became pretty estranged, and I largely cut them off .
 "For quite a while I didn't see that much of them. Not that I completely broke off things with them, or that our relationship was fundamentally antagonistic," he says .
 "1 was living a very different life than they were," she says . "We saw a lot of things differently," she adds . "I was very different than they wanted me to be living, to be honest"
 "By the mid-’70s, there was still tension between us, but two things had happened. By the time we were in the middle of that tension, there had been a lot of tension."
 While my parents initially supported the Vietnam War, they had later come around to opposing it, they were principled enough to admit they had been wrong. One of the reasons for this is that, while initially supporting the war, they also opposed it .
 While my father was then a judge, he was the kind of judge who, for example, made rulings against discrimination in the selection of juries . And, more generally, while . . he was a judge . He was also a judge in the 1980s and 1990s .
 He was still a judge, and that was an objective fact, but our political and ideological differences were not as great as they had been before, he says . He says his political differences with the former judge were no longer great .
 1 was getting to be a little closer with my parents at this lime, but our lives still didn’t intersect very much and there was still some tension there . So 1 was starting to be closer with his parents at the time, but his life didn't intersect much much .
 The RU also developed Programme Discussion Committees, where people could struggle over the application of Marxism to making revolution in this country . The RU developed a Programme for the new party .
 This journal was addressed to the people who were in these Programme Discussion Committees and in general were part of the process of going to the party . This journal is addressed to those who were involved in these programmes .
 There were a few people from the BWC who joined the party at the time it was formed, or soon after it formed, but it was still significant . There were some people from PRRWO who did the same—this was not a matter of huge numbers, but was still
 Some people who were in some other organized formations in various parts of the country joined in this party-building process . A number of people became part of the parly when it was formed, he says . And there were some people in other formations, he adds .
 There were also others who weren't part of any organized group or formation, but were just revolutionary-minded individuals who came forward .
 This journal and discussion committees provided an organized form through which people could thrash out these issues and also come to a decision about whether they wanted to go forward to be part of forming the party .
 Some people who look part in this process ended up deciding they didn’t want to join the party . Many of them remained supportive of the process .
 A number of people who were outside the RU were brought forward through this process and became part of the formation of the party . And a number of those who were . outside the . RU were . brought forward and became . part of this process .
 It was through this process that we identified and focused on the key questions and the key controversies that needed to be put on the table, and on the floor of the founding congress, to be thrashed out .
 You can’t discuss literally every line of a draft programme or constitution—you have to focus on issues that become concentration points of key questions and matters of principle, and/or the issues over which there is the most controversy and struggle .
 Within the RU itself, there was very concentrated focus on these questions, and a lot of struggle . It was a period where people were doing their political work in the day and then at night studying Marxism .
 There was a lot of vibrancy to this process, but there were also some negative elements that were finding expression and gaining some momentum . There was also some positive elements, both in terms of ideological and political line and also in terms .
 The struggle with the BWC and PRRWO occurred in a situation where the revolutionary upsurge in the U.S. had been ebbing . This was one important objective factor setting the context for things, he says .
 The United States had begun to pull out of Vietnam and was somewhat in the position of regrouping and shoring up its empire . The Soviet Union was beginning to push out and much more fully challenge the division of the world in which the United States reigned as supreme imperialist .
 China was facing a threat of Soviet invasion and the direct massing of thousands of Soviet troops on its northern border . China was making adjustments in its international posture, and making adjustments .
 The situation had begun to change on a world scale as certain dynamics and trends played themselves out, or at least went through shifts . So it wasn’t just that within the United States struggles had run up against certain limitations and begun to ebb .
 One of the very sharp questions posed itself by the early 70s was the essential nature and role of the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union was a major source of Soviet influence in the world .
 Many people criticized the Soviet Union but said that while it wasn’t very revolutionary, Vietnam and Cuba after all were revolutionary, and they would pull and force the Soviet Soviet Union to be more revolutionary . The Soviet Union was criticized for not being revolutionary .
 The Soviet Union is using, for its own imperialist ends, against colonial domination in the world . We would argue, no, no. We would . argue that the Soviet Union . is using . its own struggles against . colonial domination, we would argue .
 The Soviet Union is misusing people’s struggles in order to divert them into serving the Soviet strategy of contending with the United States in various parts of the world . For example, in places like Angola, we would maintain that the goals and objectives and the content of what the
 Even some people who had one foot in Maoism often had the other fool in an eclectic, centrist position which ultimately covered over the nature of the Soviet Union and apologized for it .
 The Soviet Union has a socialist guise but it is now in essence and in its deeds an imperialist power . Even when it appears to be supporting struggles against the United States imperialism, it is acting out of its own imperialist needs and interests . We would insist that, no, these are both
 The Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968, or the Soviet military aid for rebel forces in Angola, on the other hand, were taken by themselves . You couldn’t just look at the different phenomena that occurred in the world, like the Soviet invasion .
 "You had to get to the essence of the question -- the essential nature of the Soviet Union," he says . "You have to go to the heart of the truth," he adds .
 "We did a lot of theoretical work and research to dig into the nature of the economic foundation of the Soviet Union," she says . "We are trying to find out what the economic foundations of Soviet Union were there"
 The Soviet Union was a country where capitalism had been restored, not in the classical form of ‘free market” capitalism, but in the form of state capitalism . We made an analysis based on our research and theoretical study .
 "We did make a leap in putting together both theoretical and concrete analysis of the workings of the Soviet system," he says . "Economy is the foundation of the politics and ideology and culture and the military and international policies of any society"
 The pursuit of capitalist profit had become the guiding principle and ruling dynamic within the Soviet economy . This ultimately governed what the Soviet Union did in the world, the author says .
 I wasn't doing most of the direct research or writing of the initial drafts; but I was discussing with the team the conceptual and methodological framework for this project . I wasn’t doing most direct research .
 1 was reading the drafts and making comments and suggestions for rewrites, as well as for further areas of investigation and analysis . And then, as the team was writing drafts, 1 was . reading drafts and . making comments for re-writes .
 People in groups like the Communist League 28 were insisting not only that capitalism had not been restored in the Soviet Union, but theoretically it was impossible for capitalism to be restored in a country once it had become socialist .
 In opposition to this, drawing from pathbreaking analysis by Mao, we argued that socialism itself, where it does exist, is a society in transition from capitalism to communism, and is full of and driven forward by contradictions .
 socialism still contains a division of labor between mental and manual workers . This division is characteristic of capitalism and, actually, all class society . It's characteristic of all class societies .
 Communism is a society where such divisions will no longer exist, but you can't just declare that this has been accomplished overnight; there has to be a transition . Communism is not a society without divisions, but it's a society of people who will partake fully in both mental and manual labor
 If policies are not pursued to eliminate this, then capitalist relations will grow within the socialist society . Forces favoring capitalist restoration will feed on that and gain strength, he says .
 To fail to recognize, or to blindly ignore, this danger of capitalist restoration in socialist society will only disorient and ideologically disarm the masses of people and those who are seeking to lead them out of the hell of capitalism .
 This was all part of a very lively, vigorous, vibrant process of struggling things out to form a party that would really be a communist vanguard—a revolutionary communist party, he says .
 This understanding of the nature of the Soviet Union would prove to be very important . And as things would develop in the world, the U.S. would push out of the . Soviet Union in contention with the United States at the end of the ’70s .
 In the late ’60s the Soviet Union was not contending with the United States in the same way it did in the 1970s . The Soviet revisionists were more concerned with consolidating their home base at that time, and they were, in a real sense, letting the
 Many forces that were turning to revolution in the ’60s could see, on a perceptual level, that the Soviet Union was not about revolution or challenging U.S. domination in the world . So many forces that turned to revolution could see that it was not a revolution or really
 People united on a basic level with the idea that the Soviet Union was no longer socialist, and certainly was not revolutionary, could not deal with the huge changes which were germinating by the early ’70s . But the people who had united in the late ’60s
 None of these trends could maintain their revolutionary bearings, to a significant degree, because they had not made a thorough, materialist analysis of things in the first place . But none of the trends can maintain their revolution bearings because they were not made of materialism .
 In the fall of 1974,1 went back to China on a trip with Leibel Bergman . In the midst of all this, 1 went to China with Bergman in 1974 .
 This time I went with a little different view and different objectives. This time, I wanted to go with a different view, and I wanted a different approach . This time it was a bit more interesting to me than usual. I'm going to try and find out what I want to
 China’s support for Pakistan in seeking to suppress the breakaway of Bangladesh from Pakistan from Pakistan, writes Andrew Hammond . Hammond: After our first trip to China, we'd come back and pul out a pamphlet defending and seeking to explain the Chinese position on controversial international issues .
 We learned some lessons about uncritically accepting and rationalizing everything a country does just because it is socialist . Well, as 1 said, we learned some lesson about uncritical accepting . Everything a country should be rationalized because it's socialist .
 That was the role that China was playing then, but that didn’t mean that everything China did should be uncritically supported, he says . That didn't mean everything should be supported, the Chinese leader says .
 Marxism is, and has to be taken up as, a critical revolutionary approach to reality, says Marx . Marx insisted it has to constantly interrogate reality and interrogate itself . Marxism has to take up a critical and revolutionary approach .
 The U.S. learned from the mistakes we made earlier in uncritically supporting what China was doing, he says . He says .
 Leibel and 1 went on this trip with a lot of questions about what was going on, especially with Chinese foreign policy and international relations at that time .
 We also raised the question of Pinochet in Chile, who in 1973 had carried out a vicious coup against the reformist, social-democratic government of Salvador Allende .
 Pinochet overthrown the Allende government and then murdered and tortured thousands of people . Pinochet, with the backing and support of the CIA, had overthrown Allende . Thousands of people were tortured in Chile .
 Maoists from Chile were forced into exile, along with thousands and thousands of other Chileans, in exile . Later, when I myself went into exile in France, I met a number of Maoists in France .
 The Chinese did not denounce this coup, and did not aid people who were victimized in this coup and seeking refuge . China in effect supported the Pinochet government .
 This is another thing we were very upset about and raised when we went to China in 1974 . This was when we visited China in the 1970s . This is one of many things we were upset about when we were there in 1974, he says .
 The coup that put an end to the Allende government, and in which Allende himself died, drowned this illusion in the blood of the Chilean people . Allende's government was overthrown by the coup that killed Allende, Allende .
 It was not the revisionists who were discredited so much as China and even Maoism . Maoism was discredited because of the policies and actions of the Chinese government . China and Maoism were discredited by the government's policies and propaganda .
 We knew that raising questions about these policies of the Chinese government was going to make things pretty hot, but we felt it was important to put these things on the table . The film is based in Hong Kong, China, and airs on BBC Asia Asia .
 "We went prepared to do that — that was our orientation and that was one of the main purposes of this trip to China. We went prepared for that," CNN.com senior correspondent says .
 "Great things were going on in terms of the transformation of the institutions of society and the relations between people, and of the culture," he says . "Now, I in particular was still very excited about going to China," he adds .
 China was still carrying forward the Cultural Revolution, and this was very exciting and inspiring, says the author . "This is very exciting, inspiring and inspiring," she says .
 Leibel knew other people who had lived in China, and before we left on this trip, he had gone and talked to some of them . One thing about this trip that I’ve laughed about afterwards, because it’s sort of ironic .
 He was actually a leader of the people who continued to uphold and fight for Mao’s line against Deng Xiaoping and the other revisionists who seized power in China and then look back down the capitalist road after Mao died .
 At the time of our visit in 1974, we knew generally that Chang Chun-chiao was a leader who’d come forward in the course of the Cultural Revolution in Shanghai . We didn’t have a full sense of the internal struggles going on within the Chinese parly
 We understood there was struggle, and we knew some things about the role of different people, such as Chang Chun-chiao, but that was only in broad terms . We weren’t privy to all the ins and outs of this, but we weren't privy of
 While we were in China, we thought about this advice to ask to speak to Chang Chun-chiao, but we decided not to pursue that, because we knew enough to know that it would be a bad idea to inject ourselves into internal struggles .
 I always wondered what would have happened if we had asked to speak to Chang Chun-chiao . But I'm not sure if we would have been able to talk to him again .
 "We did raise the tough questions we fell we had to raise, and we pretty much got no answers," says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: We did raise tough questions, but we got 'no answers' "
 Chinese were distinguishing and identifying the Soviet Union as the main danger and main enemy among the two superpowers . But, in reality, as part of this three worlds theory, the Chinese were identifying Soviet Union .
 The Soviet Union was, in immediate terms, the main danger to China . If an attack were to be made on China at that time, it would most likely come from the Soviet Union . The Soviets were actually making preparations for such an attack, as I've discussed earlier .
 "We rejected the idea that, on a world scale, you should just identify the Soviet Union as an enemy" "The United States and all of its allies and puppets, like the Shah of Iran and Marcos and Haile Selassie, were in the camp of friends,
 "In this conception, the Soviet Union was really the only enemy," he says . "In fact, that was the effect of this ‘‘Soviet Union main danger, main enemy” line," he adds .
 As part of this three worlds theory, the position was being put forward openly that even imperialist slates in Europe, and Japan, should be united with against the Soviet Union . Europe, Japan, and Europe were being united against Soviet Russia .
 When this presentation was completed, we look a break, and Leibel and I went back to my room. When this presented, we looked back to our room, and went to our hotel room .
 Leibel rejected the notion of uniting with the capitalist and imperialist countries . But at that time Leibel very strongly, and with great sarcasm, rejected this notion .
 The trip to China was part of a tour of the country's struggle to become a socialist country, the author says . China's Cultural Revolution was being carried forward through the continuation of the Cultural Revolution .
 1 was struck with how this was so during that visit to China in 1974 . Sometimes things can be acutely contradictory, and this was especially true .
 Wherever you'd go, in work places or residential neighborhoods, you’d see basketball hoops and basketball courts . Basketball courts are still popular in the U.S.
 Some of the players were playing a game with the staff of a guest house where they were staying . And I remember that during the first trip they organized a game that some of them played with the guest houses where we were staying.
 On these trips to China, in each city after you had visited different places and held meetings, they would host a banquet and there was a lot of great food—and then some food which some of the members of the delegation had a harder time with . Some of the delegates had a
 "Not only the taste but the texture of it was somewhat difficult for a number of people on the delegation, including myself to be honest. But it wasn’t something people . were familiar with, and not only . the taste and texture of the . texture of . it was
 Just as our hosts were seeking to be polite with us, we were trying to reciprocate with them . But just as well as being polite with our hosts, we tried to reciprocately . We are happy to clarify that we are not trying to be rude .
 "That was a clash of cultures, so to speak, but it was all handled among comrades," he said . "That's all handled by comrades. That was a matter of comrades," the soldier said .
 "I tried very hard not to make it like a typical ‘ugly American’ thing or an affront to Chinese culture," she says . "They tried very well not to be insulted and to take it in the right spirit," she adds .
 Chin Tsu Min upheld the line of supporting the Cultural Revolution and Mao . He was one of the leading people in China who supported the Maoist and Maoist .
 During this visit he gave us a very interesting and thorough presentation about what is happening in Shanghai .
 In particular he talked about what they were doing with the economy in Shanghai and what they’d made in production .
 Shanghai was a revolutionary center in China, and the line of attack of the revisionists was that all this revolution was hurting production . It was clear, especially in retrospect, that he was doing this because of Shanghai's revolutionary center . Shanghai was the place to stage a revolution in China .
 Shanghai was the place where the people’s militias actually fought the regular army, for a couple of days, in 1976 . Shanghai was where the militias fought the army, even though their attempt to resist the coup was drowned in blood .
 Shanghai was known to be a revolutionary center and the attack on it and on people like Chang Chun-chiao, who came out of Shanghai and was one of the leaders of the so-called Gang of Four, was that they weren’t concerned with production . So Shanghai was
 In any case, comrade Chin gave us a long presentation about what they were doing with the economy and advances they were making in production on all different fronts in Shanghai . remember being struck by that at the time and, reflecting on it later, I realized that this was in part to inform
 President Obama and other world leaders had a banquet at the end of his visit to Shanghai . Obama and Hillary Clinton attended the banquet .
 Chin would lake his little wine glass and dump out the wine when he was having a toast, he said . Chin would dump out his wine glass when he had a toast . He said: “I noticed that whenever we’d have a toast he would dump it out .
 All this was in good fun, and so he started drinking a little bit, and sure enough, he did get red in the face . "Sure enough, sure enough," he said .
 1 remembered that very affectionately—and then thought about it very bitterly when 1 learned that he’d been executed as part of the revisionist coup . And we all roared with laughter. 1 remembered . And then, then, 1 thought . bitterly .
 Congress represented an important leap, in that a vanguard party did in fact gel brought into being through this whole process and as a result of this whole upsurge of the 1960s and early ’70s .
 "This was a tremendous achievement and a tremendous step forward," says President Obama . "So, in the main ... we say," he says .
 These people, as things developed more fully, actually became an organized faction . These people actually became organized faction. These people became organized .
 The Mensheviks opposed Lenin and the Bolsheviks from an economist and reformist position . They opposed Lenin as an economist, reformist . But then there was this group that we later dubbed Menshevik, because they were ideologically and politically .
 The struggle with this Menshevik faction within our own Parly came to a head and took a big leap when the coup in China happened . The struggle between the Mensheviks and the Communist Party of China came to an end in China .
 The RCP wanted to adopt a mixture of Maoism and revisionism and reformism . They were already pushing for this at the lime the RCP was founded, he says .
 Menshevik faction within our parly had style of work and of relating to people that I didn’t recognize as having anything to do with communism. These people, who became the Mensheviks, had a style of . work . I didn't recognize as . having anything
 They were petty and nasty, and if they didn't agree with you they would use underhanded and unprincipled methods to try to undermine you . They’d attack you in an opportunist way, and even on a personal level,’s author says .
 Individuals could form, and should form, different ideas and viewpoints about the different issues that are being discussed and debated . Individuals should form and form different ideas about the issues they are debating, says author .
 Different parts of the RU weren’t supposed to be solidifying and forming groups, or factions, around different positions . But different parts of RU weren't supposed to form groups, they were supposed to solidify .
 As a leader of the RU, he did not intervene in the discussions, he says . He says he had been elected Chairman of the Central Committee of the Union .
 As the leader of the RU, if I had intervened, it obviously would have had an influence one way or the other . That was not appropriate in this “botlom-up” process, so 1 went to learn and investigate but didn’t take an active
 I asked some questions sometimes about how people saw this or that, but I was very careful and scrupulous not to take sides, if you will, on the different positions that were being discussed and debated . Not to act in a way that would undermine the process of discussion and debate,
 The idea was that these organizations would be more politically advanced than the trade unions but intermediate between the unions and the parly . They weren't communist, but they weren’t just trade unions either, they were more politically radical and had a broader political orientation than the unions .
 The tension and struggle was already asserting itself between a more narrow, reformist, economist view and one that sought to bring a broader political perspective to the working class, including through their work as communists in intermediate workers organizations .
 I was taken aback by this, because in this process different district organizations of the RU were not supposed to take positions . Different district organizations were supposed to not take positions, he said . The RU was not allowed to be involved in the process, he added .
 The whole spirit and style of this was completely contrary to the spirit in which people were supposed to be engaging and discussing these questions. Plus the whole spirit of this is completely contrary . Plus, the whole . style of . this was totally contrary to . the spirit of . people engaging and
 There was no comradeship in it, it was just a bitter attack and denunciation of other people who were part of the same organization and part of a party-building process . There was 'no comradeship' in the attack, he said .
 We don't have ‘district lines,’ we’re not supposed to be organizing people around lines going into the Congress. We don’t have 'district . lines,' he said. ‘We’ve not been able to organize people around
 This was part of a whole organized effort, infused with factional spirit and a factional purpose . This is part of the factional effort, the author says . "This is not the first time this has happened," he says .
 There were a number of erroneous ideas and outright wrong positions being fought for by different people, says Parley . And then, at the same time and in contradiction to that, there were also erroneous ideas .
 We want to overthrow capitalism and get to socialism and ultimately a communist world, he says . But there remained an essential and fundamental grounding in the principle that the reason we’re going to the working class, he adds . He says .
 In the early ’70s, a lot of members of the RU who had gone to the working class had ended up among the more exploited and poorer sections of the proletariat .
 There are more bourgeoisified sections of the working class that are paid more and experience all these conservatizing influences from having a bourgeoisified existence . The working class is more likely to be paid more .
 Lenin referred to as the lower, deeper sections of the proletariat . Lenin called them the 'lower, deeper parts of the world's proletariat' Lenin also referred to the 'substitute'
 The center of gravity of our work should be the economic struggle of the workers, he says . And, along with that, in the Programme adopted at the Founding Congress, it was actually said that .
 We saw this concentration among the workers in the larger factories as a necessary part of building a working class movement that would be developed into a class-conscious revolutionary movement . Now, especially those of us whose orientation had remained one of seeing the need for revolution, we were not particularly interested in
 "This was becoming pretty acutely contradictory. But fact we were working in ways and adopting policies that were undermining that," he said .
 This was very sharply expressed at this first Central Committee meeting, following the Founding Congress . This was the first Central Party meeting, after the founding Congress .
 Mickey Jarvis, who became one of the main leaders of the Menshevik faction, gave a presentation on concentrating our forces in the major industries, like auto and steel . We ranked these industries in order of importance .
 This was a profoundly mistaken orientation and direction . But, in fact, this was a profound error and direction.
 It’s not that we shouldn’t have worked among those sections of the workers, especially when they did engage in strikes and other struggles, but that shouldn't have been where our work was rooted . The center of gravity of our political work was not in the economic struggle
 "Our whole orientation became almost like that of a slightly left-wing trade union organization," he says . But in mapping out this approach of going systematically into the big industries, he says. "In making the center of gravity of our work the economic struggle of the workers, particularly in
 In addition, when you do political work among people, it's not a one-way street -- you influence them, but they influence you as well . In addition to political work, you influence people as well, as well as yourself, she says .
 You’re “sharing weal and woe,” as the Chinese used to say . You're learning from them, you're coming to understand better how they see things, and inevitably you're being influenced by their outlook on things .
 That was skewing and affecting even many of the belter comrades who had a more revolutionary spirit . That was affecting even some of the . more revolutionary . spirit, he said .
 We had all been affected by this economism, even on the level of culture, says author . Country Music is the latest in a long line of country music artists to have appeared .
 A number of people, including myself, started listening to a lot of country music, because we knew we had to bring forward the workers from oppressed nationalities . We also recognized that it was necessary to win the white workers, to win them to the fight against discrimination, as we say
 A number of us were listening to a lot of country music, and 1 have lo say that I'm a sucker for a beautiful song. So a number of . us were . listening to country music .
 Some country music songs are very beautiful, in fact, so it wasn’t just that I held my nose and listened to this music . Some of the songs 1 actually liked, and some of them had a little bit more rebellious spirit .
 Johnny Rodriguez was a Chicano country singer named Johnny Rodriguez . His song “Riding My Thumb to Mexico” had a kind of “outlaw” feel to it .
 "reefer" was a play on words, referring to the Caribbean influences in his music . He came to Chicago and had his band called ‘The Coral Reefer Band”
 In this audience there were some youth from the middle class, but there were also a lot of young white proletarians who were there, who were into all of this . The audience was mostly white, middle-class youth, but also young white .
 There are workers, including among the while youth, who are more alienated and rebellious than many of the more stable and conservative-tending workers among whom we had been focusing much of our work .
 It is right to have a strategic orientation of winning as many as possible of the more intermediate workers, and even more backward workers, to socialism, but this should not be our main focus . It's right to win as many intermediate workers as possible, but that is not the main focus
 Jimmy Buffett concert "provoked questions in my mind politically and ideologically," says CNN's John Sutter . "Jimmy Buffett concert, while in and of itself a small thing, was a part of itself," he says .
 "I had never stopped being drawn to the culture that I’d developed a love for as a youth, namely Black culture and R&rB music at that time"
 While I was listening to country music, 1 was also listening to the main Black radio station in Chicago . The station is Chicago's main radio station .
 "Hat-Tipped-to-lhe-side" Browner was a disk jockey on a local radio station . He portrayed Rudolph “Hat-tip to lhe-Side” Browner, a character he portrayed on the show .
 'There was a lot of nonsense mixed in with it, but it was really funny' 'I used to especially look forward to when that routine would come on the radio,' she says .
 The basic thing, the thing that sustained me, was that I didn’t join the revolutionary movement, to wallow in narrow petty reforms . "I didn't join the movement before 1 was a revolutionary or a communist," he says .
 'Even before 1 became a communist, l was motivated by the recognition that radical changes were needed in society and the world'
 When 1 became convinced that we had to go to the working class in order to make revolution, we understood that at the early stages, then that is what I joined with others to do . When 1.1 became convinced we had . to . become convinced that . we needed to go
 We still held to the orientation that the purpose of all this is to get rid of this rotten, foul, oppressive, horrendous society, and everything this system does to people all over the world, and bring into being a radically different and better world .
 It wasn't that we set out to defeat this developing Menshevik faction—we didn’t even realize at that time how developed this faction was, or how firmly committed they were to this sort of economist, reformist path .
 "It was just that we were still in this for revolution and communism," he says . "We kept trying to find the ways to get it back to that," he adds .
 Eldridge Cleaver popped up in the news again in the 1960s . Cleaver was a popular TV star in the mid-'70s .
 This was a revelation to him, and he’d become a Christian, even a Christian fundamentalist, he says . This was the first time he'd heard the news of a new religion .
 1 had a lot of respect for him when he was playing a revolutionary role and he made many positive contributions . But at the same time there was always a bit of the hustler in Eldridge, he says .
 Years later someone who used to be in the Black Panther Parly just happened to bump into Eldridge somewhere . Eldridge is now in a relationship with the director of the film Black Panther .
 Eldridge says he's a conservative and a big conservative and he's into religion and everything . Eldridge: "This former Panther said to Eldridge, what’s all this shit, now you’re into all this religion"
 Revolutionary Work in a Non-Revolutionary Situation A Target of Surveillance . The RU was formed in the early 1980s .
 In the late ’60s, a demonstration ended up marching to the police station in Berkeley, California . The demonstration was being held in front of the Berkeley Police Department's police station .
 Once the RU was formed, it was increasingly targeted by the political police, the FBI and Red Squads that existed in different parts of the country . The RU was the first to be formed in the 1980s .
 "You had to recognize it as part of the conditions you were dealing with," she says . "You accepted it, but you had to accept it as a fact of life," she adds .
 In Maywood, for example, there would constantly be cars which didn’t belong to any of my neighbors parked near my house . In particular there was one guy who would park down the street a little bit from where I lived, and he would sit there, sometimes for hours
 A Freedom of Information Act inquiry found that he'd gone through our garbage . He'd done that, and then he’d gone through the garbage, police say .
 To my understanding, that kind of diagram was used by the police in the murder of Fred Hampton in Chicago . Fred Hampton was shot to death by police in Chicago in 1994 .
 Surveillance was, in one sense, “all part of what was going on,” making diagrams of your house, and indicating where someone could get good vantage points to see into various parts of the house, was heavy .
 We had realized much of this, but not quite the full extent of it until we got this FOIA material . We had a lot of this information, but we didn't realize the extent of this .
 Car would follow me for three or four blocks, and then eventually either I’d lose it or it would lake off going somewhere else . But I can remember many times leaving my house and, as I was driving, I was driven by a car . Eventually either I'd lose
 We recognized, those who were still thinking about and oriented toward revolution, that the revolutionary upsurge of the ’60s had passed. We recognized that, those of us who were . still thinking . about revolution, had passed . We recognize, those . still . oriented toward
 Even the '60s upsurge had never fully ripened all the way to a revolutionary situation, although in my view it had come pretty close and there were significant elements of that . Even the ’60’s . ‘60s . Upsurge never fully
 "No one could say for how long, but for a certain period we were going to be in a situation that was non-revolutionary," he says . But now we were in a very different situation than that ’60s upsurge, he says. No one could
 This talk I gave addressed that and spoke to how we had to develop a broad political movement . We had to raise the sights of the working class to broader political questions and be guided by a revolutionary and a communist orientation .
 As it turned out, this was highly contentious and the Menshevik faction within our Parly bitterly haled this . As it was clear from things I have said already, this is highly contentious . The Mensheviks were bitterly divided over the issue, and this was not the best
 I just thought 1 was trying to help correct and struggle against tendencies that were pulling us away from where we needed to go, along with the objective pull of being in this kind of a non-revolutionary situation .
 The Mensheviks within the Parly bitterly attacked and began to factionalize against this position . "As the Chair of the Central Committee I'd presented the outline of what I was planning to say to other leading people, and none of them had objected or disagreed"
 1 presented this to the Central Committee meeting, they attacked it in a factional way, behind my back and in a way that avoided and undermined the channels of the Parly through which disagreement and struggle is supposed to be carried out .
 Gutter Tactics: "They used very underhanded methods against my wife at that time, in order to make her life miserable and to get at me" "Gutter Tactics" is a new series of American Horror Horror Horror Films .
 We had an unpublished number, but it was known to many in this Menshevik faction . We had a number of unpublished numbers, which were known by many in Mensheviks .
 "People would call up and ask for my wife by name and then start all this heavy breathing into the phone and saying all this obscene stuff. And we started getting these obscene phone calls, where people would call . People would ask for his wife by . name, then start . heavy
 This is how low these people went, this is how thoroughly disgusting they were, and just to call it ‘unprincipled” doesn’t even really capture how despicable it was, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 'It is a disgrace to think that people who call themselves communists would descend to that level. It's a disgrace, it is disgraceful to think of people calling themselves communists,' says Labour leader David Cameron .
 "These are the unprincipled methods that people can sink to when they are in the position of attempting to defend an indefensible, opportunist line," she said . But even before they sunk to that level, they were in many ways making life completely miserable for her .
 In 1976, the bourgeoisie was making a major political and ideological offensive around the 200th anniversary of the American revolution in 1776 . At that time, in 1976, in . 1976, "The bourgeoisie" was making . a major . political offensive .
 They were calling for big celebrations in the major cities on July 4, and they were putting an awful lot of effort into this. They were trying to make it a big party, they said .
 Millions of people in the U.S. became alienated from the foundations and values of American society . They had seen and experienced too much of the truth, and there was a lot of anger against what people called “the system” and what many had begun to understand to be
 There were a lot of people who were reacting against this very positive development . But those who were alienated and radicalized had a much of initiative and conviction, she says .
 There was some regrouping by the ruling class in the early 70s and some ebbing of the struggle . But, as I explained earlier, there was also some ebbs in the struggle between the two sides .
 "They had an ideological objective—promoting this patriotism —and they had a political agenda too, which was tied in many respects to what they understood to be the growing prospect of war with the Soviet Union," he says . "They were trying to promote patriotism and promote patriotism," he
 The question before us was whether we were going to find the ways to lake this on, or keep ourselves buried in the trade union struggle . So the question is whether we will find the . ways to . find the solutions to the . problems, says Labour leader David Cameron .
 Those of us who were adhering more to a revolutionary and communist line were trying to infuse that slogan with a basic ‘against the system” thrust . Those of those who were more than revolutionary, they were infusing that slogan .
 We eventually united that it should have this basic anti-system thrust and that we should mobilize . We should mobilize proletarians and people from other sections of society to come to Philadelphia and make this statement at the time of the Bicentennial .
 We had a march and rally there, and it was very highly contested because Rizzo was the mayor of Philadelphia at that time, and he ran it like a feudal fiefdom . The march was highly contested, and the mayor ran it "like a feudal fiefdom
 They were trying to trap us into saying that we were going to have this demonstration anyway, whether or not they gave us a permit, but we refused to get drawn into those terms . The demonstration was held in a bid to prevent the government from giving the protesters a permit .
 We refused to get drawn into making statements that we were going to break the law . We just said, “We're gonna fight this through and win, and we’re gonna have our demonstration” Rizzo said .
 We had a march and rally which was very powerful, especially in the face of the attempts to suppress it . It did have a significant contingent, if you will, of people from the proletariat who came from around the country to make this statement .
 I remember I spoke at the rally on behalf of the Parly, and it had a very radical feel to it . I remember it having a radical feel, and I remember speaking at it . It was very radical and very radical for the country's first time .
 Vietnam Veterans Against the War endorsed this demonstration and played an important and major role in it . The demonstration was held in honor of veterans against the war .
 Several hundred vets from around the country gathered to make a political statement . Their contingent was quite powerful; it brought together several hundred vets . The dangers of world war were beginning to grow .
 Rizzo went on to persecute the MOVE organization in Philadelphia . He launched a vendetta against the radical Black journalist—and now death-row inmate —Mumia Abu-Jamal . The former mayor of Philadelphia was convicted of murder in 1993 .
 "The upsurge of the ’60s and early ’70s had ebbed. As I’ve spoken to several limes, one of the things that everybody was running up against was that . everybody was . running up with was that the . upsur
 Eventually, there were more than a hundred radical newspapers that were either put out by GI's or addressed to Gl’s . Eventually, more than 100 radical newspapers were sent out .
 There was rebellion, sometimes very sharp rebellion, within the military in Vietnam, against officers and sometimes against being ordered into battle . It was also rebellion against the military, sometimes against officers, against orders .
 Even in the military jails in Vietnam, where they imprisoned the troops who rebelled, there was further rebellion . Even in Vietnam's military jails, there were further rebellion, says historian .
 There was this great demonstration, Dewey Canyon III, where thousands of veterans mobilized in D.C. and threw their medals back . They declared that they didn’t want medals for what they’d been made to do .
 WAW, Vietnam Veterans Against the War, is a Vietnam veterans group . The group was formed after the Vietnam War War .
 By this time, in the mid-’70s, there wasn't the same upsurge overall, and it wasn’t the same situation in the military . So by this time in the . 1970s, the military wasn't as strong as it was in the
 There were many vets who had been radicalized, but they Loo were being affected by the fact that this ebb had set in, that you were in a nonrevolutionary situation, and there wasn’t the same upheaval, he said .
 This was the objective context for what was going on among all sections of the people, says the former president . This was also the situation that everybody seeking to build a movement of opposition and struggle against the system was facing .
 Some of us who opposed that orientation said, those issues are important to take up, but it has to be in a broader, more radical context of opposing imperialism . Others of us said, others of us . We said, 'Those issues important but must be taken up in broader,
 In 1976, the party leadership started giving increased emphasis, to the growing danger of world war . In 1976 the report to the Central Committee in 1976,1 gave increased emphasis to the threat of the war in 1976 .
 This is something Mao had pointed to even in the early 1970s, but we recognized this danger was growing and coming more to the fore . This was something Mao pointed to, but it was something he had pointed out in the 1970s .
 In line with this, we needed to raise the banner of anti-imperialism broadly, and struggle out some questions that were sharply posing themselves among radical and progressive people, over how to understand the role of different forces .
 In particular, how should we understand what role was played in the world not only by U.S. imperialism and . also by the Soviet Union? We ask: How should we . understand the role of imperialism and the role played by the Soviets?
 By this time we had a fully developed Menshevik faction within it, we had not yet come to a unified position around this, but we were beginning to take up this question just as this conference was held . Our parly—in large part because of this, because by this
 The conference had workshops and discussions about the struggle against imperialism in many different parts of the world . In the evening we had a three-sided debate between myself, representing the RCP; William Hinton, who had written the book Fanshen .
 We had tried to get someone openly supportive of the Soviet Union and that whole revisionist camp to be part of this debate, but we couldn’t find anyone who would do that . We had been trying to find someone openly supporting of Soviet Union but couldn't find that .
 Dave Dellinger took part as someone who took forward the position that the Soviet Union is no good, but that U.S. imperialism is the real evil in the world . We have to support any struggle against United States imperialism, he says .
 Our position was to oppose both superpowers and uphold revolution against U.S. imperialism and Soviet social-imperialism all over the world . We were opposed to the United States and the Soviet social imperialism .
 Hinton was putting forward the line coming out of the Chinese leadership, which, as I’ve discussed earlier, identified the Soviet Union as the main enemy, or in reality the only enemy . Hinton: Hinton’s line was coming from the China leadership .
 The Chinese position, as articulated by Hinton in that debate, was to unite all who could be united against the Soviet Union, including even the United States and other imperialist and reactionary stales in the U.S. camp . Hinton: "The Chinese position was ... to unite
 "Unite everybody against the U.S., including forces in the Soviet camp," says John Sutter . "Support those within the . Soviet camp who were seemingly taking a more radical anti--imperialist stance, like Cuba"
 Cuba had become dependent on the Soviet Union, economically, politically and otherwise, it went right down the line in 30 years . A lot of people were confused about Cuba, but the fact was that because Cuba had . become totally dependent on . The fact that Cuba had to rely on the
 In 1974, the fascist regime in Portugal was overthrown by a military coup made up in part of officers who wanted to pull the Portuguese army out of its African colonies of Angola, Mozambique and Guinea-Bissau .
 Anti-colonial insurgencies had developed particularly in the latter two colonies . Anti-colonies had developed in the last century .
 MPLA and UNITA each had something of a mass base in different tribal groupings and regions of the country . Neither represented a force that aimed to fundamentally break with imperialism . Neither did .
 Cuba could not be denied that it consistently allied with the Soviet Union . But many people still tried to keep inventing ways in which Cuba was somehow an independent force .
 We argued strenuously against that and maintained that the international struggle had to be directed against both imperialist camps . We argued strongly against that . The international struggle must be directed only against imperialist camps, he said .
 There were about fifteen hundred to two thousand people at this conference and debate on the international situation . The conference was held in New York City, New York .
 The debate was a significant clash of different positions on crucial things having to do with the international situation and the struggle against imperialism . The debate, which was very lively, was a 'significant clash'
 This became interwoven and closely bound up with the struggle that was coming to a head in our party with the Menshevik faction, particularly focused now over what stand to lake toward what was in fact a revisionist coup in China, which had taken place .
 Mao Tselung died on September 9, 1976 . Mao Tsetung died in 1976 .
 "Right at the lime he died, we didn't and couldn’t fully understand what that would mean," she says . "We didn't fully understand" what it would mean when he died," she adds .
 Mao died in the fall of 1976, a year and more later, there was a lot of struggle . Mao died a year later, and then Mao died .
 We had a definite sense that big things were up and the struggle was likely to intensify, but we didn’t quite understand how everything was coming to a head right then .
 We put out a statement on Mao’s death, and we had memorial meetings around the country . We had memorials around China, and had memorial services, she says .
 I answered that we will—the communists and the revolutionary proletarians throughout the world, including in the U.S., would step forward and lake up Mao’s banner . I said we will, and I said that we would .
 They were being denounced as a “Gang of Four” that supposedly had opposed Mao—but 1 had a strong feeling that that was just a shabby device to cover over what was nothing less than a coup against the whole direction in which Mao had been leading the Chinese people
 This coup sharpened everything up, and it put the death of Mao into this whole new context . Mao's death was sharpened up by the coup, says Mao's widow .
 "The basic terms of what was really going on were clear to me, more or less from the beginning," he says . "So I was able to get to the point of understanding what was going on," he adds .
 China was lost as a bastion of revolution and socialism and a source of inspiration for oppressed people all over the world . And then you had to confront the reality not only that Mao was gone, but that China had lost its socialist country .
 At the beginning, when the coup happened, there wasn’t anybody in the leadership of the RCP who would openly come out and support it . The coup happened in the beginning of the coup .
 "The initial reaction of myself and some other leaders of the Parly was that this was a revisionist coup, a terrible thing," he said . The initial reaction to the coup, he said, was that it was a 'revisionist coup'
 I think the reality of it was that, for a little while, the dust was still settling, so to speak, and perhaps for some people it had not really sunk in that revisionist forces had definitively seized power and won out . I think for a while the dust is still settling
 President Obama's revisionist tendencies didn’t come to characterize his outlook and approach until this coup happened, he says .
 At that crucial turning point, Leibel went completely over to the side of supporting the coup, he says . Leibel: "These negative tendencies just ate up everything else" Leibel says .
 When Mao was alive, it was clearly understood, and we all agreed, that this would lead back to capitalism . Mao was in charge of the Maoist revolution in China, but he was not in power .
 It seemed that, among other things, Leibel just couldn’t confront the fact that socialism had been overturned in yet another country . As had happened in the Soviet Union, a clique had seized power in China .
 "His pragmatic tendencies, which were always there, started really coming to the fore and dominating his outlook," he says . His pragmatic tendencies are now becoming more prominent in his career .
 "Let's not get into all this stuff about analyzing what’s really going on," he says . So let’t get into analyzing what really is going on, he says. So let's not go to analyze it, he adds .
 Deng Xiaoping had been Liu’s second-in-command and had himself been targeted and sharply criticized in the Cultural Revolution . He was brought back in the wake of the Lin Biao affair, only to be brought back .
 Leibel and the others who were heading this Menshevik faction looked to Chou En-lai as a model communist . In addition, people like Leibel looked to . Chou Enlai .
 Many intellectuals could feel very comfortable around him. That is, he was urbane and cosmopolitan, and many intellectuals felt comfortable .
 That can be a good thing, if it’s in the service of a revolutionary line . That's not necessarily a bad thing, but it's good for the company .
 Deng and his cronies were greatly aided by the way Chou En-lai was trying to pul stability and the development of the economy above everything else in China . Deng was also trying to combat revisionism and prevent capitalist restoration .
 Lenin talked about how sharp turns in society and in world events will temper and strengthen some but break and shatter others . Lenin talked in the context of the outbreak of World War 1 and the “collapse of the Second International”
 The revisionist coup in China led him to abandon the communist outlook and method and communist principles, he says .
 You're supporting these people who’ve come to power and who, as I see it, have pulled off a coup. You’re supporting them, he says . You're helping these people, he adds . He says .
 You're taking a position, you just don't want to take a position against this coup because you don’t want to admit or lace up to what’s really happened . Maybe you like the direction in which these people are taking China, where it's gonna be a
 Maybe you don't care that this is gonna be done along capitalist lines and with capitalist principles and will subject the Chinese people to horrendous oppression and exploitation once again under the rule of these bourgeois forces and the domination of imperialism .
 "A vanguard parly is absolutely essential and indispensable for people to make revolution," says Maoist . Maoist: A vanguard is indispensable to people to seize power and transform society .
 "You don’t just willfully or mindlessly split apart a party like that," he says . "So you don't just willfully ... split apart," he adds .
 You try to win over and unite as many people as you can, on a revolutionary basis, within the party . You are trying to unite and unite people within your party, he says .
 You don't seek unity at any cost, you don't do it on the basis of throwing out principles . You don’t just lightly fracture apart a parly, says Obama . Obama: "You don't just lightly break apart aparly"
 Some of us were getting more and more clear that a revisionist coup had in fact taken place in China . This would have horrendous consequences for the masses of Chinese people, which of course has proven to be true . But which is rarely, if ever, talked about these days in the
 The imperialist media, when it “covers’s China, focuses on the elite minority, on the bourgeois forces in China . The masses of people are rarely mentioned in the imperialist media .
 All the terrible suffering that they’ve been subjected to since Mao died and the revisionists seized power, is not a focus of the imperialist media . The suffering is not, of course, that, of the . It is not the .
 Those who opposed the coup were focusing on what this will mean for the masses of people in China, and throughout the world, the writer says . But that was what those who opposed this coup were .
 A faction is a group inside a party with its own views, its own network and its own discipline . A faction can be a group of people inside a political party, a party leader says .
 "You can see how that would undercut the unity and discipline that a serious party needs, but it also actually subverts the search for truth," he said . "It would undercut ... unity, discipline, but also subvert the truth"
 Mao: "In a situation like this one, where we were split on the highest level of leadership over what was right, we at least needed to formulate the questions that people should be studying" Mao 34. Bitter Sacrifice Strengthens Bold Resolve”
 "You couldn’t just go around to anybody in the Parly and try to influence them, in whatever way you could, toward the view that you held," he says . So you couldn't just go . around to anyone in the . Parly .
 They had an unprincipled position and they had unprincincipled methods that went along with it, he says . "They had to be more principled and more principled," he says of Obama administration .
 "They were opportunists all the way around, so they didn't hesitate to factionalize," he says . "They didn’t hesitate to particleize. They were opportunistic," he adds .
 In fact, I didn’t really realize the full extent of this until the struggle came to a head, he says . People started telling stories about how, even before the coup in China, these people were factionalizing, he adds .
 "They were factionalizing for their line everywhere they could, every possible occasion," says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 More than a thousand people, from many different industries, came to Chicago for this convention . The convention was attended by more advanced politically aware workers .
 Those who opposed the coup in China resisted pulls to retaliate in kind . So, even in the face of this factionalism, those who opposed it resisted pulling to retaliate . Those who did not support the coup will be punished for their actions .
 It was ironic. remember one time we confronted one of these Mensheviks and pointed to concrete evidence of how they had been factionalizing all over the place. We pointed out one of them was a member of the Menshevik, but it was ironic .
 "We pointed out that, as a matter of fact, we had not been doing the same thing. And we pointed out ... that we were not," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Sometimes, as a result of adhering to this principle, it would get very lonely, because there was almost nobody for me to talk to . couldn't even talk to my wife at that time about this, since she wasn't on the same level of top party leadership that I
 Everybody on that level of leadership knew what everybody’s position was, and the two of them were open and aboveboard about all this in discussions with others .
 It was several months after the coup, and part of our overall approach to resolving this question was to send a delegation to China to investigate . It was part of the overall approach, the government said .
 Some people on the delegation were part of this Menshevik faction, and then other people weren’t part of any faction and had a range of views . The delegation collectively was assigned the task to go and investigate without formulating definite opinions .
 At the end of the delegation’s visit to China, they had one of these banquets . The delegation had a banquet at end of their visit .
 A member of the Chinese Communist Parly Central Committee came and officiated at this banquet .
 "In the course of this, he tried to put this comrade leading our delegation on the spot," he said . "He was trying to put [the comrade leading the delegation] on the . spot," the Russian president said .
 He cut right down the middle of this and maintained principle without taking a side one way or the other .
 The Menshevik faction were not only arguing for their position but were pressuring this comrade who headed the delegation to lake a position in support of the coup . Now the people on this delegation who had been organized by, or influenced by, this Mensheviks faction were .
 "1 was veiy glad when the delegation returned — not only because the results of their investigation were important but also, on a personal level, because once again there was someone I could talk to about all this. They came back and reported to the leadership, and 1 was glad when
 After he returned from that trip to China, we used to sit up late at night talking and going over articles in the Peking Review . We used to go over articles with him in China, he says .
 The Peking Review was now being put out under the direction of the revisionists who had seized power, so it was giving us their side of things . We also pored over issues of the Peking review that had come out before the coup, like the ones with the articles by
 We’d go through these issues and thrash all this out, comparing and analyzing the different lines, over and over again; and we would read and discuss things written by Mao, as well as other Marxist theory . Things which shed light on the situation and provided important theoretical grounding
 At the time, the people behind the coup were using their monopoly of the media to just gossip about, slander and really vilify the ‘Four” The coup was used to create an atmosphere that was trying to obscure the real differences between them .
 "They wanted us to just come out and support the coup, but since we refused to do that they had to go along with this method of identifying and focusing attention on key questions and certain key lines of demarcation" "The coup" was aimed at "identifying and focusing
 These were criteria that it would have been extremely difficult for them to openly oppose at the time . These criteria were difficult for the government to oppose .
 Former Chinese President Deng Xiaoping was critical of his country's policies toward China's leaders . He said the country's stance toward the Chinese leader was "a very important issue"
 Deng had been criticized as a ‘capitalist-roader’ during the last year and a half of Mao’s life . Deng was made the focus of a mass campaign of criticism during the . last year . of Mao's life .
 Hua Guo-feng was nominally the leader of the government of China when the coup was pulled off . Another factor in this was that he was the author of this coup, and nominally author of it .
 Hua made a pretense of continuing the movement to criticize Deng Xiaoping, Hua said . And, for a short time, Hua continued to do so .
 The truth was that Deng Xiaoping was the real force behind the coup, but for a short time this was not so glaringly obvious . The truth is that the coup was made to look like a coup in China's first year .
 What happens with Deng Xiaoping now that these new forces in power in China will tell us something very important about what road they are on . We united people that Deng Xiaop is a capitalist roader, and what happens with him now?
 Mao's verdict on Deng Xiaoping was Mao’s verdict, and this new leadership, nominally headed by Hua Guo-feng, was still pretending to be upholding what Mao was all about . He hadn’t yet been rehabilitated, and moreover everybody knew that
 Under these circumstances, the Mensheviks had to go along with this criterion, and this was very important . The Menshevik had to comply with this criteria, and it was important .
 If they claim to be upholding Mao’s line, they should continue to carry forward the transformations that were brought forward through the Cultural Revolution . The Cultural Revolution was brought forward by Mao's Cultural Revolution in China .
 Another key criterion and guideline concerned a crucial political formulation .
 This was integral to the line identified with Mao and a qualitative advance in the understanding of the nature of socialist society and of the continuing class struggle within that society . This was an important advance in understanding of socialism and class struggle .
 The Mensheviks couldn’t oppose these criteria because a basic understanding of these things was generally grasped throughout our party, and because these principles hadn't yet been openly denounced and overturned in China itself . Once again, the Menshevik couldn't oppose these . The principles hadn�
 Then crucial transformations that had been brought forward through the Cultural Revolution were repudiated and abolished . The Cultural Revolution was repudiated by the Communist Party Party .
 The majority of Parly members were able to recognize that those who had seized power in China were in fact reversing the whole course that Mao was leading the people in, and were just putting into practice that line of Deng Xiaoping, which comrades could understand to be a line of restoring capitalism
 The hard core of this Menshevik faction went along with all these changes in China . Now eventually, some of them followed them without thinking that much, frankly, or who gravitated toward this sort of revisionist line .
 'It did do make me more aware of the complexity of the whole process of moving from capitalism to communism,' he says .
 Not just everything that is involved in getting to the point where it is possible to overthrow capitalism in the first place, but then the process, and struggle, of continuing on the socialist road, to carry forward the radical transformation of society .
 It brought more fully to life things that Mao had pointed out about the danger of capitalist restoration in socialist society . Mao had said he was worried about the dangers of capitalist restoring in socialism .
 T JL's internal process of focusing comrades’ attention on the big questions that were being posed about the direction of China, lasted for about a year . The process was meant to focus comrades' attention on what was being asked about China's direction .
 A meeting of the Central Committee of the Parly was called, to resolve the struggle . A meeting was held to resolve a dispute between the two sides .
 In preparation for that, I wrote a paper called “Revisionists Are Revisionists And Must Not Be Supported; Revolutionaries Are Revolutionaries And Must Be Supported” It was later published in the book Revolution and Counter-Revolution .
 It set forth my view (which was shared by the other leading comrade 1 have referred to) that what had taken place in China was a revisionist coup, and that those who had been arrested and denounced as the “Gang of Four” were in fact the genuine revolutionaries
 The paper analyzed why this was the case, and it spoke to a number of contentious issues . It answered attacks on revolutionaries appearing in the Peking Review, which was now being pul out by this revisionist ruling group in China .
 It also answered the main arguments that the Menshevik faction within our Parly was raising—things they had taken up from revisionists in China and to some degree had their own particular ‘spin’ on, as is said today .
 This was a clearly polemical paper, and it made very clear to everybody who read it that there was an intense struggle between two fundamentally and antagonistically opposed positions . The paper was clearly a struggle between a fundamentally and antagonistic position .
 The people on the other side did not write up a comparable paper putting forward their position . The other side's paper did not put forward their own position .
 They were free to do so, but they didn’t —and this was characteristic of the way they chose to carry out the struggle . They were . free to . do so . But they didn't — and this was . characteristic of their . struggle .
 They didn’t want to pul forward a fully developed position that people could then answer and refute, they said . They didn't want to . ‘They wanted to be able to answer questions and refute them,’ she said .
 "They chose instead to repeat a lot of gossip and raise a . lot of doubts and secondary issues in order to obfuscate the question," she said . "They . chose to . try to undermine the process by which people could focus on and come to a determination about the key issues
 "Their opportunist line had to be, and was accompanied by opportunist methods," says the British Prime Minister . "They had to have opportunist lines, and they had to take opportunist ways," he says .
 "Right up to the Central Committee meeting, I continued to meet with, and to have discussion and struggle with, the people who were heading up this faction," he says . "I continued to ... continue to meet and struggle" with those who led up the faction .
 Mickey Jarvis, who was one of the main leaders of this Menshevik faction, called me up on the phone . Mickey Jarvis is a former member of the Communist Party's Central Committee . He says the Mensheviks are 'a very powerful group of people'
 "I guess the FBI must have gotten quite an earful, because here we were talking on the phone about all these issues that were in contention, about who were the revisionists," she says .
 Jarvis seemed to be having second thoughts and to be more open to considering the position that I had been arguing for . Jarvis seems to have second thoughts on the issue .
 As it turned out, he really just wanted to hear my arguments one more lime so he could try to sharpen his own opposing arguments in preparation for the Central Committee meeting . He was pretending that he was being won away from, or at least reconsidering, his position .
 At one point I even told him, “You know, I feel like Charlie Brown with the football—one more time it’s gonna get pulled out from underneath when 1 go to kick it.”
 1 tried to explain, as fully and patiently and as exhaustively as I could, the answers to the questions he was raising . 1 tried, as well and patiently, as he could, to explain the answers .
 "Even though I had very serious doubts and suspicions about what he was up to, I went through this process with him. So that's why," he said, even though he had serious doubts .
 As I said, the time had come to hold the meeting and decide the issue . The time had also come to decide the future of the country's future .
 President Barack Obama did not come in with a paper that sought to substantiate his position . But neither did he come into the White House with any substance, he said . Obama said: "He didn't come into office with any substantiate this position"
 The Lone was set going into the Central Committee meeting, because he had been opporLunizing right down to the last minute, and now it was all out in the open . The Lone had been waiting for the meeting to be finished .
 In order to get to the Central Committee meeting, 1 had traveled by airplane with this other comrade . The other comrade had led the delegation to China and who firmly united with me in opposing the coup .
 "During the airplane ride, we were discussing what he should say about this at the Central Committee meeting," he says .
 "Everybody on both sides had their say, and then we were going to bring it to a head and resolve the issue. Our orientation and approach for the meeting was to keep going," he said .
 CNN's John Sutter says he's looking at what he would lay out as part of his presentation on the issue . "He and I were talking to him and I was talking about what he'd lay out," he says .
 We went through a number of different arguments that we’d heard from the Mensheviks, and we were developing our refutation of that . As we talked, he was taking extensive notes to prepare and organize what he wanted to say at the Central Committee meeting .
 "It turned out that his notes somehow got left on the airplane. Then we got off the airplane and were continuing on our way toward the meeting, and it turned out to be a mistake," he says .
 "We joked afterward that the people working on the airplane and some of the passengers perhaps got an education in these world-historic issues about China and socialism and communism," the author says .
 He was the first person to speak and went on for a number of hours refuting the arguments of the Mensheviks . Nonetheless, we had to go through the whole thing again, and he made notes and prepared his remarks .
 The Central Committee meeting proceeded from there, and people did speak as long as they wanted to . People did not have to wait long to speak .
 In fact, the last day before we brought things to a vote, we just went all night long—we started early one morning one morning and the next morning until the next day . The last night was the last person to speak, and that's how long it went .
 I started late at night and continued until early the next morning, summing up the key points and answering arguments that had been raised by the Mensheviks . The Menshevik party was founded in 1903 .
 According to this view, whatever “works” is right, whatever wins out is true . This view is based on the fact that whatever ‘works’ is right .
 "Objective reality is not determined by who's prevailing at a given time in a struggle, or what’s more popular among a section of people or generally in society," he says .
 Truth is an objectively correct reflection of reality as it actually is . Truth is a mirror mirror of reality, and truth is an objective reflection of truth .
 It’s not whatever is convenient, it's not what is winning out at the time . It's not the convenience of convenience or whatever is winning the time at the moment, says CNN.com.com .
 Pragmatism was a big ideological and philosophical component of the outlook of the Mensheviks . The Menshevik was a Marxist-Leninist party in Russia .
 Never mind that it represented the practical application of capitalist principles . Never mind, it represented that it was a practical application to capitalist principles. It was also a sign of capitalism .
 These two pragmatic tendencies reinforced each other in their thinking . The pair were pragmatic and pragmatic .
 "Revisionists Are Revisionists And Must Not Be Supported; Revolutionaries Are Revolutionaries And Must Be Supported" "We are not going with them just because they won out in the short run," he says .
 All Mensheviks except for Leibel Bergman pretended to make selfcriticism and to unite with majority position . After vote was held at the Central Committee meeting, the line pul forward in position paper 1 wrote had prevailed .
 No sooner did they leave the site of the meeting than they began factionalizing again . But, as became clear before long, no sooner than they left the site, they began to factionalize again .
 "I remember very clearly one of the decisive organizational steps we had to lake. I remember very . clearly one . decisive organizational step we had had to take to lake."
 As I said to my wife right before this Central Committee meeting, 1 was not sure we would win this struggle. "As I said, I said I said right before . I said: "1 said to be not sure [the party] would win [the] struggle."
 The Mensheviks knew whom they could count on going into the meeting, but I had not lobbied and politicked, so I didn’t . "I didn't want to lobby and politick," says the Menshevik leader .
 I had a sense of where some people stood, but mostly I was waiting to see how people fell out at the meeting . I had been waiting for the meeting to see where people would fall out, I said . I'm looking forward to seeing how people fall out .
 As it turned out, no one outside the Menshevik faction sided with them, and even some of the . Mensheviks began to waver and ended up abstaining when the issue finally came to a .
 "I would not have tried to confuse the issues when clarity was demanded," she said . She said she would not try to confuse issues when they were asked for clarity .
 There actually is a unity between your ends and your means at any given time . The reason is that there actually is unity between ends and ends at any time .
 "If you use means that are not in line with your communist principles, that don’t serve getting to the world you’re trying to get to, you will find yourself getting further from that world and actually undercutting your goals"
 We had to defeat this factionalism and unite the Parly as thoroughly as possible, internally . This was, of course, the key step that needed to be taken. We needed to defeat it and unite it internally .
 "Even beyond that, we needed to put this analysis out more broadly in society and the movement," she says .
 At that time, within the U.S. but also internationally, there was a great deal of confusion and disorientation about China . At the time of the 1980s, China was a major source of instability in the world .
 Even among the Maoist forces, more than a few got taken in by the revisionist coup, or in one way or another went along with it, and as a result lost their bearings further . As a result, many of the Maoists in the country have lost some of their
 Some of them even self-destructed, in effect, immediately or over a period of Lime, as a result of supporting what was objectively counter-revolution, even though some of them perhaps thought that they were supporting revolution .
 Many parties around the world which had considered themselves Maoist were undermined and destroyed by taking the wrong turn and supporting the wrong side at this crucial divide .
 Some were unwilling or unable to face up to and analyze deeply what had happened . Because what was objectively involved was a profound setback, they did not want to acknowledge it . They did want to draw the bitter but necessary lessons .
 Maoist parlies and organizations refused to go along with the revisionist coup in China . At the same time, a number of Maoist groups refused to accept the coup . Maoist organizations were analyzing what had happened and why .
 “Revolutionaries Are Revolutionaries” was an important but beginning step in that direction, and it was necessary to deepen that. Revolutionaries are Revolutionaries,” the author says .
 I began writing this series of articles to deepen and systematize this analysis and provide more of an allaround framework for understanding these questions . I began this series to provide a more of a systematizing framework .
 Mao Tsetung’s Immortal Contributions are published in a book . Mao's Immortal Contributions is a collection of articles written by Mao's colleagues .
 We also needed other means and vehicles for popularizing our understanding and trying to help people gel clarity about these worldhistoric events . The Mao Memorials will be held in honor of Mao Zed Zedel .
 There was a lot of confusion and contending analysis, CNN.com's John Sutter says . "There was a little bit of confusion out there and a little confusion," he says . Sutter: "It's not just a matter of confusion. Because, again, there was
 Some of it came straight from the bourgeoisie, which of course was distorting the whole thing . Some of the real issues were obscuring the real issue, he says .
 Some of it came from other forces in the progressive and radical movements, who had, at best, a very eclectic understanding . And then some of the other forces came from the left, some from the right, others from left, right and right .
 A lot of people were just sort of at a loss to understand what had happened in China. And, more broadly, a lot of a lot, people were at a . loss to understanding what happened in the country .
 Mao Memorial meetings are one of the main vehicles for bringing a more comprehensive and systematic analysis of this to a broader range of people, we decided to hold .
 This was a three-hour presentation, and it was followed by a question-and-answer session . People raised questions off of the talk and more generally questions they had about what had happened in China .
 Memorials "did fulfill to a significant degree the objectives we had for them," says President Obama . "These Memorials did fulfill ... objectives," says Obama .
 About twenty-five hundred people came to both events combined, and that, plus all the publicity we did around it and then the booklet that was published afterwards, had a major impact at that time, and did help .
 Tell the Truth: Tell the truth . Tells the truth to enable people to understand the reality of what had happened . Our objective was to help people understand the truth of what happened .
 Some people believe that if you understand reality, including what you might call the negative parts of reality, or the things that go against what you are trying to do, then you’ll just get demoralized . Some people seem to believe that . If you understand what you want to
 If you don’t understand reality you will end up in a much worse place, much more demoralized by what are objectively negative developments and setbacks—and not only demoralized but disoriented . But his feeling about that, and 1 think a more scientific approach to that, is
 If there are negative turns in the struggle, or even monumental and world-historic setbacks, the first thing you have to do is confront what has happened, analyze it . If your analysis tells you that there has been such a setback, then that’s what you must accept,
 By “accept,” 1 mean that you have to recognize that it’s the reality that you’re dealing with . I don’t mean you simply bow down and capitulate before this reality and give up trying to change the world .
 "You have to tell people the truth about it. But if there have been negative developments and setbacks, you not only have to recognize that yourself, you have to . You have to be honest about it, and that it's not a good thing."
 This doesn't mean that the goal of socialism and ultimately communism can’t be achieved, says Julian Zelizer . The goal of communism is to be achieved by socialism, he says .
 It drives home more fully that there can be not only great leaps forward, but also great setbacks along the path to that goal . But it drives home that there must be great steps forward, and great setbacks .
 Getting to where humanity needs to go in order to end this nightmare is, to paraphrase Mao, a march of ten thousand miles . Getting to the end of the nightmare that most of humanity suffers every day is, says Mao, "a march of 10 thousand miles"
 It is a twisting path, not a straight line forward, and it isn’t a continuous ascent . It’s not a continuous climb, it's a twisted path, but it is twisting path forward .
 "You have to tell people the truth about it in order for them to learn more deeply what the goal has to be," he says . So you have to con people, he says, and continually deepen your understanding of this, and the truth .
 "It may sound corny, but with that orientation, we set out to tell people the truth," says the band . "We're going to tell them the truth, but we're not going to lie"
 Chapter Twenty-one “A Fitting Welcome” for Deng Xiaoping T _Lhe booklet from the Mao Memorial was barely published when we faced the question of defending Mao's legacy in practice as well as theory .
 After the coup and then the consolidation of a new revisionist, capitalist regime in China headed by Deng Xiaoping, the U.S. imperialists saw a big opening to further develop their relations with China, to more firmly bring China into the United States camp and open China up more
 Deng Xiaoping would come and hold meetings with the U.S. president at the lime, Jimmy Carter . Deng's visit was arranged to meet with the United States president . Jimmy Carter was the president of China in the 1970s and 1980s .
 As Maoists, this was a political and ideological gauntlet that was being thrown down to us. Confronting Deng as Maoists within the U.S. This was the first time we had been confronted by Maoists in the United States .
 We decided to mobilize people from around the country to go to Washington, D.C. when Deng Xiaoping was there, to demonstrate and to create public opinion as much as we could . We recognized that we had a responsibility to do something that would make a clear statement against this,
 We had a rally in a church and then we left to go on the march through the streets of D.C. to politically confront Deng Xiaoping . "We wanted to make as powerful a statement as we could in opposition to what he represented and to raise the banner of Mao,"
 This was very inspiring and strengthened our resolve to stand up in the face of the revisionist coup in China and the way the U.S. was moving to further its support for the direction in which Deng was taking China . The United States' support for Deng was "very inspiring,"
 Authorities 'really didn’t like this demonstration’s march,’ says protester . ‘As we began we began the march, it was already very clear that the authorities really didn't like it. As we began this march, we were already very . clear that
 As we got to the area of Lafayette Park, the police unleashed a violent attack, beating as many people as they could, and finally succeeded in breaking up the march . The police finally succeeded to break up the protest .
 Some were so disfigured from being hit with billy clubs and pummeled in the face that you could hardly recognize them for weeks afterward . They especially went after the women, brutally beating them . Some of the women were so badly beaten they couldn't recognize them, even for weeks
 Some people came very close to being permanently disabled or even killed . Some people were close to losing their lives or being killed .
 The assault the police unleashed was extremely vicious, and over eighty people in that demonstration, including myself, were arrested . Over eighty people were arrested, including himself, who was arrested .
 Some people who needed medical attention were driven around in paddy wagons for a long time before they were taken to the hospital . While a number of us were arrested and taken to jail, some others needed medical care . Some others who needed treatment were driven .
 I and most of the people arrested with me spent the first night in jail handcuffed and chained outside our cells because we were continuing to chant revolutionary slogans and this pissed off the jailers . This pissed off jailers. This is not the first time I've been arrested, he says .
 The men were held separately from the women but the lawyers who came forward to defend us told us inspiring stories . They told us how the women continued to chant revolutionary slogans and shout from one cell to the other in Spanish, so the jailers couldn’t understand exactly what they were
 Carter government, and the ruling class, were infuriated by this demonstration . The Carter government was infuriated with the demonstration, and was angered by it .
 It drew attention to the questions we were raising, and from a number of angles it politically embarrassed them . Beyond the way the whole thing disrupted ‘business as usual” in the capital city, it politically disrupted what they were doing, it drew attention .
 The demonstration, and the activities surrounding it, became an international incident . The demonstration was the first of its kind in the world .
 This was before the Internet and satellite news and all that kind of thing, but news of what we did went out over news services all over the world . News of the demonstration was before satellite news, and I later talked to people from many parts of the world for whom this demonstration was
 We were fulfilling our internationalist responsibility to let people know that, right in the U.S., there are people who uphold the banner of Mao and oppose what Deng Xiaoping represents and how he has taken China back to capitalism .
 Police officers were attacked by protesters in the wake of the attack . Protesters say they were trying to protect themselves from the public from harm .
 We were charged with felonies, like assault on police officers . Initially, they only charged us with misdemeanors . Then they came back with heavier charges for a smaller number of us arrested .
 "They decided that in response to what we’d done they needed to come down with even more heavy political repression. In other words, they decided that . In other . Words, “In other . words,’s . well, they decide that in . response
 President Barack Obama has been charged with numerous felonies in the past . He has been accused of corruption in the U.S. House of Representatives . The White House says the charges are politically motivated, but also a political issue .
 Pranking the Parrots is no joke, but it's a little bit lighter, though with its own sharp edge . This week's episode focuses on a series of parrots pranks .
 They had gone right along with the coup in China and in their newspaper, The Call , they had pul out all this stuff just parroting whatever was said by the revisionist leadership in China . The Call .
 Mike Klonsky had run right over to China and met with Hua Guo-feng, who nominally was the head of the government and nominally led the coup . Deng Xiaoping was really behind the coup, but it was really a coup .
 Some people in the movement at that time, like the Guardian newspaper, tried to turn things inside out and upside down and say that Klonsky got there first and got the mantle, so to speak, from Hua Guo-feng . According to this distorted version of things,
 Bui's visit motivated us to lake the opposite position. Bui his visit was obviously not whalmotivated us to . Bui’s visit to the U.S. inspired us to take a stand.
 We thought it would be good—it would make an important point, and also involve some fun—to ridicule the position Klonsky and the CP had taken, and their basic approach to things. Anyway, we thought it was good . Anyway, it was a good idea to ridicule
 We pul out a phony issue of The Call which parroted and slightly, but only slightly, exaggerated the ridiculous positions that they were taking on China . So we pul out the phony issue, The Call . It was only slightly exaggerated to exaggerate the positions that The Call was taking
 Chinese revisionists were beginning to attempt to improve relations with the Dalai Lama . For example, at the lime we pul out this parody of The Call .
 The Dalai Lama met with the Chinese leadership and visited the Dalai Lama in China . The Dalai's visit to China was the first time the Chinese government had met with him in China since 1999 .
 They brought drums made with human skin in Tibet under the rule of the Dalai Lama to celebrate the occasion . The article said that, for this ceremony, they brought drums .
 The parody was referring to a very real fact of history: things of this kind had been done under the rule of the supposedly “benevolent” Lamas, including this Dalai Lama . In writing this parody we made a point of referring to this reality and to the torment
 "The oppression of women in that society was even more extreme. And, course, of course, the oppression of . women in . that society," she said . "And, of . course,  the oppression . of women was even even more . extreme."
 Even as we were doing a parody of The Call, we pointed to the reality of whal life had actually been like for the Tibetan people under the rule of the Dalai Lama and his predecessors .
 The Battle in the Legal Arena . Returning to the heavy legal attacks that were coming down on us . The battle in the legal arena .
 Interview with a reporter from the Washington Post was published as part of a pamphlet . But it was also necessary, of course, to battle in the legal arena .
 When the government came after us, they apparently believed that we either would just capitulate or else would act like crazy maniacs and fanatics . Nobody could understand or in any way identify with them, he says .
 Lawyers who came forward to take up the defense were concerned about whether they would just be "lunatic revolutionaries" or "unrealistic revolutionaries" But 1 think that, at the start, this attitude existed to a certain degree even among the lawyers who took up our defense, he
 "We Look this very seriously and recognized that there was a need to apply correct tactics and have good sense in battling in the legal arena, even while sticking to and being guided by our larger principles"
 "A lot of this came down to breaking-the-ice kinds of things, even on a personal level," he says . "I'm not going to let it slide down, but I'm going to do it," he adds .
 "I was a “regular human being,” at the same 33. So we started talking about basketball, and then he saw that I was a regular human being," he says . "So he saw me as a "Regular human being"
 Bob Avakian Speaks on the Mao Tsetung Defendants' Railroad and the Historic Battles Ahead, RCP Publications, 1981, 1981 . He says the defendants' Railroad was the site of the largest rail network in North Korea .
 "These were good-hearted liberal and progressive lawyers, but they still had these misconceptions," she says . "We had to do our best to struggle out in a good way," she adds .
 1 of the judges read up a brief to present to the court as part of this case, and 1 read it over and wrote a lengthy critique of it .
 "I pointed out what I thought were the good points in it but also the weaknesses and things that should be done differently. But 1 didn’t just slam it," he said .
 "I was able to contribute through this critique and in other ways to developing and sharpening the legal strategy, as well as the overall political strategy," he says . "I’d gotten ever since I was a little kid, watching my dad argue some of his cases, and
 My relations with my parents had become closer again, but on an even better basis than they’d been before . My family Grows Closer .
 There had been a gap that had opened between us when I’d become a radical and then a revolutionary and a communist . There was a 'gap' that opened between them when I'd become radical and revolutionary .
 My parents never came to fully share my political and ideological outlook. I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to live with them, but I'm sure I am going to live in the U.S.
 My mother remained very religious, although to a significant degree that expressed itself in her being compassionate, generous person . My father was somewhat religious also also. My mother was compassionate and generous .
 They had developed a growing understanding of and respect for what 1 was trying to do . But by this time they had developed an understanding of each other's intentions .
 They saw me as a person of integrity, who stuck to my principles and who had high ideals, as they saw it . They respected the fact that I stood up for that in the face of repression and attack, and that I stuck to it .
 '60s had become much more aware of the larger injustices in American society and many of the injustices the U.S. perpetrated around the world .
 From Ike to Mao and Beyond er er er on this basis, through a process of development and struggle, and even a period of a some estrangement between us . So we’d grown clos370 from Ike to . Mao and beyond er .
 A little later, around 1980, I actually wrote a letter to my parents setting forth some important aspects of my principles as a communist . "I wanted to spell out for them how I viewed these things," he says .
 1 was arrested in the demonstration against Deng Xiaoping, at the beginning of 1979 . His father was a judge for a number of years and was something of a public person .
 "I think they expected they would be able to play on contradictions," she says . "They expected that my father would distance himself, or even attack me," she adds .
 "This meant a great deal to me personally, and it was also an important statement in a broader sense," he said . "This was a very important statement," he added .
 To him it represented the whole outrageous character of the indictment to begin with, coming on top of this assault that the police had launched against the demonstration, and he frequently talked to his friends and legal associates about this as an example of political prosecution and persecution .
 "I remember thinking very soon after I got arrested that he might be contacted. I remember thinking . He might have contacted me," she says .
 "I didn't want my parents to be surprised and caught off guard if they were asked for a statement. And 1 didn’t want my . parents be surprised," she said. "And 1 didn't . want them be surprised."
 As soon as I was able to do so after being arrested, I sent a message through a lawyer to someone l trusted, asking them to contact my parents and let them know what had happened . So, as soon as possible, I asked for help contacting my parents, so I could
 'Crude' calls from people who claimed to be speaking on behalf of 34-year-old were made to his parents . 'Sometimes people would make crank calls to my parents, and sometimes people who said they were speaking on my behalf, but 34.
 This letter was actually published as a pamphlet, Communists Are Rebels . It was published in the same pamphlet as the Communist Party pamphlet .
 1 tried to figure out a way that 1 could tell them that this person was calling on my behalf . As a result, my parents were wary about phone calls from people they didn’t know, and 1 was aware of that .
 The author's father was in law school in San Francisco when he visited an open-air farmer’s market with his uncle . He said he remembered one of his favorite stories, about a guy hawking tomatoes at a fruit and vegetable stand .
 Before the trial, we had a preliminary hearing, and that was also a real lesson and another thing that outraged my parents and in particular my father, given his legal training and background . Rai l road: "Before the trial we had to have preliminary hearing"
 The preliminary hearing is supposed to determine whether the prosecution can establish “probable cause” that the defendant was engaged in an unlawful act . The hearing will determine if the defendant has to stand trial for that offense .
 The prosecution didn't have any concrete evidence or testimony that pointed to any specific acts committed by anyone . The prosecution couldn't identify specific people with specific acts, the prosecution said .
 This went along with the whole approach of charging us with “assault on an unidentified police officer” The frame-up nature of the whole thing was very clearly on display, says CNN.com.com .
 I have listened to the testimony and evidence, and 1 am satisfied that it has been established that each and every one of the defendants was present when unlawful acts were committed, and therefore I find probable cause to continue with prosecution . I am satisfied .
 The judge threw out the standard of proof that the judge had established at the beginning of the hearing, he simply threw out that standard and ruled for the prosecution anyway . In other words, after it had been shown that the prosecution couldn’t meet that standard, the judge ruled for
 It was clearer than ever that, while we could lose this battle through legal mistakes, we could not win this merely by mounting the best possible legal defense . It was clear that while it was clearer that ever that . while . . we could . lose this . battle through . legal mistakes
 Even as this struggle against the legal attacks was unfolding, we were continuing to grapple theoretically with the implications of the loss of China . Chapter Twenty-two Re-Evaluation... and Leaping Forward Interrogating Ourselves .
 "When you go through a major turning point, including a major setback like this, it forces you to re-evaluate and look much more deeply into many things," he says . "When I go through this, I'm looking at a lot of the things I need to do,"
 "The logic and dynamic and the momentum of something of this magnitude confronts you with the necessity to do this," he says . "You have to confront the necessity of doing this. The logic and dynamics of something like this confronts you," he adds .
 If you continue to believe that communism is what is needed in the world, then there is a strong compulsion to do this . But if you believe communism is needed, you will be tempted to do it, he says .
 The issue was what position were you going to take. So that wasn’t the issue, the issue was how you would take it, he said .
 Mao had emphasized that if in the future the revisionists came to power in China, the people of the world should oppose them and unite with the great majority of the Chinese people to overthrow this revisionism . Mao also said that if the world opposed them, they should unite against them .
 It is not just that Mao said this and that we agreed with Mao —it is a matter of our internationalist responsibility to do this. It is also a matter for our internationalists to do it. Mao said it was not just Mao but it was our international responsibility to act .
 The struggle around this deepened our appreciation of the importance of internationalism, says the author of the book . And struggle around the world has deepened the appreciation of internationalistism, he says .
 As 1 said, when you go through a struggle like this, you’re confronted with the need not only to go more deeply into things having to do with that issue but also to look again at some other things, to dig into them more deeply .
 Menshevik position represented a fully developed opportunist, reformist and pragmatic, trade-unionist orientation . The Mensheviks are a well-developed opportunist and reformist party .
 We started questioning how we had been carrying out work in the working class and among the masses of people generally, says the Labour Party leader .
 For those who weren’t in the Menshevik faction, our objective had always been to take revolution, socialism and communism to the masses . For those of us who weren't in Mensheviks faction, we had always wanted revolution to be taken to masses .
 We had fought to uphold, as we put it, the revolutionary legacy of Mao Tsetung; and in going more deeply into that, it took us back to Lenin, in a new way and a deeper way .
 Lenin had also given great emphasis to the role of consciousness in the revolutionary struggle . We began to appreciate in a fuller sense some of the key things that Lenin had brought forward and contributed to the communist movement .
 Mao emphasized that people could take a tremendous amount of initiative on the basis of their consciousness being raised . Mao: "People could accomplish miracles on that basis"
 Lenin had emphasized the role and importance of consciousness in the revolutionary movement . Mao argued against the notion that the struggle of the working class should center around its immediate needs and interests .
 Lenin insisted that the economic struggle of the workers is important but not the heart and pivot of work to build a revolutionary movement among the proletariat . Lenin: The economic struggle for the workers but not for the proletariat is important .
 Lenin emphasized the crucial role of genuine, revolutionary class consciousness . Workers could only develop this consciousness by having their attention centered on all the events going on in society and in the world .
 Lenin emphasized that communists have to expose all the ways in which different issues and events in society affect these different classes and strata, and how in turn these classes respond to them, in a fundamental sense, in accordance with their interests . Lenin: "Communists must expose how different issues
 Workers must grasp the larger relations in society and their own role in leading a revolution to transform society, he insisted . This could not be done by focusing their attention mainly on their immediate conditions and struggles, he said .
 We began to look again at the question of what sections of the working class we should base ourselves on as the main force for revolution . In going back to and studying that more deeply, we began to think again .
 We recognized that we should work among all sections of the working class, and all strata of the people, but we began to recognize the importance of . Lenin's emphasis of Lenin’s on “going lower and deeper” in the proletariat in terms of the bedrock base
 Lenin’s emphasis on what he called ‘revolutionary defeatism’ in the imperialist countries . Lenin called this defeatism a “revolutionary victoryism” in imperialist countries.
 Lenin had argued that in an imperialist country that was plundering large parts of the world, the proletarians had no interest in siding with ‘their own” ruling class in the wars it carried out in order to fortify and expand this plunder and exploitation . Lenin argued that
 The proletariat had to have its consciousness raised and be mobilized to oppose these wars . Instead, the proletariat must be mobilized against these wars, he says . The proletariat should be mobilized, he writes .
 Rather than bemoaning the weakening of its own ruling class, the proletariat had to be educated to welcome this . The proletariat should welcome this and take advantage of it to build the struggle in a revolutionary direction, he says .
 It had to take a stand, not with “its own” ruling class against the oppressed people of the world, but with the oppressed . This was a crucial principle and dividing line between genuine socialism and communism, on the one hand .
 By the late 1970s, we had become more clear about the contradictions between the U.S. imperialists and the camp that was under their leadership . Western Europe and Japan as well as other countries aligned with, or under, the domination of, the . domination of the . U
 The danger of war between the two blocs is becoming more acute, says President Obama . "The contradictions between these two . blocs were sharpening up," he says .
 As the decade of the 1980s approached and then as we entered that decade, many people became more acutely aware of and concerned about, and began to mobilize against, the growing danger of world war . As we entered the decade, the . 1980s, many . people became . acutely
 Lenin: How rarely revolutionary situations arise in the imperialist countries . Lenin: "Rare moments" are rare in imperialist countries like Russia and China . Lenin’s insight: “Rare Moments” is that revolutionary situations rarely arise .
 In these countries you don’t have a situation similar to many Third World countries, where revolutionaries can generally take up the armed struggle to oppose the regime right from the beginning of the revolutionary process .
 In many of these latter countries, the systems of transportation and communication and in general the infrastructures are much weaker, and the people are much more brutally oppressed and deeply impoverished all the time .
 Mao had shown that this path has to be taken in countries like China and other countries that have similar economic and social conditions and forms of reactionary rule . Mao's example is shown in China, other countries with similar economic, social conditions .
 Mao drew a distinction between that and in the imperialist countries, where most of the time you don't have a weakened system of rule and instead you have very highly developed systems of communication and transportation and the very highly concentrated power of the ruling class throughout the country . But again, Mao drew
 In these countries it is only when a number of factors come together— resulting from both the objective development of a revolutionary crisis and the work of conscious revolutionaries— that you get a revolutionary situation .
 Lenin talked about this in terms of what he called “revolutionary conjunctures,” when all the contradictions of the system are heightened and come together in a concentrated way, and a revolutionary crisis develops . Lenin called this a "revolutionary conjunction"
 Lenin: If the revolutionary party has prepared correctly, it can seize on those rare moments when all these things come together in a revolutionary crisis . At that point, Lenin said, developments and events of decades gel concentrated in months, weeks and even days .
 This distinction is crucial, between the two types of countries and the two roads, as we say . In third world countries, the road of “protracted people’s war,” as I’ve briefly characterized it; and in imperialist countries, a revolutionary process
 Lenin: People who in “peaceful times,” as Lenin put it, “allow themselves to be robbed, are more inclined to an all-out revolutionary struggle . The revolutionary vanguard must have the orientation, and must have developed the ability, to seize on such
 Lenin's characterization of a ‘conjunctural crisis,” or the conjuncture of events leading to a revolutionary crisis . All that is concentrated is in Lenin's description of the “conjunctive crisis’s .
 The upsurge of the '60s may have passed, but that didn’t mean that there would not again be another conjuncture of events where a revolutionary crisis would deepen and sharpen . Millions of people would be in a revolutionary mood, or seeking a revolutionary way out
 We had to prepare for such a coming together and intensifying and magnifying of the contradictions of the system to a very acute stage where revolution would become possible . Whether that came sooner or later, we had to .
 Lenin said the goal of a communist is not to be a ‘trade union secretary’ but a tribune of the people . This is grounded in the understanding that, as Lenin said, a communist, should not be a trade union secretary . Lenin said: ‘The goal
 We did not and do not see our newspaper as a supplement or “optional accessory" to our work, rather it must be the hub and pivot of everything we do, says the paper . The paper will not be an "optional accessory," but it is the "hub and pivot
 When these volunteers came to D.C. they constantly used the newspaper . They took this saying that Mao had popularized during the Anti-Japanese war in China, and adapted it to say that the supplies of the People’s Army basically amounted to millet and rifles .
 In other words, their use of the newspaper wasn’t off to the side of their political work, it was very central . In other . words, they used the newspaper to promote their political . work .
 A year-long campaign we waged for May 1st, 1980 was launched by the Communist Party . R.A. Communist Party was founded by Mao and Lenin .
 We had a rally on May Day 1979 in the Howard Theater in Washington, D.C., and a phone hookup with San Francisco, where there was a simultaneous May Day meeting and rally .
 I gave a speech at the rally in D.C., and at the end of the speech I announced the call for a mobilization of the working class on May Day 1980 . The goal of mobilizing ten thousand or more workers on that day, a working day, under the banner of
 This was a bold initiative, something that hadn’t been done in decades, if ever, in this country . This is a bold move, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The PLA pioneered a style of relying on the support of the masses to counteract the superior firepower of the enemy . The hallmark of their style was simple living .
 We built for this, we made important advances, taking crucial issues to important sections of the working class and carrying out a lot of revolutionary propaganda in the course of this campaign over a year . And, as well as this, as we built, we built many important advances—taking crucial
 It also led to very intensifying conflict with the powers-that-be and to the assassination of one of our comrades, Damian Garcia, which 1 will speak to in depth later . The assassination of Damian Garcia led to a very intense conflict between the powers that-be .
 We called on people throughout the country to raise or fly the Red Flag and to sing the communist anthem, “The Internationale,” all at the same time . About two thousand people actually did that, and to my understanding, about two thousand did that .
 Hundreds of people were mobilized in Revolutionary May Day and it was viciously attacked by police in Los Angeles . And then on May Day we mobilized several thousand people, mainly from the working class, and there were some key concentration points of this struggle .
 "We had put a lot of work into this. On the other hand, although we mobilized thousands, we fell short of our goal of bringing out ten thousand or more," the mayor says .
 Lenin’s emphasis on going lower and deeper, into the bedrock, most exploited sections of the proletariat, had not yet fully made that transformation . Lenin had begun to lake up his writings on imperialism and its effects on the proletariat in the imperialist countries .
 Thousands of workers rallied to the revolutionary, communist banner on May Day 1980 . Some of them came from the lower and deeper sections of the proletariat . By and large we had not yet made the transformation to where we were focusing .
 This is something we had to sum up out of this whole experience around May Day 1980, even while we sought to build on the positive things that did come forward through all the work around that and on the day itself . We wanted to focus on the positives that came forward through the work
 Earlier I spoke about going to a concert by Jimmy Buffett and the Coral Reefer Band in the late 1970s . He spoke about the impact this had on him .
 Bruce Springsteen was popular among, and gave expression to a kind of alienated and rebellious spirit among, a lot of white youth in general . Around the same time, 1 started listening to Springsteen, who was popular with white working class youth .
 This was another thing that at the time strengthened my sense that just because you’re going to integrate with sections of the working class, and in particular white workers, to spread the politics of socialism and communism among them, doesn’t mean you have to gravitate toward the
 We should be looking for the sparks of rebellion and working to fan and develop this into revolutionary sentiment and consciousness . We should look for the spark of rebellion, says the author .
 You had “punk” coming over from England, and people turned me on to The Clash. You had "punk" coming over, and you had ‘punk’ coming over . People turned me onto The Clash .
 We were trying to learn from all this and as Mao said, to ‘extol’ what was positive in it . Mao said: “Extol” what was negative in Mao’s words. “We were trying . to “extol the
 Mao also wrote that “there is no construction without destruction” Mao also said that ‘there is . no construction . without destruction, Mao wrote . If you are going to go forward you have to really settle accounts very thoroughly with your mistakes .
 This year's election will be the first time since 2008 that the election has come to an end . It has been a tough year for some of the world's most famous politicians to come clean .
 "What we’re about is very serious and very difficult and demands a very serious approach. To use Marx's phrase, we interrogated ourselves very thoroughly,’s director says. “What we're about is . very serious," he says .
 The neighborhood where students were being bused was a bastion of segregation, including in the schools . The schools were essentially all-white .
 In these conditions, white supremacist and fascistic sentiment was being mobilized among the white people to oppose this busing plan, the author says . White supremacist sentiment was also being mobilized to attack the Black people, the Black families, and even the Black students who were being bused in .
 Aims to finesse some of these intense contradictions in a kind of economist way . But, at the same time, his position on this actually represented a narrow and ultimately reformist approach .
 We raised the demand for “decent and equal education,” which on the one hand could be part of a correct program, but in the actual circumstances it amounted to an avoidance of the central question of segregation . For example, we raised the issue of ‘decent
 As we saw it, the ruling class was fanning antagonisms among different nationalities . There was truth to that, but there was truth that, he said . The ruling class, he added, was trying to fan an antagonism among nationalities among them .
 "We tried to maneuver around this by presenting a position that called for building up all the schools," she says . "But, in this situation, rather than grasping that, the key to opposing that was to fight against segregation," she writes .
 We fell into thinking that if we carried forward work in the working class around what we soon came to call the “center of gravity” of the workers’ economic needs and struggles, we could get them to unite on that basis . We could get the white workers to oppose
 Opponents of busing plans say they call for decent and equal education all the way around . Opponents say busing programs are fanned with antagonisms .
 "If you didn’t make that the cutting edge and the key thing and the pivot of everything you were doing, you were bound to gel it wrong" "We did. We did. But if you didn't make that cut edge and that was the key to everything you
 It is not that my hatred, or the haired of my comrades, for white supremacy had diminished in the slightest . It's not that I hate my comrades or my hatred of white supremacy has diminished, he says .
 Aims to transform society and transform society, he says. But when you're trying to determine how to implement a strategy to make revolution, you're confronted with the need to approach things differently than when you’re just proceeding from your basic feelings .
 You have to develop and apply line to transform reality you’re confronting and how to transform it . You need to develop an analysis of the reality you're confronting, and how you need to transform that .
 'Of necessity, you have to address things on that level, if you’re trying to lead a revolution and radically change all of society. Of necessity,’s Mr. Assange said .
 If you gel off track on that , it can even override some of the deepest sentiments you have, it can override your deepest sentiments . And if you're not focused on that, it may even override your feelings .
 In a negative way in this case, the importance of line-lines is being emphasized . So there you can see, in a positive way, in the negative way .
 In that case our line was incorrect, and this was, in a negative way, so to speak, an illustration of the profound importance of whether your line is correct or incorrect . The line was an example of the importance of knowing whether a line is incorrect or incorrect, the author says
 At that time the RU was putting out Revolution as a monthly newspaper, and 1 happened to be in a leadership meeting of the RU when the newspaper came out . The newspaper was in opposition to this busing plan .
 One of the comrades who was responsible for putting out the newspaper brought the newspaper, hot off the press, to this leadership meeting . The newspaper was hot off a press, and it was brought to the meeting .
 "This was not the stand we thought should be taken, let alone blared in the headline of Revolution newspaper. Because, while we did have a wrong position on this, this is not the way we felt that our position should be expressed and put forward," said the paper .
 RU would never have wanted to pul out a headline with that kind of an emphasis in it, it was a sort of grotesque carrying further of a position that was fundamentally wrong . So even while the leadership of the RU would . never have . wanted to . pul out . headlines with that
 Sometimes people trying to implement that position will carry it to even greater extremes and more grotesque expressions, but even though that grotesque exaggeration is not actually your position, it still reflects the fact that your position is fundamentally and essentially wrong .
 It was only later, during the 1978-80 period, and as a result of this whole struggle with the Mensheviks within the RCP, we began to re-examine things, and to change the way we approached similar busing plans in other cities .
 In the late 70s, we published a self-criticism in Revolution examining our errors around this and why we’d made them . We were trying to both learn more deeply ourselves through systematizing that self criticism, but also to enable others to learn from our mistakes .
 To recognize that we had made errors of this kind, around a question of this decisive importance, was a very painful experience . When you make such errors, recognizing and acknowledging them is a crucial part of what goes into doing what you have to do in order to help bring into being a
 "This whole process of deep rethinking, so to speak, went on for a couple of years," says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "It's a very exciting time for the world"
 "Everything" would be brought to bear as we took on the charges coming off the demonstration . And everything—the efforts at self-criticism, the theoretical ferment, as well as what we were learning from taking out a more straight-up revolutionary communist line— would also be brought
 As a result of the demonstration against Deng, 1 was lacing what could have amounted to over two hundred years in jail, and a dozen or so other comrades faced similar charges . Deng was laced with a possible two hundred year jail sentence . Deng is a member of the Communist Party
 "We recognized that it was important to battle this in the legal arena. As I’ve described, we recognize that it’s important to fight this in a legal arena," he said .
 "We had to build a political defense and take not just our legal case, but our case in the broader political and ideological sense, to the masses of people, in the D.C. area especially, but around the country as well"
 We saw a very real basis to do that— represented, for example, by how people had responded to the demonstration . We saw the real basis of that, and it was very real, to say that. We saw that .
 We intended to create tremendous political awareness and political turmoil and to mobilize masses of people in support of us. We wanted to create ... political awareness, political turmoil," the author says .
 We aimed to get two hundred people to come as volunteers, and this is what happened . This is the first time we've had two hundred volunteers come to volunteer for the event .
 It was clear that we were going to be able to have a major impact politically and in terms of mobilizing masses in the city . It was going to become a very hot issue—something that was not only talked about all over the place, but something around which people would be actively
 D.C. residents have deep feelings of distrust and hatred for the government in the U.S. itself . They say they have a deep reservoir of support for Mao, a basic recognition of what Mao represented .
 Many people remembered things like Mao’s statement in support of the AfroAmerican people when they rose up after Martin Luther King was assassinated, and in general they remembered Mao as a revolutionary leader whom they admired and looked to .
 It was clear that there was great potential for mobilizing people on this basis. It's clear there is great potential to mobilize people on the basis of this .
 During the same period when we were mobilizing people to come to D.C., we were also taking our revolutionary line to people more broadly . During this period, we were taking revolutionary lines to more broadly, including in Washington, DC .
 L.A. Lime was facing heavy charges and faced a major speaking tour with media all over the U.S. Lime says he's proud of his work in the anti-abortion movement .
 Tom Snyder’s plan was to have me on first and then this guy would come in and mock me by acting like a typical commie bureaucrat, as Tom Snyder saw it, as he saw it . Apparently, Tom Snyder's plan to have him on first, then this
 Snyder’s problem was that the discussion with me wasn’t anything like you’d have with a typical Soviet bureaucrat, he says . Snyder: “This other thing he did afterward really fell flat. This other thing [Snyder] did afterward fell flat
 Tom Snyder felt that this would be something that there would be an audience for, he said . "It was interesting, and it reflected how big an issue this was among a broad range of people," Snyder said .
 People among the most exploited and oppressed sections of society -- the basic masses, as we say --recognize that they need leaders . The basic masses need leaders, says Ravi Agrawal .
 They also recognize that there have been negative experiences with leaders, where many have been killed or jailed, and some of them have sold out or gone off track and ended up at least betraying the cause .
 Even if they don’t understand it in a fully developed, scientific way, they hate this system . They have first-hand experience with or have witnessed many of the crimes it commits, in the United States and around the world .
 They agonize over whether there can there be leaders who won't sell out or won’t just be crushed or killed . And they agonize about whether there will ever be leaders .
 "This greatly deepened my understanding of the great responsibility that was on us and, yes, was on me directly," he said .
 The cult of the personality would come up in the course of doing this, the question of ‘the cult of a personality” comes up .
 We understand in a deep and scientific way why people need leadership and what kind of leadership they need, scientists say . We understand why we need leadership, and how people need it, scientist says .
 We also look at the role of individual leaders differently than the bourgeoisie does, certainly, and also differently than others who don’t have a communist viewpoint and understanding . So we also look . differently than . others who have a . communist viewpoint .
 "We understand that there are people who, as a result of a combination of personal experiences and larger social experiences, come to embody the kind of leadership that the masses of people, and the politically advanced forces among them, need in order to make revolution," the group says .
 "cult of the personality" is a phrase that has been used to convey a negative meaning . The word “cult” implies a kind of religious sect . But there is a deeper question here about the meaning of "cult"
 "It has been important to take this on directly, and at limes in a provocative way," says Simon Cowan .
 What is really involved here is the role of individual leaders, especially ones who do come to represent in a concentrated way the kind of leadership people need, people who are outstanding leaders, if you want to say .
 Many people don't have a hard time recognizing that certain people come to play outstanding roles in various other areas of life . But when it comes to the sphere of political leadership, this seems to be a much more sensitive and controversial issue .
 This question came up repeatedly, in a number of different forms, and we went into it deeply and struggled over it with broad numbers of people . This question was repeatedly asked repeatedly, and in a variety of ways, by people .
 This is a strength in terms of contributing to the international struggle. This is the strength of the world's struggle. We are proud to be able to contribute to the struggle. It's a strength for the people in the world, he said .
 This is not something to be embarrassed about or ashamed about or defensive about, it is something to uphold and to popularize to people that we do have this kind of leadership . So this is not an individual who is willing to take that responsibility and is able to do so .
 In the course of this campaign, a number of intellectuals as well as people in the arts and others in various spheres of society were mobilized in support of the Mao Tsetung Defendants . A Broad Defense .
 There were many people who supported me on that level, people with many different viewpoints, including nationalists, artists, academics, academics and others . There were also people from among different movements based in the middle class .
 On May Day 1979, we launched the first issue of the Revolutionary Worker . It was a great advance for the communist movement in the U.S. and made a big contribution .
 One of the outrages we had taken up, through the newspaper and other ways, took place in Chester, South Carolina, where a young Black man had been found lynched . We had been taking up the issue of lynching in Chester .
 There was a mass outpouring of protest against this lynching on the part of the Black community in Chester, South Carolina . It was widely understood that this was because he had been dating a while woman .
 While I was in the course of the nationwide speaking lour to build opposition to the attempt to railroad me and other Mao Tsetung Defendants, this lynching came to our attention . The lynching comes to the attention of the lynching, the author says .
 South Carolina is a small, rural town of Chester, South Carolina, for a meeting in a Black church there . CNN.com will feature a new documentary this week .
 1 went on to talk about how we have to see this lynching as an outrage in itself but also as part of the overall crimes of the system . This shows us once again why we need a revolution to sweep away this whole system, he said .
 "We left with this long caravan of dozens of cars, which the people from the church had . drove with us, until we were far out of that county and away from that area"
 "That experience has stayed with me, ever since then, in a very powerful way," she says . "I'm very proud of that experience," she adds .
 It was all about how we should go out with our real, living revolutionary message . "Not in the stereotypical, dogmatic way that people often expect, but in a lively, living, non-dogmalic way"
 "We should take this to people, bring them forward to support myself and the other Mao Tsetung Defendants on that basis. We should take it to people," he said .
 During this same time, there were many highly charged events going on in the world . During this time, the world was at a high level of tension .
 This was the period when the Iranian revolution had reached its high point, and driven the Shah of Iran out of the country . The Shah was driven out of Iran, and the revolution was reaching its highest point .
 I remember a headline in the Chicago Tfibune when the Shah was teetering on his throne, just before he fell . I remember the Shah being teetered on the throne when he fell. I remember him as a king .
 That was basically the stand of the Carter administration and the U.S. ruling class, right until the fall of the Shah . The Shah was the Shah of Iran .
 The United States had pul him in power through a CIA coup in 1953, and they maintained him for almost three decades . The U.S. had pulked him into power in 1953 .
 After the Shah could no longer maintain his rule in Iran, they brought him into the U.S., after having tried to get a few other countries to take him . Then, after the Shah was forced to stop his rule, the Shah moved to the United States .
 This was happening at the same time as our case was getting ready to go to court and as we were working, through the efforts of the volunteers and in an all-around way, to build support for myself and the other Mao Tsetung Defendants and to promote and project the line
 Klansmen and Nazis came to a CWP rally and opened fire and killed five people in broad daylight . At one point they held a rally, and a combination of Klan and Nazis opened fire .
 This was all part of the increasingly volatile situation within the United States at this time . This is part of a growing trend within the U.S.
 Shortly before this assassination, I had gone to North Carolina as part of a speaking tour, but when our people got to the meeting site to set things up, people who were obviously FBI agents and Klan types were running all over the place .
 "It really looked like there was going to be some sort of assault on the meeting. Clearly, there was something brewing there," says CNN's John Sutter .
 "We expected that at any moment we might be attacked. So that particular speech and meeting on that part of the tour was extremely intense," he says .
 At the last minute, as a tactical maneuver, we changed the site of the meeting to prevent an attack . In that way, as well as by bringing more people to protect the meeting, we were able to successfully hold the meeting .
 The CWP people were attacked and murdered, this was an outrage that fit in with the pattern that we’d seen. So, when the CWP ... this was a ... outrage, this is an outrage,’s David Cameron says .
 CWP mobilized people in response to this murder and had a rally and march in the area . The CWP had a march and march to the area in response .
 "We recognized that we had to work together with them in the face of this kind of an attack," he says . "We worked out the basis for doing so and joined with them, and others, in mobilizing people," he adds .
 "At the same time, we had to take a stand in support of the Iranian revolution," she said . "We had to support the revolution. At the same . At the . same time," she added .
 When we would go out to do revolutionary work in Iran, larger numbers of people would gather . We would go to Iran to talk with people and do agitation about what was happening there .
 Things would get extremely healed, and sometimes there would be physical attacks on our people . Sometimes physical attacks would be carried out on people, and things would heal .
 We were very determined that we had to lake this on and turn it around, even as we had this major campaign and battle . We had to wage around the case flowing out of the demonstration against Deng Xiaoping. But we were determined to turn this on, even though it was a
 There was hysteria, mob mentality and chauvinism whipped up against the Iranian people and Iranians who lived in the U.S. The government and the media had put a lot of effort into this, but it was also superficial, he says .
 As is so often the case with people who are whipped up around reactionary shit by the ruling class, there wasn’t any depth to it,’s so often . ‘As is so . often, there was no depth to this. As is . often case with
 I gave a speech at the rally. I talked about the overall political questions involved with the battle around the Mao Tsetung Defendants .
 "I went into what this attack represented," he said . "The outrage of the whole persecution that was embodied in this persecution and these legal proceedings"
 CNN's John Sutter talked about world events that were going on, and what was happening in Iran . But he also talked about the Iranian situation .
 We had worked closely with the many radical and revolutionaryminded students from Iran who were living and studying in various parts of the United States . Ironically, they had been sent to the U.S. by the Shah .
 The Shah had this program to modernize enclaves of the Iranian economy, while the masses of people would be enmeshed and enslaved in deep poverty and oppression . The Shah's program was meant for wealthy enclaves, but the masses would be enslaved in poverty .
 His government, working with the United States government, had financed a lot of these students to go to the U.S. to get training in things like engineering . So his government had financed some of these kids to go abroad .
 Many had become radicalized, but by and large this was a secular anti-imperialist radicalism, rather than fundamentalist religious militancy . But, especially because of the nature of the times, many of them became radicalized .
 Many of the students had become revolutionaries of one kind or another . The communist and Maoist trend had a lot of initiative among these thousands of Iranian students . Many of them had become revolutionary .
 Some of them were beginning to go back to Iran to take part directly in the revolutionary upsurge there . We continued to work closely with them and support them as the Iranian revolution developed, although some of them went back .
 Obama: "Once again, once again, a question of internationalism. So when I gave this speech at the Howard Theater 1 talked about this and why it was important that we lake a stand in support of the revolution"
 It was our respon400 From Ike to Mao and Beyond sibility to oppose our own ruling class in trying to reinstitute and fasten down more lightly the domination and oppression of the Iranian people . The Iranian people are being oppressed by the ruling class, says the group .
 Some people felt that by taking this stand, in the midst of this whole attack on us, we would be taking on an even bigger burden and bringing down even further repression on ourselves . Some people thought that by . taking on this burden, they would be bringing down further repression, they
 During this whole period we focused mainly on the case of the Mao Tsetung Defendants, and in particular on the way in which this involved a concentrated attack on me . On the Basis of Principle, On The Basis Of Principle.
 "We also look up other sharp attacks and big questions in the United States and internationally," he says . "We linked them with the struggle against the attacks on us and with my defense," he adds .
 These connections were strongly in evidence at the rally at the Howard Theater . The rally was held in honor of President Obama .
 "There was a very broad array of people represented there from different political viewpoints who stood in solidarity with us in the face of this attack," he says .
 The last surviving “Scottsboro Boy’s 37 was there and spoke, and there were people from 36 . For example, the last surviving Scottsboro boy, 37 spoke .
 Parly members and supporters took this pamphlet out very broadly, generating controversy and through sharp struggle helping to repolarize the terms of debate in a more favorable way . The pamphlet was published by the National Institute of Public Service .
 The Scottsboro Boys were nine young African-Americans who, in the kind of gross miscarriage of justice commonly directed against Black males in those days, especially in the South, were arrested and charged in 1931 with raping two white girls . They were found guilty and were sentenced to death .
 This was the result of building a relationship of “unity-struggle-unity” with them, says the president . This was a result of a relationship between the two sides, he says .
 In other words, we built unity around the things we agreed on, and we continued to have struggle about larger strategic questions . "We worked to deepen our unity on a principled basis," he said .
 This was expressed very powerfully at that rally, and 1 know it had a powerful impact and effect . This was said at the rally, "This is expressed very strongly at . that rally," she said .
 "When I was in different parts of the country, 1 would see posters of myself staring down at me from overpasses on the highway and from buildings," says the author .
 In the first few minutes of the Blues Brothers, when Jake Blues gets out of Joliet Prison and is picked up by his brother Elwood, they slop right near a bridge . There in the background, for a brief moment, if you look carefully, you'll see one of
 This was another reflection of how broadly we were building this and how broadly this got expressed in various ways, even finding its way into the popular culture . This was a reflection of what we were doing when we were developing this project, and how it got expressed .
 "All this was coming to a head, a number of us were facing serious charges and possibly long years in prison," he says . "I and others in the leadership of the RCP never considered retreating in a political or ideological sense"
 "We never considered toning down, but actually more aggressively and boldly took out what we were all about," says the band .
 That was a key part of how we understood we had to build support in the face of attack, as well as being a crucial part of working toward our overall strategic objectives of revolution, socialism and communism .
 Iranian revolution and 'hostage crisis' had to be dealt with for two essential reasons, says John Defterios . He says the Iranian revolution was a crucial part of the crisis in Iran .
 It was a major event in the world and people needed to know about it and be won to the correct stand on it, he says . If we didn't maintain this kind of stand, then we were compromising not in a tactical way but in a fundamental way, compromising everything we were
 "From those reasons, we were determined that, from a strategic standpoint, we must not back down, or water down our stand, around Iran or around our basic principles"
 Farber was sort of a forerunner of Rush Limbaugh (and, from what 1 understand, is still on the air) and right from the start, he was very aggressive and nasty . He planned to use this as an occasion to launch a political attack on me, he said .
 "That was representative of a number of battles I had with more reactionary types," he said . "I'm not going to be able to get back on the ground," he added .
 The Times assigned a reporter to attend the speech itself and to hang out and talk with me for a few days before the speech . The reporter was supposed to write an article supposedly providing insight into what someone like myself, a revolutionary communist party leader, was like .
 She attributed a statement to me that could have had the effect of making it sound as if I were threatening Jimmy Carter, who was the president at the time . When she finally wrote what turned out to be a rather major and lengthy article, she attributed it to me .
 The Secret Service picked up on it and tried to use it as a basis to go after me, even though there was nothing to it . And, in fact, this was a total distortion .
 We actually fought back by, number one, going into court and trying to prevent the government from acting on this basis, by showing that it was, in fact, a total distortion .
 "The judge wouldn't grant us this injunction, but the fact that we took this initiative did have an impact. And, although the judge wouldn’t grant us a injunction, the fact . That’s not a good idea, but it's a good thing that we
 Jimmy Carter threatened to sue the Times Times if they didn't print a retraction . They did print a partial retraction, admitting that this was a distortion . The Times eventually printed a full retraction of the claim .
 On the other side of the picture, we were beginning to demonstrate our potential to “turn D.C. upside down,” as we had said in our call to the volunteers. “We had said that we had . said in a call to volunteers.”
 A few days before the mass rally at the Howard Theater, we went to court and the judge ruled in our favor and dismissed the charges . So, in this context, literally a few days ago, we go to court, and the charges were dismissed .
 The government subsequently appealed that and later the charges were reinstated, but in the short run they had to back off . "There was going to be a significant political price to pay for continuing this attack right then," she says .
 There were more and more reports of threats coming from the government and from Nazis, Klansmen and similar types . There were reports of more than a million threats from government and Nazi sympathisers .
 We got threatening messages from Nazis in North Carolina, and this carried particularly heavy weight given what had happened there, the author says . The group's tour of the U.S. included a visit to North Carolina and a trip to New York .
 The government can come in on the basis of that and use that as a pretext for an attack, Times says . Times Times . Times: Government can use that to justify attack . Times .
 It is important to understand that, while you can’t just ignore the mainstream bourgeois media, at the same time whatever dealings and encounters you have with them are a matter of class struggle, as we say .
 They represent the ruling class, and they’re going to serve its interests in whatever way they can, even when they appear to be talking in a friendly way to you . Even if you find a few honest reporters here and there, they're going to be honest reporters .
 A reporter for the San Francisco Chronicle wrote sympathetic articles about the movement . He eventually had to quit because he came under attack from the editors and publishers of the newspaper . "I remember way, way back in the days when we were in Richmond," he says .
 Fortune reporters weren’t really interested in talking to us so much any more, he says . "I noticed that my comments never made it into the article when it was published," he says. "So then these reporters weren't really interested ... any more interested"
 'I had learned clearly about the role of this mainstream bourgeois media and the fact that dealing with them is a part of the struggle. So, through those and many other experiences, I had learned ... about the . role of the . mainstream bourgeois . media and dealing with it is a
 Times reporter totally distorted what 1 was saying in a way that provided an opening for a further attack by the state . State. Times reporter .
 Some comrades from the local area came over to meet with us in our motel rooms . At one point 1 was staying in a motel with some other people just outside Atlanta, and some of the comrades came over .
 Some of the comrades were Black and some of them were white, and apparently this infuriated the authorities . It's not sure if it was just local authorities or also agencies like the FBI that were involved .
 In any case, it turned out that this scene was a provocation to the pigs, who were preparing to mount an assault on us . In any . case, this scene turned out to be provocation to pigs, which were preparing for an assault .
 At one point, one of the people who was in our room got thirsty and went out to the coke machine at the motel . There was this housekeeper there, a young Black woman, who had positioned herself strategically so she couldn’t be seen by all the cops who
 "In a real way she saved us from that attack, because we immediately packed up our things and left," she says . "In real way, she saves us from her attack," she adds. "She saved us," she said .
 "We left in two cars and we were followed for miles before the cops finally decided to give it up," says the author of the book . "We were followed by police for miles," she says .
 This is another incident that indicates how the overall atmosphere was heating up . But this is another example of how the atmosphere is heating up in the U.S.
 The housekeeper saved us from what was clearly being prepared as a major assault; and who knows what we would have been subjected to if they'd come flying into the room with masses of police .
 Damian Garcia 1 spoke earlier about our efforts to build a revolutionary outpouring on May 1, 1980 . Damian Garcia: "We are proud to be part of the revolution that we built in 1980."
 The repression against our Parly and the people who were rallying around this vision intensified week by week, with arrests, jailings, beatings and threats . As May Day 1980 approached, the repression against the Parly intensified .
 Damian Garcia was one of three people who had raised the red flag over the Alamo and denounced the imperialist conquest and domination that it represented . Not long before this, Damian Garcia had raised a red flag .
 The war against Mexico and the theft of its land was a key part of the expansion of the system in the U.S. as it approached and then reached the imperialist stage at the end of the 19th century .
 Damian Garcia unfurled a red flag and read a denunciation of U.S. imperialism . Garcia was in a profound expression of opposition to this, Garcia said .
 "This is truly a living, and a dying, that is full of meaning and inspiration for millions and hundreds of millions fighting for or awakening to the same goal all around the world," says the author .
 A poster of Damian on top of the Alamo, red flag flying proudly, was put up around the country with portions of that statement . This statement was read at memorial meetings that were held all over the country shortly before May 1, 1980 .
 The Parly was leading the Parly to re-examine a lot of what had been our guiding assumptions and to forge a new and much more revolutionary political line . This was a very wild and tumultuous period .
 Reports of death threats against me from various quarters, including from the police, have been picked up by the Secret Service . Times fabrication and distortions and other things as well had been reported to Secret Service, he says .
 "We determined that it was necessary to make a tactical move in order to disrupt a dynamic that could be headed toward something very serious and perhaps even disastrous," the team says .
 "This seriously undermined and took away from what he was trying to do with his life's work. And, as he was busted for this, time after lime, his whole life and activity was caught up in defending himself," he said .
 "We wanted to disrupt the dynamic where they were going to keep coming after me in particular, in one way after another," he says . "It would take away from the broader revolutionary work we wanted and needed to do," he adds .
 In 1981 I look the extreme but necessary step of going into exile and I applied for political refugee status in France . So, in 1981 I went into exile . In 1981, in France, I applied to be political refugee in order to stay in the country .
 The experience of applying for political refugee status in France, in 1981, was very interesting and revealing, and very intense, she says .
 The way the process worked was that you went to the UN High Commission on Refugees, which was in Paris, and you applied there for political refugee status . The way you applied was to apply for political refugees, the way it worked .
 The French government was supposed to grant you the rights that went with that, including the right to remain and be able to live and work in France . And if that commission of the UN granted you political refugee status, you were supposed to be granted the rights to remain .
 When I went with my lawyer to the office of the UN High Commission in Paris, we went from one desk to another in the office with my application for political refugee status, and we were turned away at each one . I went to the Paris office and was turned away by each one
 "I kept exposing these things, and they just kept turning me away, sending me from one desk to another, and refusing to even accept my application to start the process," she says .
 We finally found this guy, and he did agree to sign the application so at least the process could be undertaken . The application is required to be submitted by a judge .
 Well, you know, you'll have to go down to the prefecture of police, and they’ll definitely want to talk to you, police say . Well, I’m not sure what happened to me, but I'm not sure if you’ve seen
 "Even though he was signing my application, he was obviously trying to scare me off at the same time," she said . "He was obviously signing me off," she added .
 The application was signed and filed and the process began . The application process began after hours of hours .
 Going into exile had been a very difficult decision, says the ex-president of the United States .
 Left behind family and loved ones and many friends . Still, it was personally very difficult and a big dislocation. left behind family, loved ones .
 I even had to leave behind my dog, a half German shepherd, half huskie named Dude, that I’d raised from a pup . I also left behind my half- huskie half-German shepherd half huskies named Dude .
 "I was also going to completely new and unfamiliar circumstances, and a different culture," she says . "I'm going to be in a completely different country, and I was going to have a completely new experience," she said .
 1 was excited, on a certain level —Paris, the city of lights, full of life and vibrancy and vitality, and more than that, a city that drew people from all over the world . Would have a chance to meet and be exposed to people from many different countries
 "It deepened my understanding of what the imperialist system does to people all around the world," he says . "That was one of the very positive things about going there, and that did happen"
 The U.S. pulled off coups and installed brutal dictatorships that tormented and tortured, and brutalized and murdered thousands and thousands of people . "The United States had pulled ... coups," writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 I talked to many Chilean refugees, for example, who gave vivid accounts of this . "I talked to [Chile refugees, including many Chileans] who were forced to flee," he says .
 A number of people 1 met, including refugees from other countries who had been in France for a while, helped me learn the ropes, as they say .
 Mao Tsetung Defendants case laid groundwork for some people to understand why 1 had to go into exile . And there had also been some political work done, in France and other parts of Europe, around the Mao case, so that had laid a groundwork .
 I found a great deal of sympathy and support when I arrived in Paris. All in all, I found it all to be very supportive of the French president .
 "It was a difficult thing to uproot myself and have to go into entirely new surroundings. Yet the fact remained that, especially at first, it was difficult," she said .
 Even though it was a very exciting city, 1 felt out of place in many small ways . Even though the city was very exciting, it felt out-of-place .
 "I was determined when 1 went there that I was not going to be an ugly 4J4 From Ike to Mao and Beyond American, trying to make everyone speak English," she says .
 So 1 was determined to learn the language, but it took a while . By reading the French newspaper Le Monde, you could find more interesting news than you could from almost the entire mainstream bourgeois press in the U.S.
 People would dispel the mystery and awe by explaining that people were just carrying on mundane conversations about everyday humdrum things that weren't of very great importance in most cases .
 "To me this still often seemed mysterious and heavy, until 1 myself learned French well enough to understand what they were saying, and the mystery then dissolved," she says .
 At the same time I was trying to take in as much as I could of the culture of Paris and of France . Getting into the Scene at the beginning of the year was a big challenge .
 It’s very easy to get around in the city, because the Metro was not that expensive and you could hardly ever get lost . The Metro was never that expensive, and you couldn't get lost, the author says .
 There was a Metro station within two blocks of almost anywhere you were in the city . Each station had a very good map showing what lines you would take to get to where you wanted to go .
 It was just a great cultural experience—all this diversity from all over the world, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 "I was trying to figure out what this was all about, and they just said, “billet... ticket, s’il vous plait,” so 1 figured out that they wanted to see my ticket, and 1 did have one, so that turned
 Sometimes I would spend hours riding around the city on the Metro, getting off and walking around different places and looking at the architecture and other things that were very different from the U.S., he says .
 There was food at all different prices throughout the city . So far, so far, 1 would seek out all different kinds of food. There was a variety of different prices .
 You could go to different parts of the city and find restaurants of all kinds . Moroccan, Greek, everything. You could find restaurants in different parts .
 "I also sought out things that fell familiar to me, even while I was trying to take in more and more of this new culture," she says . "But I also sought to find things familiar," she adds .
 "I right away discovered this weekly magazine called Pariscope that told you what was happening everywhere in the city during that week, including the schedule of the movie theaters."
 The movies made in the U.S. would arrive in Paris within a few months, and then you could go see them in English with French subtitles . You could see them either in English or in French, depending on how you wanted to take in the movie .
 1 would still go see movies from the U.S. in English with French subtitles, because that was the language they were made in . Even after 1 learned French more, 1 would go to see movies with subtitles in English .
 There would also be what they called a ‘cycle’ -- a series of movies featuring one actor . There would be new movies, but there would also feature a “cycle” of films .
 When 1 was traveling around on the Metro, 1 would also get out and walk around to discover where different treats could be had .
 "I discovered to my horror a few months later that he’d moved, he wasn’t there anymore," she said . "He’s moved, and he wasn't there anymore. And then I discovered to . horror, he moved, she said."
 1 was learning the language and increasingly taking in the culture of France . While at the same time I was interacting with and learning from all people and cultures from all over the world. These were some things that 1 did .
 French Basketball, “The Deerhunter,” and Doo-Wop 1 also discovered French basketball leagues . 1 was frustrated because they usually only played once a week .
 There was a team in Paris and teams in other cities, and each of these teams was allowed to have a certain number of players from other countries . Americans were allowed to play for each team, mainly Americans .
 Some people who didn’t quite make it into the NBA but had played in college in the U.S., or who had played a year or two in the NBA, came over to Europe to play . Some of those who didn't "stick" to the NBA came over
 "I would go to as many games as 1 could, and sometimes I'd talk to some of the players after a game," he says . "People back in the United States sent me videotapes of basketball and other sports," he adds .
 Fiouston team that came to be Phi Slamma Jamma was a team called Phi Slamm Jamma . So this involved a lot of complications, but still I managed to keep up, he says .
 So that was another way 1 could keep up with things that were dear to my heart. So I could keep track of things that are dear to me .
 Culture, especially if it’s done well technically and artistically, can have a very powerful impact in influencing people's thinking and in creating public opinion . Culture is a powerful force in the world, especially in the U.S. culture .
 The Deerhunter came out in the late 70s . It was a movie about Vietnam and American soldiers .
 For example, there was a famous image that people all over the world saw of this suspected Viet Cong member who had a pistol pul to his head and was executed in the streets by a member of the political police of the Saigon regime .
 The Deerhunter had this whole motif in it where one of the U.S. soldiers had kind of dropped out of things and was playing Russian roulette . The scenes of the scenes were aimed at subtly and sort of subconsciously recalling but then reversing the meaning that had been conveyed by
 The Deerhunter is about the Vietnam War . It's about the political police of the puppet regime installed by the U.S. was doing to people accused of being Viet Cong .
 Vietnamese in the liberation army who were captured by the U.S. side were put in tiny “tiger cage’s prisons and tortured there . For example, in the actual war in Vietnam, the Vietnamese in . Vietnam were put into tiny ‘tiger cages�
 The Deerhunter reversed that and had the U.S. soldiers being put in tiger cages by the Viet Cong . The Deerhunter reversed that with the United States soldiers in tiger cage .
 This, again, was a very conscious attempt to reverse the meaning of things, and “reverse political verdicts”; and it was done in an artistically powerful way, because it was a well-made and well-acted movie, designed to create reactionary public opinion in
 1 didn't go for quite a while when it was actually showing in the U.S., and then I had to go into exile . Knowing this, 1 couldn’t just go to this movie like any other movie, so 1 couldn't .
 "It was a very powerful and very reactionary movie, which played the political and ideological role that I have described here. And 1 discovered that indeed it was indeed a powerful and reactionary movie."
 I wanted more of the movie, even though 1 understood what it was doing and recognized how it was manipulating people’s thinking and feelings . 1 did feel the powerful pull of it, even while I was resisting it .
 "I learned something more about the powerful effect that art and culture can have, in this case in a very negative way," she says .
 One pull 1 did not try to resist, nor would 1 ever want to, was my continued love of doo-wop. "One pull 1 never tried to resist," she said .
 1 bought an album of songs by the Spaniels, a group 1 really liked and that a lot of people modeled themselves after when 1 was in high school . They had all kinds of records, including old doo-wop records 1 had lost or had to leave behind when I
 French radio sometimes played songs from the United States as well as music from France . And French radio often played American songs .
 Leading a communist party doesn’t mean that you have a ‘hands-on’ role in every particular thing that the party might be doing, he says . It is important to understand that leading a communist parly doesn't mean that .
 "That would have been impossible—and not the correct method of leadership," says President Obama . "It's not the only way to get around the world," he says .
 "Leadership is essentially a matter of line and not matter of tactical guidance," he says . "In other words, as we say, leadership is essentially ... a matter . of line," he adds .
 Leadership is not the most important aspect of leadership, it is providing direction and forging specific tactics for a particular struggle . But it is the more important aspect by far, as is forging tactics and providing direction for a struggle .
 The essence of communist leadership is to enable people to continually raise their sights to the larger objectives of the struggle, revolution, socialism, and the final goal of communism worldwide, says the Communist Party Party .
 In order to provide that kind of leadership, it is necessary to study the historical experience of the communist movement, internationally as well as within particular countries, he says .
 It is necessary to continually study communist theory and apply the essential principles and methods that are concentrated in that theory . The Communist Party is a Marxist Party Party .
 It's necessary to pay attention to and learn about what is going on in many different spheres, not just in the political sphere, but in the arts, the scientific realm and other fields of intellectual activity . And it's also necessary to learn about the arts and science, and many other
 It is necessary to learn what people working in these spheres are learning, what problems they are wrestling with, and so on. It is also necessary to understand what people are learning from these spheres .
 You have to look into social commentaries of various kinds, putting forward different viewpoints on important questions, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 "It requires learning from the experience and the ideas of the people you are seeking to lead. It requires learning," says the author of the book .
 Communism is not just “being a mirror” to the masses, but applying the scientific viewpoint of communism to concentrate what is correct in their thinking, raising that to a higher level, and then returning that to the mass in the form of lines and policies, propagating these among
 The mass line can and must be carried out not only in the relations between the vanguard party and the masses, but also within the party itself, on all levels . The party itself must be at the heart of the mass line, he says .
 The mass line is not a recipe for tailing the masses, whether inside or outside the party, but a means for learning from and leading them . It's from the standpoint of, and toward, the strategic objective of, communism, says the author .
 "Communist leadership is essentially a matter of leadership through line. All this is what is meant in saying that communist leadership is basically a matter," he said .
 The question we faced was finding ways in which 1 could continue to do that in the new circumstances that arose when I was forced into exile. The question was finding the ways in . that . The question is finding the way in which . one could continue the . way in . the new
 Mao and Lenin studied more deeply into Mao's development of communist theory, but also studied the history of the revolutionary movement, the Soviet Union and China as socialist countries .
 The October Revolution in Russia, in 1917, was the first few years of the Communist International (the Third International) when it was led by Lenin, through the period of the next several decades when, in essence, Stalin, until his death in 1953 . The international communist movement was led
 My approach was, in a real sense, to look at this history anew, applying a critical approach to everything 1 was studying, even those things written by communists . I applied the fundamental outlook and methodology of communism to draw, from all this, the most essential lessons .
 Out of this study, I first wrote up some summations of what 1 thought were the main lessons . The Communist International was founded under the leadership of Lenin and then, after Lenin’s death in 1924, was led by Stalin .
 The International Proletariat Must and Will was recorded and then transcribed and published in Revolution magazine . Revolution magazine.
 Conquer the World was my attempt to further develop this critical summation, and in this talk I did not limit things to the experience of the international communist movement under the leadership of Lenin and then Stalin, but tried to lake in the whole sweep of the communist movement from the time of Marx
 The weekly Revolutionary Worker replaced the old monthly Revolution newspaper . Revolution then became a magazine, which was published periodically .
 It is not a dogma and not some kind of religion where you just blindly follow the leaders of the movement, no matter how great those leaders may actually be . It's not a religion, it's not dogma, it is not dogma .
 Even with Marx and Lenin and Mao, as well as Engels and in particular Stalin, l not only took account of and tried to sum up the main contributions they had made, but also focused on what, with historical perspective, 1 fell could be and had to be recognized as shortcomings in
 In order to grasp the most important lessons from this whole historical experience, it was necessary to take this kind of critical approach, he says .
 I'm convinced that this is the kind of approach and method that has to be applied. And I am firmly convinced that, not only in this particular case but in general, this is a good idea . And I'm not just saying that, I'm also saying that we need to
 "For a number of years 1 had been smoking a pipe and I found that, under the intense circumstances of the late ’70s and early ’80s, my smoking had increased," he says .
 "I was not only smoking a pipe, but smoking cigars, and then I started smoking cigarettes," he says . "I started smoking more and more. I was smoking cigars and cigars, then started smoking them," he adds . "It's not just a pipe anymore, it's
 'People were really starling to get on me, warning me about the serious dangers to my health,' she said . 'I'm not going to die. People were really getting on me,' she added .
 "1 started not being able to taste food. Plus my mouth hurt all the time," she said . "I started not feeling good enough to eat again," she added .
 "I was still stubbornly continuing to smoke, while increasingly recognizing that people were right in telling me I should give up smoking," she says . But she says she still recognizes that people should stop smoking and quit .
 One thing finally convinced me I really had to quit smoking . I was working on writing up an outline of the history of the international communist movement .
 During the early 1980s, there was a broad awareness, not only among communists but more broadly in society, of the growing danger of global nuclear war . The Cold War ended in 1986, but the U.S. has never ended .
 The Reagan administration came in with this very bellicose posture and approach of trying to roll back gains that had been made by the Soviet Union through the 1970s . Reagan took the explicit position that if it came to nuclear war, he wouldn't back down .
 In the 1970s, the U.S. was aware of the growing danger of world war in the Middle East . The party was more keenly aware of this growing danger than people from other parts of the world .
 In the U.S., the ways in which the government was aggressively pushing out and confronting the Soviets in various places was constantly in the public eye . There were things in the United States popular culture at that time—like the TV movie The Day After , about what would happen if there
 The possibility of world war was pushed to the forefront in U.S. society . With the United States being one of the two superpowers, the possibility of a world war became more prominent in society .
 Some people from other parts of the world didn’t see as acutely some of the changes that were being undertaken on the part of the United States in the international arena . The contradiction between the two imperialist blocs was sharpening up, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 In the 1980s, America In Decline was written by the Maoist political economist Raymond Lotta . Lotta wrote a book, America in Decline, about America's decline in power .
 Read drafts of this book and offered comments and suggestions . It made a lot of concrete analysis of the development of the U.S. and Soviet blocs and the growing danger of war between them .
 In this and other ways 1 was also devoting a lot of attention to the intensifying contradictions between the imperialist blocs, the growing danger of world war, and the threat of this posed for the masses of people .
 In summing up, we continue to believe that there was a real danger of world war in the 1980s . The contradiction between the two imperialist blocs, headed by the two superpowers, was in fact the main contradiction shaping things in the world .
 We were right to call attention to the danger of world war, even though there were ways in which we were somewhat mechanical about that. We were also right to point out the dangers of the war, but there were some ways we were mechanical .
 "We have had to sum up and draw important lessons from the mechanical tendencies we fell into. So, while upholding what was correct in our analysis and approach to this, we have had a lot of the lessons we learned from our mistakes," says BBC Sportsmail .
 "I had learned a great deal about the terrible crimes that United States imperialism was carrying out not just in the United States but in many other parts of the world" "The horrible suffering that the daily functioning of this system inflicted on billions"
 Going to another country, meeting people from many different parts of the world and learning from them about the horrors that the imperialist system, and especially the U.S., inflicted on people, deepened my understanding of internationalism .
 I've tried to learn as much as l could from the revolutionary struggle throughout the world, especially where that is led by communist, Maoist forces . I have also continued to devote attention to summing up and drawing lessons from the history of the international communist movement, and I’
 I have written a number of books on major questions confronting the communist movement . I have also written a series of books about the communist party .
 Can't We Do Better than That? analyzes the content of different kinds of democracy throughout history . The book explores democracy in its historical context and how it has evolved .
 The vaunted “American democracy” has a definite social and class content . In other words, this is a democracy that is founded on and serves the capitalist and imperialist system and the ruling class that benefits from that system .
 In their thinking, as well as in the realities of how society functions, they are still trapped within the framework of what is in fact bourgeois democracy, a system of bourgeois rule . All the politics and in fact all the affairs of society are dominated by a small class of people that rules
 Democracy in a country like the U.S., in its actual functioning and social content, remains extremely important . So “democracy” continues to be a source of considerable illusion and confusion,’s David Frum says .
 I wrote a book called For a Harvest of Dragons. Cant We Do Better Than That? I wrote the book for the first time . I also wrote For a harvest of Dragons, I wrote for a book about dragons .
 Even before the Soviet Union collapsed, there was a lot of talk about how Marxism was in crisis . At that time, even before the . Soviet . Union collapsed . The Soviet Union was in a crisis .
 So 1 wrote this book to defend Marxism and communism, both as a theory and as a political movement, and also to sum up what I saw as some of the key aspects of Marxism and how they applied in the contemporary world .
 Bush is deliberately promoting religious fundamentalism in all kinds of ways . Bush, besides self-consciously taking on the swagger and smirk of a philistine know-nothing bully, is promoting that as a model .
 "All this is part of his promotion of religious fundamentalism in the United States," he said . "We, in our party, have very correctly labeled Christian Fascism," he added .
 Christian Fascism does not refer to Christianity in some general sense . There are people who take up Christianity from many different viewpoints, including people who are progressive .
 Christian fundamentalism is an ideological and political force in society, author says . Its connections now reach right up to the highest levels of the ruling political structures, including the White House and House of Representatives Majority Leader Tom DeLay . That is very different, however, from fundamentalism, he
 In the decade of the 1990s, I gave a number of talks and wrote several articles which spoke to the growing phenomenon, and danger, of religious fundamentalism, within the United States .
 Preaching From a Pulpit of Bones also includes a critique of attempts to use the Bible for more progressive causes . The book also includes an analysis of the Bible's use of it to promote progressive causes.
 The Bible cannot be a guide to eliminating the injustices and outrages that many of these progressive religious people seek to abolish, he says . While uniting with some of the sentiments, and many of the actions, of people who proceed from this perspective .
 I have devoted some attention to analyzing questions of military theory during this period . I have also devoted some . attention to questions of . military theory .
 Certain people who had been part of the Maoist movement started tailing after bourgeois-democratic viewpoints . They said that we had to rethink the whole history of the communist movement and not just criticize certain errors, but throw out altogether the experience of socialist society .
 This was vastly different than what I had done in Conquer the World . I had raised a number of sharp criticisms but had upheld the overall experience of socialism . This was an attempt to repudiate that and to argue instead for a more democratic approach to socialism .
 As I analyzed in polemicizing against this, it would amount to abandoning the cause of revolution and communism completely . As I said, "I analyzed in . polemicized against this in polemics. As I . analyzed ... it would . amount to . abandoning . the cause
 "We should basically adopt bourgeois democracy in the name of socialism and communism," he says . But while strongly rejecting, and sharply polemicizing, he also struggles against, the notion that we should basically adopted bourgeois democracy, he has tried to 39 .
 This is part of developing socialism as a vital and vibrant society where people themselves are wrestling with and thrashing out all the big questions of affairs of state and the direction of society, says Simon Tisdall .
 Even where people may not agree that we should continue on the socialist road, we should seek to learn from their dissent and criticism . We should not seek to suppress it, so long as it doesn't take the form of an actual concrete organized attempt to overthrow socialism and drag people back to
 I have returned to the theme that Mao brought forward of letting a hundred flowers bloom in the arts and a hundred schools of thought contend in science . I am trying to pursue further the contradictions involved in actually giving expression to that, both in building the revolutionary struggle and the vanguard party now
 The RCP has been trying to help the RCP develop its work, both in the realm of practice and in theory, but also to contribute whatever I can to the struggle internationally . So these are some of the main questions I have been wrestling with and writing .
 Learning from Others 1 have always taken that approach of reading very broadly . Learning from others 1 has always been very positive about reading broadly .
 In studying the history of the international communist movement, 1 read summations not only by people within that tradition, but also by people from a number of very different viewpoints .
 Marxism embraces but does not replace the arts and sciences and all the different fields of human endeavor . Marxism, as he put it, embraces but not replaces the arts or sciences . Marxism is not just Marxism, but Marxism embraces all kinds of human endeavors .
 "It is necessary to learn from many different people with many diverse viewpoints in all these different fields," she says . She says. "I want to learn more from people who have diverse viewpoints."
 Mao meant by saying Marxism embraces these various spheres . Mao's approach and approach to dialectical materialism can and should be applied to all these different spheres .
 It is a comprehensive scientific viewpoint and method that can lead to grasping reality, in all its complexity and particularity, in the most thorough way .
 An important part of applying that viewpoint and method is learning from many different people, including people who don't agree with or don’t apply the communist outlook and method, says the author .
 Many people who don’t apply the communist viewpoint and method have made important contributions and discovered important truths . Many people in the sciences, in the arts, and in other spheres, have made significant contributions .
 Mao's "does not replace" Mao is getting at the point of Mao's Maoism . Mao's message is that the revolution is not going to be a success in China .
 It is not easy to learn very broadly without losing your bearings . It is difficult to hold on to the correct basic approach and method without gelling dogmatic .
 “Marxism embraces but does not replace” should be applied in our work now and in socialist society, he says . With all this in mind, in various talks and writings I have been exploring how this principle should be used now and again .
 Madison, Jefferson, and Stalin: The end of one stage of the proletarian revolution, and the beginning of another . The last period of the revolution was the end of a stage of one, and another .
 The stage that’s ended is the whole period that began with the First International, at the lime of Marx and Engels, and then took three successive leaps with the Paris Commune in 1871, the October Revolution in Russia in 1917 . The Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution in
 Once again there are no socialist countries in the world and no Communist International . And now this historical period has ended with a situation where . once again there is no socialist . countries . No Communist International. No Socialist Socialist Party .
 Marxism-Leninism-Maoism is the product of this whole period and which enables us to sum up that experience and move forward—which we have been doing . To the contrary, we have Marxism- Leninism-maoism, which is a product of the whole period
 Maoist parties regrouped into Revolutionary Internationalist Movement . Maoist struggle has contributed to the future formation of a new Communist International .
 With all their tremendous accomplishments, we can’t just try to repeat the experience of past revolutions; we must do even better, and we can . We can. We can, and I'm sure we can. With all the tremendous accomplishments of the past, we must .
 A number of times in this memoir I’ve recalled our insistence on upholding the ideals of the Soviet Union under Stalin, focusing on the ways in which the masses truly were making history under his leadership . The memoir, From Ike to Mao and Beyond, is published by Simon Tisd
 Stalin is to the proletarian revolution and socialist society as Jefferson and Madison were to the bourgeois revolution and capitalist society . Stalin was to the revolution and the revolution of the capitalist revolution, Madison and Jefferson were .
 Jefferson and Madison provided critical ideological and political leadership to the bourgeois revolution in the U.S. Jefferson, Madison, wrote the Constitution and the establishment of the republic .
 Slavery was the legal foundation and political structure that enshrined this ownership of human beings for another 85 years, until the Civil War . At the same lime, they both owned and traded in slaves .
 They were important representatives of the bourgeoisie and capitalist society, but at the same time there were significant ways in which, in theory and in practice, they applied and propagated things sharply in conflict with that. They applied and . propagated .
 Stalin represented a class, the proletariat, and a system of socialism whose goal is not simply replacing one set of exploitative and oppressive relations with another . Stalin's goal was to abolish all relations of exploitation and all oppressive divisions, throughout the world .
 Stalin’s role was to lead the workers and peasants of the Soviet Union on the road of transforming society to uproot exploitative and oppressive relations . And, especially in the early period of his leadership, he was to support the revolutionary struggle throughout the world toward the same goal .
 Even during that time, the danger of military invasion of the 40.5-year-old country was still a threat, says historian .
 Jefferson and Madison had a foot planted in the past, even in relation to the bourgeois revolution of their era; so did Stalin . Stalin in relation with the era of proletarian revolution, as well as Jefferson .
 If the bourgeoisie and its political representatives can uphold people like Madison and Jefferson, then the proletariat and its vanguard forces can and should uphold Stalin . Stalin, in an overall sense and with historical perspective, is a good example . If the proletariat upholds Stalin, it should uphold Madison and
 Unlike the bourgeoisie, we are aiming for the abolition of all relations of exploitation and oppression, everywhere in the world . We should not simply uphold Stalin—or even greater leaders of the proletariat and socialist society, such as Lenin and Mao—but more than that we should strive to learn from
 My demand for political refugee status was eventually turned down, as we expected it would be . The Outcome of the Charges and the Refugee Status was the result of the charges against me .
 The demand was eventually turned down, but it was an important struggle to wage for those reasons, even though the demand was ultimately turned down .
 The authorities in the United States were finally forced to back off the charges that resulted from the demonstration against Deng Xiaoping in 1979 and the police attack on that demonstration . Even though the demand for political refugee status was turned down, in 1982 as a result of all the struggle that was waged
 The United States government was forced to come to a settlement which resulted in the charges being dismissed against myself, and none of the Mao Tsetung Defendants doing any jail time . None of the defendants were ever convicted .
 It was a battle right down to the end, even in the final appearance in the courtroom . It was the last time the two men were in the same courtroom .
 The other defendants had to appear for the final disposition of the case, but there had been an agreement that no one would have to do jail time . No one will have to go to jail .
 A federal prosecutor ran out racist garbage about a big Black man and he was scary and violent, the prosecutor said, according to CNN.com . The prosecutor's comments were met with laughter, laughter and laughter .
 The prosecutor was forced to back down, and we were able to achieve a successful resolution of the whole case . The case was resolved after the judge's decision to withdraw from the case was made .
 In many ways this period, beginning with exile in France in the early 1980s and up to the present, has been personally difficult . Chapter Twenty-seven Perseverance, and Inspiration The Hardship of Exile .
 "I have had to be separated from family and loved ones and many friends," she says . She says she has been separated from her family and friends .
 On the other hand, I have had the wonderful experience of finding a person who has been not only a close comrade but in the deepest sense a soulmate of mine . That has made up for many things, even though there have been many painful experiences, he says .
 "I was able to correspond with my parents, and we became closer in many ways," she says . "We were able to communicate with each other," she adds . "I'm glad to be able to see my parents again," she said .
 My father would read most everything I wrote, but also my mother, would read it . We would correspond about this; and in that and other ways we actually became closer over these years .
 Just shortly before she died, 1 had a chance to correspond with my mom, and talked about how 1 was trying to make a belter world; and she responded that she was doing the same thing in her own way .
 1 was able to have very little contact with them because of the difficulty of these circumstances, and the same has been true with other people who had been close to me throughout much of my life . Still, 1 was . able to had very little . contact with some of the . people
 "Within the last few years, first my older sister, Marjorie, and then my mother and finally my father died," she says . "I'm not going to be able to go back to my childhood," she writes .
 "There is no way to truly express the kind of loss I felt as a result of this," she says . "They had always been dear to me, even when we were somewhat estranged politically," she adds .
 Over the last period of Lime 1 became much closer to them, yet was physically separated from them almost entirely during this period . "To have them die, and not to be able to be there, was very excruciating," he said .
 In some cases these relationships have ended when sharp political differences emerged . Others, they have deepened with battles fought and battles shared .
 Peter Tosh's last song, "Peter Tosh's Last Song," is one of his last songs . The reggae artist died in 2009 at the age of 50 .
 The album’s title song strikingly presented nuclear war as a concentrated horror, while at the same time driving home the point that life for the masses of people, worldwide, is already a horror .
 He had an updated version of “Fight Against Apartheid” that connected to the inspiring uprising of the midand late 1980s in South Africa . And there were a number of other very powerful works touching on struggles of the masses .
 I do not think that money, as such, will cause us to turn our backs on what we have set out to do, he says . Millions of people are counting on us to lead in doing this.
 "I do not think we will turn back from this, or be turned away from it, because of things like money," he says . He adds: "We will not turn back because of money. I do not want to turn away from this."
 When someone falls to sugar-coated bullets it is demoralizing to the masses of people beyond the loss of a particular person . The loss of that person is even more destructive than literal bullets, says CNN's John Sutter .
 ‘magic combination’ of ideology, MLM, and the masses of people, he says . ‘We will have to struggle with each other and help each other,’ he writes .
 Like much of the album, it's powerful—and sweeping — in its simplicity . The album is powerful and sweeping .
 We, of course, have differences with him, especially that he is religious and we are against religion, ideologically, ideologically . We have differences, he says, but we are not against religion .
 He was one of those of whom it must definitely be said that his religious convictions led him to stand, firmly, with the oppressed of the world against the oppressors .
 Over the years and now decades, I’ve experienced many disappointments . Over the past decades I've experienced many disappointment, but I've been through the ups and downs of life .
 There have been real, and even profound, losses in terms of the struggle for a whole different world and better future for humanity . Beyond personal hardships and losses, there have been many more than personal .
 There have been not only twists and turns, but gigantic setbacks, like the loss of China as a socialist country and base area for the world revolution . China is no longer the base area of the revolution, says the historian .
 "This is something that I myself, our Parly, and communists throughout the world have had to confront," he said . "I myself, my . Parly," he added, said .
 The people who so viciously rule the world oppress and exploit people in the most ruthless and murderous way . The world's most ruthless rulers are the people who oppress people in a ruthless, murderous way.
 These are not just words that get thrown around; those are words that hardly capture the reality of the suffering . The domination of this system twists and distorts the relations among people and turns people into instruments either to be used for the amassing of wealth on the part of a relative handful
 There is crushing of human potential and spirit that goes along with that. And there is the crushing of that. There is also crushing of the human potential, spirit, she says .
 The need to do away with all that, from a strategic point, has not been eliminated, or even lessened, despite setbacks and even real defeats . The need for all that has been eliminated hasn't been eliminated or lessened despite these setbacks and real defeats, he says .
 When 1 reilect on all this, I think of a conversation I had with a friend when I was a teenager. When 1.1 reiledcted on all that, 1 . think of the conversation with a . friend when he was a . teenager .
 CNN.com: "I asked him what he wanted to do when he got out of medical school, what kind of medicine he was going to practice. One day I asked him . One day he said, 'I wanted to ask him if he would be able to practice medicine'
 It has been many decades since that time, and while some advances have been made in treating cancer, it’s still a scourge . Some advances have since been made, but cancer remains a major problem .
 "I would never say that his efforts have been wasted just because cancer is still here. But that person has been working in this field all these years," she says . "That person ... has been ... working in ... this field," she adds .
 The need to eliminate cancer, or find a cure for it, is as great as ever . The need for a cure is still great as well as ever, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 It is within the realm of possibility to find the means to eliminate this scourge on humanity and that it is worth persevering in that effort . And, if you take a scientific approach to disease, you know that it's possible to eliminate it .
 The same applies to the question of uprooting, overturning, and abolishing these horrendous relations of exploitation, oppression, and plunder on which this system is based, and on which it thrives .
 The need to eliminate this system and bring something much belter into being is even more profound than the need to find a cure for cancer . The need for eliminating this system is even greater than finding a cure is more profound .
 Scientific approach to investigating, learning about and changing reality can be found to do that . And if you’ve taken up a scientific approach to investigate, learn about and change reality, then you know that it can be done .
 There is a basis within nature of the world as it is, within the nature and contradictions of this system of capitalism and imperialism, to overturn and uproot and eliminate this system, says Nelson Mandela . Mandela .
 Marxism is a scientific approach to understanding and changing reality that is Marxism, says Marxist leader . Marxists must draw the lessons as fully as possible, he says . "You have to ground yourself even more deeply in the scientific approach," he adds .
 All the experience I’ve been through and learned from has taught me much more deeply and shown me that it is both necessary and possible to do this,’s the best thing that I could do with my life .
 From Ike to Mao and Beyond, Beyond ter ter ter world, a communist world . Beyond ter world will keep throwing up the need for revolution to abolish it, writes Peter Bergen .
 This need will continually be brought to the fore, over and over again . This need is continually being brought to light, over again. This need needs to be continually brought to fore .
 The conditions of the people and what they’re put through will continually cry out for this change, says the president . "The conditions of [the people] and what [the] people [will] cry out," he says .
 If you have had a chance to see the world as it really is, there are profoundly different roads you can lake with your life . If you want to know more of the world, there will be many different roads to explore .
 You can just get into the dog-eal-dog, and most likely get swallowed up by that while trying to get ahead in it . You can't just get ahead of the dog, you can't get ahead, and you'll get swallowed .
 You can put your snout into the trough and try to scarf up as much as you can, while scrambling desperately to get more than others . You can also put your nose in the trough to try and scarf up .
 "You can try to do something that would change the whole direction of society and the whole way the world is," he says . Or try to change the way society is, he says. "Or you can change the direction of the world"
 Your life is going to be about something—or it’s about nothing, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: Your life will be about what you're going to do or not .
 There is nothing greater your life can be about than contributing whatever you can to the revolutionary transformation of society and the world . And there is nothing more than that, to put an end to all systems and relations of oppression and exploitation .
 The communist revolution is still in its early stages historically, says Maoist leader . "I have learned that more and more deeply through all the twists and turns," he says .
 There have been great achievements, in what is actually the very brief and beginning experience of socialism and the advance toward communism . The Soviet Union has been in the midst of a long-running struggle against communism .
 The masses in any part of the world rise up spontaneously, even spontaneously, and especially when they do so with communist leadership . This is a source of tremendous inspiration and shows once again the potential for this whole revolutionary struggle and transformation of society and the world .
 This is a very powerful and sustaining thing when combined with an increasingly deepened grasp and application of the scientific outlook and method of communism . This is the result of a growing scientific appreciation of communism, he said .
 In the past, while we opposed discrimination against homosexuals, we regarded homosexuality as essentially a negative phenomenon which posed an obstacle to the ending of all oppression . In particular, we saw male homosexuality as something that contributed to the oppression of women .
 "I have continued to contribute whatever I can, and to lead the RCP in contributing the most it can," he says . "A world of freely associating and cooperating human beings, the great majority of people, and ultimately all of humanity, would want to live"
 In recent years, the rulers of the U.S. and other capitalists and imperialists were seizing on the reversal of the revolution in China and then the collapse of the Soviet Union to proclaim the ultimate triumph of the capitalist system .
 In Los Angeles on a massive scale but also in Cincinnati and other cities, uprisings have taken place against outrageous acts of brutality and murder by the police . In Cincinnati and Cincinnati, Cincinnati and others cities, police brutality has taken place .
 Every year since 1996 there has been a National Day of Protest against police brutality, repression, and the criminalization of the youth . Thousands of people took part in dozens of cities around the country .
 The battle around the right to abortion, as a key concentration of the light against the oppression of women, has continued to rage . The battle is once again sharpening up .
 The fight to eliminate discrimination against gays and lesbians in all spheres of society has taken new leaps . At the same time, the fight against discrimination against gay and lesbians is taking new leaps.
 In recent years massive protests and battles have taken place against capitalist globalization and its devastating effects on people throughout the 41 countries .
 This is discussed, and gone into in greater detail and depth, in the new Programme of the Parly and in a position paper, “On the Position on Homosexuality" available from RCP Publications .
 The ruling class of the United States and its leading core have unleashed a juggernaut of war and repression, declaring a worldwide war to expand their global domination and exploitation in the name of “fighting terrorism,” and instituting new levels of repression within the U.S. The
 Maoist parties, united in the RIM, are making crucial advances in the world . Maoists parties united in RIM are making important advances in China and Russia .
 I think again of my friend who decided to dedicate his life to ending cancer—and of the even greater need to put an end to capitalism-imperialism and all the suffering and oppression this system embodies and enforces throughout the world . When I look at all this, I think
 You see that there isn’t anything more important that your life could be about, and whatever you end up contributing during the course of your lifetime is the most important and the most uplifting thing that you could possibly do .
 "Yes, there are moments of great disappointment, but also moments of joy as part of this. And yes, there were moments of . great joy," says Mark Brownlee .
 There is the joy of knowing that you are part of this whole process and contributing what you can to it . There is also the joy that you can contribute to the success of the project, says author .
 There is the joy of being together with others in this struggle and knowing that it is something worthwhile, that it's not something petty and narrow that you are involved in but something uplifting .
 There is the joy of looking to the future and envisioning the goal that you are struggling for and seeing people come to even a beginning understanding of what that could mean, not just for themselves but for society, for humanity as a whole .
 "This is what my life will continue to be devoted to, and this is what the ongoing story of my life is about," she said .
 A veteran of the Free Speech Movement and the revolutionary upsurges of the 1960s and early 1970s, he worked closely with the Black Panther Parly . He was a member of the Black Panthers and Free Speech .
 By the mid-1970s, he emerged as the foremost Maoist revolutionary in the United Stales . He emerged as a leading Maoist in the U.S.
 He has guided the RCP since its formation in 1975 and is a major leader of the international communist movement . He is a key figure in the world's communist party .
 Avakian has produced a highly significant body of work over the last twenty-five years . Marxism is a living, developing science that must be constantly interrogating itself, he says .
 Avakian has penned the most comprehensive account of Mao’s theoretical contributions to Marxism . He has also written a book on Mao's theoretical contributions .
 He has been undertaking an ongoing examination of the experience of proletarian revolution in the twentieth century . This includes the profound lessons of the Cultural Revolution in China, as well as its setbacks and shortcomings .
 He has been addressing issues of revolutionary strategy in the U.S. and for the international movement .
 He has analyzed why revolution is not only necessary but also possible within the United States itself . The revolution is possible in the U.S.
 Avakian has been bringing forward a vision of socialism and communism that breaks vital new ground for Marxism and the communist project . Through these and other critical investigations, he has been able to uncover the truth .
 In recent writings, he has been speaking to the indispensable role of dissent in socialist society . He says it contributes to deeper knowledge of socialist society, and the critical spirit that must permeate it .
 He has been drawing attention to the importance of the intellectual and cultural spheres in socialist society . He probes historic problems in the understanding of the international communist movement .
 He has been conceptualizing the international dimensions of communist revolution in ways that have far-reaching implications for the world struggle . Further Thoughts on Conquering the World .
 Avakian’s writings are marked by great breadth—from discussions about religion and atheism and morality, to the limits of classical democracy, to basketball . He has also written extensively about politics, religion and morality .
 It is often alleged that a vanguard party is incompatible with a searching, critical, and creative intellectual enterprise . It is also alleged that it is not compatible with a search for the truth .
 From his life experience and revolutionary perspective comes a profound sense of the struggles and sentiments among the masses of people . He keeps his finger on the pulse of the movements of opposition in society more broadly .
 Correspondence should be addressed c/o Insight Press, 4044 N Lincoln Ave. In the U.S. Insight Press is a sister-to-one of Insight Press' weekly feature programs .
 The author's memoir is published by Insight-press.com . The book was published by Simon Cowan in 2007 .
 The Revolutionary Worker/Obrero Revolucionario regularly publishes articles by Bob Avakian, and is published weekly in English and Spanish editions . It is published in English, Spanish editions.
 Why It’s Necessary, Why It's Possible, What It's All About, is a film of a 2003 talk by Bob Avakian . The film was made of a talk by the filmmaker .