 This method, called critical oral history, is described as an applied phenomenological psychology . The goal has been to reconstruct the psychological reality of decision makers in October 1962 . This method has been described as "critical oral history"
 The missile crisis was found to be more dangerous than previously believed . It was largely due to United States and Russian ignorance of, and disregard for, the crisis as viewed from Cuba . The U.S. and Russia were largely unaware of the crisis .
 I think that you and I, with our heavy responsibilities for the maintenance of peace, were aware that developments were reaching a point where events could have become unmanageable . I think . Developments were reaching point of becoming unmanagingable, says President Vladimir Putin . Putin: "I
 No, Comrade Khrushchev, we knew, and do not presume that we ignored it, that we would have been annihilated, as you insinuate in your letter, in the event of nuclear war . Kennedy, October 28, 1962 No, . We knew we would be
 Fidel Castro to Nikita Khrushchev, October 31, 1962 . Nearly 10 years ago, we were two psychologists seeking to make policy-relevant contributions to issues of war, peace and conflict .
 We wished to speak not only or primarily to other psychologists, but rather to policymakers . That is, we wished ultimately to speak primarily to others, but to policymakers, as well as others .
 We therefore posed the following questions to ourselves, then to fellow psychologists . We asked fellow psychologists for answers to the questions we asked .
 By showing what it was really like to have nuclear responsibility when, as in October 1962, everything seemed to be at stake . In 1962, the U.S. became one of the world's most powerful nuclear powers .
 Cohen wrote during a time when U.S.-backed forces were fighting ""proxy"" wars against Soviet-backed forces in Nicaragua, Angola, Ethiopia, El Salvador, Cambodia, and elsewhere .
 Cohen: Those who are guilty of pondering of the events of October 1962 had unwittingly become solipsistic and irrelevant to the world as it is . Cohen's view: Those guilty of the ""ceaseless pondering of the events of October 1962"" had, in Cohen
 Move away from October 1962 and into the study of other events, other analogies, with which to understand the present . Move to study other events and analogies in order to understand present .
 Cohen's advice was sound. For those who were primarily interested in the uses of conventional forces, it was sound . Cohen: "For those who, like Cohen, were primarily . interested in using conventional forces"
 For those who took this risk seriously, it was natural to turn toward the reexamination of the missile crisis, rather than away from it . For many students of international affairs, the risk was very seriously .
 By the mid-1980s, the study of the missile crisis offered as little aid to students of nuclear risk as it did to students and practitioners of conventional warfare .
 Virtually all the literature on it was written about Americans, by Americans . The event centrally involved three countries-the United States, Soviet Union, and Cuba- .
 Khrushchev's inexplicable blundering caused the crisis, Kennedy's courage and skill resolved it . Castro's Cuba was irrelevant either to its causation or its resolution . Kennedy was the man who resolved the crisis .
 None of these works contained a single footnote or reference to real-time documents, with which scholars typically evaluate the validity of interpretive recollection . Moreover, none of the works contained any references to real time documents .
 Allison's subtitle accurately summarized what most scholars had been attempting to do with the episode . Allison was the author of the book, "Ally Allison" and "Allison" Allison .
 Escaping the missile crisis is not an option, however, for students of nuclear risk . Escaping a missile crisis would not be an option for students, however .
 Students of nuclear risk must move into the missile crisis, rather than away from it . Students must move to the nuclear risk, not away from the nuclear crisis, says Peter Bergen .
 Peter Bergen and Michael Cohen saw by 1986 little assistance deriving from the study of the missile crisis . But they had to try to devise a means with which to understand it more thoroughly than before .
 We were looking for clues from actual human experience as to how a crisis looks and feels from the inside, when it appears to be evolving into catastrophic nuclear dimensions . We're looking to find out how to deal with a nuclear crisis from inside .
 It is useful to recall now the connection we made then between the raw, evolving experience of the missile crisis and what we took to be policy relevance .
 The psychological reality of bearing the burden of trying to manage the crisis must contain useful guidelines, perhaps even some invariants, that would likely apply if such a crisis should ever occur again . But the psychological reality must be contained in useful guidelines .
 Human nature, human psychokogy, the perceptual dimensions of ""being there"" under conditions of such moral extremity-call them what you will-are likely to remain relatively constant . Human nature is likely to be constant .
 These two sets of descriptions together constitute an attempt to pry open the meaning a given pattern of thought and feeling has for a person .
 If you seek to understand an action, ask the actor what he or she was trying to do, ask him to explain it to you .
 If the reasons actors give for actions still perplexes you, try to understand the meaning the situation and action had for the individual actors . If you want to know more of the meaning of the situation, try it out .
 This, in outline, is the psychological foundation on which the reexamination of the missile crisis has been based . The psychological foundation is the basis of the reexamining of the crisis is based .
 We asked just such questions throughout 1986 and early 1987 of former Kennedy administration officials . We asked them questions throughout the years of the Kennedy administration .
 Others were simply lacking in content because of the respondents simply did not remember . Some of the content was missing from the survey .
 Other answers were so fantastically precise as to be a bit incredible, after the intervention of nearly a quarter century . Still other answers are so detailed that it's incredible, as well as a bit remarkable .
 Something was lacking, something that would help propel these veterans of nuclear risk back into October 1962 . "Something was lacking," they said . "We need to hold their feet to that recollected fire until they found it possible to communicate credibly"
 We also came to see that, even among Americans, views were diverse, and that merely mentioning the views of others in the interviews often inspired the veterans to respond more detail and with greater conviction .
 We had discovered, in other words, that to get more fully reacquainted with a given experience in October 1962, veterans must be provided with information about their own views, and those of others, reflected in documents and in oral testimony .
 We called it critical oral oral history and, as we developed it, it seemed both helpful and legitimate to characterize our effort as an applied, dynamic phenomenological psychology of the missile crisis . The book is published by Pulitzer Prize-winning author David Gergen .
 In 1986 participation by former Soviet officials was out of the question . American Sovietologists known for their acumen on Soviet motivation in the crisis were recruited .
 Scholars and journalists whose knowledge of the 'literature' of the missile crisis were invited to join the enterprise . Finally, scholars and journalists who knew of the "literature" invited to help .
 In early March 1987, at Hawk's Cay, FL, we tossed these ingredients into the "stew" of a conference on the missile crisis to see what would emerge . In the 'stew' of the conference, we found out what was happening .
 "We had no intention, before the conference, of doing anything further on the crisis," he said . "We were not going to do anything further," he added .
 Most participants believed that although the experiment in critical oral history was worth a try, there wasn't all that much left to learn about this most extensively studied crisis of the post-War era . Most of the participants believed .
 The conference in Hawk's Cay turned out to be the first of five meetings on the missile crisis . As it happened, however, the conference was just one of five .
 There seem to have been two fundamental reasons for the surprising fruitfulness of the critical oral history of the crisis . The oral oral history is a critical look at the events leading up to the crisis in the 1980s .
 First, the method itself produced unexpected discoveries from declassified documents and data-based recollection by veterans that was far more detailed and credible than anything derived previously .
 Participants often witnessed barely managed confrontations between former colleagues and/or adversaries . The resolutions, if achieved, were often both moving and illuminating . And, participants often witnessed .
 The highest levels of the governments of the U.S., Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, and Cuba got increasingly interested in the outcomes of the meetings .
 In the summer of 1987 we decided to act on a hunch that present and former officials in both the U.S. and USSR might see in the process an opportunity to push back glasnost, then in its infancy with regard to the Soviet Union .
 A third, larger meeting was held in Moscow in January 1989, at the height of enthusiasm for Mikhail Gorbachev's glasnost and perestroika . Former Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko, former Ambassador to the United States Anatoly Dobrynin attended .
 Cubans also participated in the conference, though in a subsidiary role . Cubans were in attendance at the conference .
 They issued an invitation in Moscow to the Americans and Soviets to come to Havana to a conference focused on the Cuban perspective on the crisis . The Cuban government invited the Soviets and Americans to attend the conference .
 In January 1990, the project moved to the Center for Foreign Policy Development at the Thomas J Watson, Jr. Center . The project moved into the Thomas Watson, J. Watson Jr. Jr. in January 1990 .
 What was initially conceived as a heuristic ""collision"" of veterans, scholars, and documents quickly assumed another dimension-cross-examination by former adversaries .
 "This has had all sorts of repercussions for those who organize and try to manage the meetings," says the author of the book . "This is not the first time I've been in charge of meetings," she says . "It's a very difficult time for those of us who organize
 Often, they were surprised by the extent of their own misperceptions and those of others, they said .
 The most striking feature of this process has been the evolution in views from seeing oneself as an effect and the adversary as the cause, to seeing how the process was driven by decisions and actions of all sides . The process has evolved from seeing one side as a cause to seeing the process driven
 The veterans learn things they didn't know at the time . Veterans begin to see the interactive nature of decision making, and it becomes possible to construct a rough psychological chronology of the thoughts and feelings underlying the evolution of political and military events .
 The inadvertent slide to that confrontation is thus their joint burden of nuclear responsibility . The two countries have shared responsibility for the nuclear crisis .
 Together, they put the world at greater risk of nuclear catastrophe than at any time before or since . The world is at risk of a nuclear catastrophe, says CNN's John Sutter .
 For veterans, oral history presents both opportunities and risks regarding their personal reputations . For the veterans, the possibility of political reconciliation with former adversaries is also a risk .
 Much of the cross-questioning throughout the critical oral history can be seen as, at various points, attempts to avoid, shift, or finally to assume this burden of nuclear responsibility during the missile crisis . Much of this is seen as an attempt to avoid or shift the responsibility of nuclear
 This is true in the exchanges between American hawks and doves, Americans and Soviets . Americans and Cubans, and even, to an extent, both are Cubans . The U.S. and Cuba have been at odds for decades .
 All of these cross-examinations tend to be characterized by attempts to assign responsibility to the other . If successful, the process is successful, it will accept mutual responsibility for events leading to October 1962 . In 1962, the events leading up to that date will be remembered as the "
 This is far from the only issue around which one might conduct a ""tour"" of the five conferences . This is one of the only issues that might be discussed during a tour of the conferences .
 The issue of responsibility for the crisis goes directly to many of the most startling and troubling findings deriving from the project, including gross misperception by all three parties far in excess of anything previously believed .
 Each side responded in what was felt at the time to be a completely justified, defensive reaction to actions of one or both of the other two . Each side's intentions were misjudged, according to the book .
 This pattern reiterated until it was almost too late to reverse the perverse momentum of misperception . This pattern repeated until it . It was almost . too late for the government to reverse it .
 These data provide a field day for peace psychologists interested in how inadvertent escalation really works, in an almost moment-to-moment fashion .
 Each leadership, seeking to discharge its responsibilities honorably, unwittingly collaborated with the others in a process that could have led to the initiation of a nuclear holocaust . All would have shared responsibility if all had remained to assign relative blame, the author says .
 Castro, along with Soviet forces serving in Cuba, preferred to initiate nuclear war if there should be an American invasion of the island . Yet it is also clear that Castro and Soviet forces served in Cuba preferred to start nuclear war .
 Cuban and Soviet forces in Cuba felt it was their solemn responsibility to do so. Moreover, Cuban forces in Cuban territory felt it's a responsibility to defend Cuba .
 Leaders of the superpowers from those on the ground in Cuba on the issue of responsibility in October 1962 . It is little wonder we came so close then and that, even now, three decades later, the process of assuming mutual responsibility is still incomplete .
 None of the leading participants in the missile crisis will ever know what it was really like to bear the burden of responsibility in real time as the event was unfolding .
 Looking back at October 1962, we are keenly aware of the terrible stakes, but also of the peaceful outcome . Looking back on October 22, 1962, the U.S. was in the midst of a civil war in Syria .
 Many began to doubt, before the crisis reached its peak of tension and remarkable conclusion, that they would be equal to the task of managing it . Looking forward into a situation that seemed to be spiraling out of control, the actors knew only the stakes .
 Memory is foremost a reconstructive process, and the reconstructions occur in light of experience subsequent to that which one seeks to revisit . Memory is a process of reconstructing and re-imagining of the past .
 Documentary evidence is so central to the task of accurate revisitation of the past, especially in the present case, using declassified documents containing thoughts committed to paper in real time . That is why documentary evidence is . central to an accurate revisititation of . the past especially, in the
 Real-time documents do not reveal anything like the whole of realtime psychological reality either . Of course, real-time . documents do . not reveal . anything like realtime . psychological reality .
 Critics of oral oral history must start their engagement with the past with oral history . But they are where practitioners of critical oral history should start with their work .
 The burden of responsibility felt by Kennedy and Khrushchev in October 1962 is seared into their crisis correspondence . It is supremely exemplified by the extent to which they tried to shift it back to one another's shoulders .
 The letters reveal that both men were shocked by what they took to be the irresponsible, precipitate action of the government of the other . They were unable or unwilling to take responsibility for causing a crisis with such dire potential consequences, they wrote .
 The President announced the imminent imposition of a naval ""quarantine,"" or blockade, of Cuba and preparations for military action against the missiles in Cuba, if the Soviets refuse to remove them .
 These measures were portrayed as having been made necessary by Khrushchev's irresponsibility . These measures are portrayed as making necessary by the Soviet Union .
 Kennedy: 'Secret, swift and extraordinary buildup of Communist missiles in an area well-known to have a special relationship to the United States and to the nations of the western hemisphere' Kennedy: "This sudden, clandestine decision to station strategic weapons for the first time outside the Soviet Union ...
 It was about the latest and most dangerous evidence of what was regarded in the West as the central character flaw in Soviet Communists-secrecy and deceit in pursuit of world domination- now a potentially catastrophic flaw, because the Soviet Union had become a nuclear superpower . The Soviet Union has become a
 With regard to the concerns and motivation of the Kennedy administration, therefore, the crisis was misnamed . The Kennedy administration's concerns were misnamed, the author says .
 To the American government, it was caused by the movement of Soviet missiles to a merely convenient piece of Caribbean property, in service of familiar and despised Soviet goals . The U.S. government was outraged by the move of missiles to the Caribbean property .
 The day after Kennedy's speech, Khrushchev served up his own litany of accusations in his message to the President . Kennedy's remarks were the first to be made public in the wake of the Kennedy assassination .
 Khrushchev attempted to send responsibility for the crisis back into Kennedy's court . The crisis was the first time since the war broke out .
 Khrushchev says missiles were sent to Cuba in response to a series of aggressive acts by the U.S. against the Socialist government of Castro . Kennedy's decision to authorize the invasion at the Bay of Pigs in April 1961 led to missiles being sent .
 Kennedy sent the burden of responsibility for causing the crisis back to Khrushchev later the same day . Kennedy later sent the blame for the incident back to the Soviet Union .
 Kennedy professed to be puzzled and shocked by the actions and statements of his counterpart . Also like Khrushchev, Kennedy was keen to assign all the responsibility for the dangerous crisis to the other .
 Kennedy administration did not expect Soviet missiles in Cuba . They thought they had been perfectly clear as to their unacceptability . The Kennedy administration thought they were clear about the missiles .
 Khrushchev and his colleagues did not expect a blockade-an act of war, as they saw it-in response . The blockade was a response to the blockade of Soviet Union-sanctioned Russia .
 Leaders in Washington and Moscow responded instinctually to failed predictions with renewed insistence on their righteousness . Moscow leaders responded instinctically to their failed predictions .
 In a matter of days, the crystal ball effect-assent to the intellectual proposition that war between the superpowers would be catastrophic folly-yielded to a mutual feeling that the crystal crystal ball might be about to shatter- the fear of sliding imminently into a nuclear war
 As this occurred, the shock, anger, and rigidity that characterized the initial responses of each gave way to circumspection and compromise . The shock and anger of each person's initial responses gave way very shortly to circumspect and compromise.
 Accusation and denial of responsibility gave way to self-reflection and eagerness to reach a solution . Leaders in Washington and Moscow reached a face-saving way out for leaders in both Washington and Russia .
 By October 28, the day of the Kennedy-Khrushchev ""understanding,"" the Soviet leader had been transformed from a belligerent warrior to a genial diplomat .
 Kennedy responded in kind in a statement issued to the press the same day . Kennedy responded by issuing a statement in kind .
 Chairman Khrushchev's statesmanlike decision to stop building bases in Cuba was a statesmanly decision . The Soviet Union began dismantling offensive weapons and returning them to the Soviet Union under U.N. verification .
 This seemed to be the psychological point at which the two leaders converged . The two leaders seemed to have converged on each other .
 Before the crisis each had peered into the nuclear crystal ball and found nuclear war to be unthinkable because events would always be manageable . Before the nuclear crisis, each had looked into the crystal ball to find nuclear war was unthinkable .
 Each had subsequently, at the peak of the crisis, discovered that nuclear war had become all too thinkable, because events were becoming unmanageable . They had subsequently discovered that .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev learned quickly that they must share responsibility for ending the missile crisis . The moral common ground on which they stood at its flash-point conclusion proved insufficiently spacious to accommodate an end to the Cold War, he says .
 For this to have happened, the U.S. and Soviet governments would have had to assume their respective shares of the responsibility not only for concluding the crisis, but also for causing it . This they could not do. For this, the United States and Soviet Governments would have to assume
 An exchange between the two leaders in December 1962 demonstrated that each still believed the mutual heroics of October were made necessary by the subterfuge and aggressiveness of the other . The two leaders still did not trust one another .
 Khrushchev blamed the crisis on "American imperialists were sharpening the knives and threatening Cuba with a massed attack" In a speech to the Supreme Soviet Soviet Union on December 12, he blamed American imperialists .
 Profundity of each experience produced eloquence unexcelled in the rhetoric of statesmanship in the nuclear age . Yet the profundity and eloquence of each . experience produced . eloquence .
 Khrushchev chose the divided, disputed, and dangerous city of Berlin in which to demonstrate that he had learned the great lesson of the missile crisis .
 Marxist-Leninists cannot propose to establish Communist civilization in the ruins of centres of world culture, on land laid waste and contaminated by nuclear fall-out .
 The question of Socialism would be eliminated altogether, because they would have disappeared bodily from our planet . We hardly need to add that in the case of many people, the question of . Socialism would also be eliminated, as they would . disappear bodily from . our planet, writes David Cameron .
 If we cannot now end our differences, at least we can help make the world safe for diversity . If we can't end differences, we can make world a safe place for diversity, it's time for diversity to thrive .
 In the final analysis our most basic common link is the fact that we all inhabit this planet . For, in the final . analysis, our most . basic common . link is to our planet, and we all live on it .
 We labor on-not toward a strategy of annihilation, but toward peace . And we are all mortal ... confident and unafraid, we labor on, not toward annihilation . We labor not toward annihilating ourselves, but towards peace .
 The correspondence between Khrushchev and Cuban leader Castro on the final weekend of the missile crisis reveals that, whereas Castro felt a heavy weight of responsibility, the burden he felt had little in common with that of leaders in Washington and Moscow .
 Castro: "For Castro, the enemy was neither unexpected nor was the fear of inadvertent disaster brought on by the momentum of crisis . For Castro, fear of accidental disaster was not unexpected, nor was fear of unintended disaster .
 By late in the evening of October 26, Castro became con238 BLIGHT AND LANG vinced, not without reason, that a United States attack o n C u b a w a s only hours away .
 Castro a n d Soviet Ambassador Aleksander Alekseev spent the entire night drafting a message f o r Khrushchev . According to documents and testimony, he spent the night redrafting the message . Castro a d d d wrote the message in the night .
 Khrushchev a t approximately 7m. The Soviets agreed to send a cable to the Kremlin in order to get the message . Khushchev's message was sent to the White House .
 If they actually carry out the brutal act of invading Cuba in violation of international law and morality, that would be the moment to eliminate such danger forever through an act of clear legitimate defense, however harsh and terrible the solution would be, for there would be no other .
 "We view a situation which we view as quite real and quite close. But at the same time, we are ready to confront a situation ... quite close," says President Obama .
 Alekseev sent a report of his all-night session with C a s t r o t o Moscow, after t h e original c a b l e from Castro had been sent . L e s t there b e a n y doubt i n Khrushchev's
 Under certain circumstances, we should forestall them without waiting to experience ourselves the perfidy of the imperialists and the first nuclear blow from their side . But under certain circumstances we should not wait for the first blow from the imperialist .
 Khrushchev was horrified, in part because he seems to have incorrectly interpreted Castro's request as a call for a preemptive nuclear attack . The request was made before any invasion of Cuba had taken place .
 By the time Khrushchev drafted his response, he and Kennedy had struck their deal, via radio messages, to save time . The deal saved time for Khrushches to write his response to Kennedy .
 Khrushchev was elated at having gotten a pledge from the U.S. not to invade Cuba . He obviously thought he was conveying good news to Castro .
 Kennedy-Khrushchev understanding for on-site inspection of missile sites in Cuba . But this was not good news to the Cubans, for several reasons, including the provision for inspection of sites .
 He had resigned himself to Khrushchev's inability or unwillingness to comprehend Cuba's situation and requirements . He had apparently resigned himself .
 It appears to have become obvious to Castro that Cuba's security interests, as perceived by the Cubans themselves, were not part of the Soviets' calculations in deciding to end the crisis . The Cuban leader appears to think that his country's national security interests were at risk .
 Khrushchev seemed to Castro to have abandoned Cuba in its hour of supreme emergency, he writes . Castro asked for a nuclear strike on the U.S. in the event of an invasion, he says .
 Facing a pivotal and risky choice in the crisis, Khrushchev had not chosen Cuba, leaving Castro, who had chosen the Soviets as protectors, to bear the burden of what he believed in that moment was responsibility for the potential destruction of the Cuban Revolution .
 Khrushchev was alarmed that the deal struck with Kennedy might come undone due to Cuban intransigence . Anastas Mikoyan, his First Deputy Premier, was dispatched to Havana to persuade the Cubans to agree to the terms of the deal .
 Notes of conversations in Cuba between Mikoyan and Castro provide clues as to what the Cuban leader imagined when his crystal ball began to shatter . Castro feared for what he felt for what h e feared was about to happen .
 As though we were being deprived not of missiles but of the very symbol of solidarity, we were deprived of solidarity . As though . We were deprived not . of missiles, it was as though . we were . being deprived of . solidarity . It was not only missiles but the symbol of
 "Our people thought the news about the withdrawal of the missiles was a lie," says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Putin: "We are not going to go to war with Russia, but we are going to fight back"
 They did not know about the agreement that the missiles still belonged to the Soviet side . For they did not . know about . the agreement , that the . missiles still belong to the . Soviet side. For they didn't know about that agreement .
 "I went out onto the streets and to military units and saw that this was so. I went out on the streets," he said .
 We were asked not to open fire on U.S. planes invading our airspace, officials say . We were told not to fire on United States planes invading airspace .
 These feelings could have been used by the counterrevolution to incite anti-Soviet moods . The counterrevolution could have used these feelings to incite pro-Russian sentiment .
 He had cast his lot with Marxism-Leninism, asked the Soviets to assume responsibility for the protection of Cuba, and had accepted the nuclear missiles . Cuba became a target for an attack that the missiles were, in theory, deployed to deter an attack .
 Castro still felt this way on November 19, the day before the crisis was officially concluded at a press conference called in Washington by Kennedy . Kennedy called the press conference in Washington that day .
 Castro's ""October crisis"" was thus utterly unlike that of Kennedy and Khrushchev . Castro's "October crisis" was thus unlike those of Kennedy, Khrushchchev .
 It was not an omen of inadvertent nuclear catastrophe, narrowly averted, from which one should derive the central responsibilities to succeeding generations . It's not a good omen that one should take responsibility for the fate of the world's first generation .
 Castro's crisis was a disaster about to occur not by accident, but due to a deliberate attack by his enemy and the unexpected cowardice of his ally . In the peak of tension and denouement of October 1962, Castro was about to be a disaster due to an unexpected attack by
 He could only rage at the United States planes overflying Cuba at will, waiting for the final end from which there would be no escape, and for which there was no redemption .
 Khrushchev had announced over Radio Moscow the imminent withdrawal of all nuclear missiles from Cuba, in exchange for a U.S. pledge not to invade Cuba . The Soviet Union had agreed to pull out of Cuba in return for a promise not to attack .
 The President sent his brother, Robert Kennedy, to confirm the details of the agreement with Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin . Robert Kennedy was the Attorney General of the Soviet Union .
 Robert Kennedy and the President spent a few minutes alone discussing the events of the previous 13 days . The President and Robert Kennedy were returning to the White House after the assassination .
 The President, according to his brother, wanted to discuss Abraham Lincoln and the Civil War . Public remembrances of 100th anniversaries of Civil War events occurred almost daily during his presidency .
 Former Kennedy White House aide Walt Rostow has written that Kennedy was not a morbid man . Rostow: Kennedy was 'a morbid man. He was not morbid man'
 Those close to him knew he was haunted by the fear that he might be the man whose decisions led to nuclear war . He was haunted with the fear he might have made decisions that led to a nuclear war, they say .
 Kennedy: "It was a good deal to ask of a human being-to protect the possibility of civilization by putting it at risk" "The burden was most harsh and explicit in Kennedy's time," he says .
 By connecting his own experience to that of Lincoln, Kennedy conveyed his sense of relief, his sense that events for which he was supremely responsible might have turned out far worse than they had . If he were to go out heroically, this was the day to do so, Kennedy said
 The critical oral history of the missile crisis began as an inquiry into the nature of Kennedy's experience of that burden of responsibility, and those close to him who shared it with him .
 Those involved in the inquiry have from its inception taken the goal of revisiting October 1962 seriously, not merely remembering it or reading about it, or drawing lessons from it . The inquiry has taken on the topic seriously since its inception .
 To revisit is actually to be there as it was in the event, not literally, for this is impossible . To revisit the event is to be present and present, not to be in the memory .
 Participants create contexts conducive to an accurate and multidimensional revisitation of responsibility at once so difficult to verbalize, but so essential to understand, they say .
 In March 1987, Thomas Schelling expressed to Kennedy's Secretary of Defense McNamara his own real-time experience of the missile crisis . Schelling spoke to McNamara in March 1987 .
 Schelling was in the basement of the Harvard Faculty Club, watching Kennedy's October 22 speech on television with his colleagues in the Harvard-MIT Arms Control Seminar . Schelling says Kennedy's speech was a "national moment" in history .
 Schelling remembered feeling no anxiety whatever, only exuberant anticipation of Khrushchev's humiliation . Schelling said he felt no anxiety or anxiety, only anticipation .
 Schelling: McNamara and many of his former colleagues gathered at the conference had felt tremendous anxiety even while the speech was being delivered . Schelling noticed, apparently for the first time, that McNamara's former colleagues had felt anxiety .
 It was clear from the start that the main perplexities for all U.S. participants in the process concerned Soviet motivation . Soviet motivation was the main concern for the United States .
 Discussion began with a series of questions about Khrushchev's intentions in putting missiles in Cuba, posed by Ernest May .
 The list of possible motives for the Cuban missile deployment was expanded at Hawk's Cay . In the absence of knowledgeable Soviets willing to share what they knew, speculation continued unabated . U.S. Sovietological theorizing was informed, mainly by United States .
 The Gorbachev-Shevardnadze revolution in the discussion and conduct of Soviet foreign policy would create an entirely new possibility- a private discussion in Cambridge, MA, in October 1987, for the public record, between Americans close to Kennedy and Soviets who had worked with Khrush
 The intellectual and emotional context of that meeting is in certain respects almost as difficult to revisit as the event whose unprecedented, bilateral revisitation was its purpose . The political and personal context of the meeting is also difficult to recall .
 Soviet literature on the missile crisis claimed that the U.S. had unilaterally caused the crisis through its aggressive imperialist actions against Cuba . The Soviets were forced to become involved in order to protect Cuba, they said .
 Khrushchev, who had been persona non grata since his forced retirement in October 1964, is never mentioned by name in the book .
 In this account, American imperialism is the cause of the missile crisis, Kennedy its tool and the author's father its unsung hero . The author tried in vain to get Kennedy to come clean about his intention to provoke the crisis, and also provided wise counsel to unnamed Soviet officials .
 He put the missiles in Cuba, a move that seemed then and thereafter to lack common sense . The move seemed to seem like common sense, but it didn't seem common sense.
 These were the questions that Americans most often asked, during the crisis and ever since . These are the questions Americans most frequently asked, including what happened in the U.S.
 Americans present began the conference in Cambridge by posing to their Soviet counterparts just these questions . The Americans hope they will receive answers with sufficiently thick texture, balance, and credibility to warrant taking them seriously .
 Khrushchev reported in memoirs having the inspiration to put missiles into Cuba . Burlatsky had travelled with him on his visit to Bulgaria, during which he had reported in his memoirs that he was inspired to launch missiles .
 "We have enough rockets and warheads to compare our forces with American forces," says President Obama . We have enough weapons to compare forces with U.S. forces, he says .
 "We also had responsibilities to the Cubans, especially after the Bay of Pigs-maybe not so connected," says President Obama .
 Khrushchev's aim was to begin detente with the U.S. But it is very difficult to imagine how placing rockets in Cuba can support this. Khrushchev's aim is to start detente .
 "From my point of view, it was more an emotional than rational decision. From my view, I was more than rational," he said . "I'm not sure if it was a rational decision," he added .
 Khrushchev said the decision to deploy the missiles was irresponsible, poorly conceived, and motivated by deficiencies in his character . Further, he said he had done so critically, implying that the decision was irresponsible and poorly conceived .
 He had disagreed with the long-held Soviet official line on the reason for the deployment-defense of Cuba-and in so doing he openly contradicted the line he himself had helped Khrushchev to articulate in the Soviet leader's speech in December 1962 .
 Russia's self-critical interventions by Russians are now commonplace . Such self-criticism by Russians is now commonplace, says CNN's John Sutter .
 In October 1987, on this subject, they were unheard of, which was unheard of . The veteran Sovietologists and former Kennedy administration officials present took notes like freshmen . In October, 1987, the president's administration was in the midst of a crisis .
 Kennedy made an impression on him at the Vienna summit of June 1961 . The answer, he said, must lie in the impression Kennedy made on him . Kennedy made the impression in Vienna, Vienna, in June 1961, the president said .
 Burlatsky admitted that there was in this conclusion the unmistakable air of self-delusion and wishful thinking . Khrushchev's firm, if ""irrational"" convictions, combined with his highly concentrated power in the party and government, led to the irresponsible decisions in the
 Sergo Mikoyan had been an assistant to his father Anastas Mikoyans during the missile crisis . He addressed head-on the issues that had most troubled U.S. officials and scholars in 1962 and ever since .
 Georgy Shakhnazarov, the senior member of the Soviet delegation (and long-time Central Committee staff member) hinted as well that, as Americans had long suspected, the Soviet leadership systematically deceived all the members of their foreign service corps, excepting Gromyko .
 All three Soviet participants laid the charge of irresponsibility heavily on the Soviet leadership . It was here that all three Soviet leaders laid the . responsibility heavily on Soviet leadership.
 No contingency plans had been made in case the missiles were discovered prematurely, nor could there have been such plans, as many officials who would have been central to their execution did not know of the existence of the missiles .
 In this way, Soviets at the Cambridge conference began to redress the massive imbalance between what Soviets knew about U.S. decision making and what Americans knew about Soviet decision making .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev tried repeatedly to return responsibility for causing the crisis back to the other side . Kennedy tried repeatedly, like two tennis players in a long volley, to try to give responsibility for the crisis .
 The Soviet participants at the Cambridge conference offered to join their American counterparts in an exercise more like a game of catch, requiring each side to accept the possibility of its share of the responsibility .
 The Soviets had begun the process courageously by ""catching"" a considerable and highly specific degree of responsibility, and only then did they attempt gently to toss the ball of responsibility across the table .
 O c t o b e r 1962 proved m o s t revealing that of American intentions regarding C u b a following the B a y o f Pigs invasion .
 Mikoyan: "All the participants in the discussion agreed that the United States was preparing for the liquidation of the Castro regime ... there were invasion plans," he says .
 There was also a covert operation at the time code-named ""Mongoose,"" whose aim was to destabilize or overthrow the Castro regime .
 "I don't believe the public knew about it, but the Soviets certainly would have," says CNN.com's John Sutter . The Soviets would have, he says .
 "There was great frustration about Cuba and considerable confusion about what we should do," says President Nixon .
 We had no intention to invade Cuba, but it seems from what you say that there was a very solid picture in Moscow that we were going to do something more than we were . It seems that Moscow had a solid picture of what the U.S. was about to do .
 Let me say that we had no plan to invade Cuba, and I would have opposed the idea strongly if it ever came up, he said . We had no idea of invading Cuba, he added .
 We thought those covert operations were terribly ineffective, and you thought they were ominous. We thought that covert operations ... well, you thought that were ominous . But they were effective, they were, they said. They were effective . We thought they would be .
 Small actions can be misperceived in important ways, with disproportionate consequences . Small actions often have disproportionate consequences, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 There was no intent in the White House or in the Pentagon--or at least in my Pentagon-to overthrow Castro by force. I can assure you that there was . no intent to overthrow Castro . The White House and the Pentagon did not want to overthrow the Castro regime by force,
 A second U.S.-Soviet conference regarding October 1962 convened in Moscow in January 1989 at the invitation of Shakhnazarov, who had by then become a personal aide to President Gorbachev .
 The conference benefitted from the presence of the highest level living Soviet participants in the crisis, including Andrei Gromyko and Dobrynin . The conference was attended by the highest-level Soviet participants .
 Many more chapters in the common chronology of U.S.-Soviet intentions were added to the chronology . Many of the chapters in this chronology were added .
 At the Moscow conference it was suggested by the Soviet hosts that the participants be differentiated according to whether they were scholars or veterans . The Soviet hosts suggested that participants be distinguished from scholars to veterans .
 He cautioned veterans and scholars alike to resist "a tendency on the part of all of us, in assessing blame, to speak in terms of national interest"
 In fact, "there is plenty of blame to be shared by all three countries represented here today"" - a view with which no United States or Soviet veteran revisiting October 1962 in that Moscow conference room registered any dissent .
 Cuban participation in the joint revisitation of October 1962 began at the Moscow conference . American veterans and scholars were forced to attend the conference . Cuban participation caused difficulties for American veterans .
 The utter unfamiliarity of the Americans with these Cuban officials served to illustrate to the Americans just how exclusively the U.S. and Soviets had been in their view of the missile crisis, from 1962 onward .
 After the conference began, mere confusion became genuine consternation at the Cuban interventions . The Cuban intervention was the first time the U.S. government had intervened in Cuba .
 Americans in Moscow thought they had entered a new kind of exercise . It rapidly dawned on the Americans in Russia that, with the entry of the Cubans, they had . The U.S. and the Cuban government have been at odds with each other for years .
 All U.S. administrations since Kennedy's have, in one way or another, endorsed that statement . "All United States administrations since JFK's have ... endorsed" that statement, CNN.com reports .
 The United States has not had full diplomatic relations with Cuba since 1961 . The U.S. broke diplomatic ties with Cuba on January 3, 1961 .
 Cuban leader says the requirements have never been addressed, much less discussed or resolved . "In the Cuban view, these requirements never have been addressed," he says .
 Cuba remains locked in a Cold War with the United States . Cuba is in an atmosphere as close to perpetual crisis as is sustainable short of war . The U.S. and Cuba are locked in the Cold War .
 Cuban officials who came to Moscow came to revisit the origins of their present grievances . The Cuban officials came to Russia to discuss their grievances with Moscow .
 U.S. held responsible for October crisis, which they blamed for crisis, and the fact of its continuing relevance . They came most of all, so it seemed to . present themselves as victims of United States aggression, they said .
 If there was to be a meaningful U.S.-Cuban revisitation of October 1962, the Americans must take the first step by openly declaring, as the Soviets had done in Cambridge, their share of the responsibility for the crisis . It was clear, therefore, that if there was
 McNamara: "If I had been a Cuban leader, I think I might have expected a United States invasion" McNamara says he would have expected U.S. invasion .
 The U.S. had carried out what I have referred to publicly as a debacle- the Bay of Pigs invasion- we'd carried it out in the sense that we'd supported it. Because the United States had carried . It was a 'debbie' because of the debacle,
 There were covert operations extending over a long period of time ... from the late 1950s into the period we're discussing, the summer and fall of 1962 . "There were important voices in the United States-important leaders in the Senate, important leaders of our House-who were calling for
 I can state this categorically, without qualification, and with the certainty that I am speaking not only of my own knowledge, but of my understanding-and I think it was complete-of the mind of President Kennedy . President Kennedy had absolutely no intention of invading Cuba . Therefore, the
 U.S. officials f r o m t h e K e n n n e d y administration h a d stated publicly, to Cubans, the U n i t e d States' responsibility t o C u b a f o r actions that with benefit of hindsight led
 This question was put to the test at a subsequent meeting in Antigua, in January 1991 . This is the first time a meeting has been held in the same place since then .
 The Cubans had begun their presentation in Moscow by reading aloud from declassified U.S. sources . They led off with a highly detailed report on United States covert operations in Cuba .
 It was a selfconscious attempt to refute the claim McNamara had made in Moscow- that the Cubans had been victims of misperception in drawing the conclusion that the U.S. intended to use military force to destroy the Cuban regime, he said .
 War is not only combat with tanks, aircraft, machine guns, cannon and missiles . War is generalized terrorism, war is indiscriminate murder-war is all of this. War is the placing bombs, the placing of bombs and the placement of bombs, says author .
 The causes of the crisis can be traced back to U.S. aggression . Thus, the causes of this crisis can't be traced to the United States aggression .
 The Americans were responsible for the crisis we had come to discuss. The Americans are responsible for this crisis. The U.S. was responsible for it, the minister said . The Americans, he said, were responsible .
 U.S. officials believe they had to respond to a war declared on Cuba by the United States . It was a pointed attempt to encourage the Cubans to understand that, just as they believed they had already declared war on Cuba, the U.N. had declared on pro-
 McNamara admitted that he cannot in retrospect defend an operation like Mongoose . That was how they saw it at the time . McNamara admits that he can't defend the operation .
 Escalante's presentation was a mistake committed not by perverse men in Washington . But it was committed not, perhaps, simply by perverted men in D.C. It was the mistake committed, not by men in the U.S.
 Cuban actions played an important causal role in U.S. decision making, therefore, Cuba bore some responsibility . Cuba's actions emerged from a context in which it played a major role in the United States decision making .
 Cuba's expulsion from the OAS and rupture of diplomatic relations by many countries in Latin America with Cuba . Many of these other countries started to support the Cuban counterrevolution, says President Obama .
 Any act of Cuba to help the revolution in a country that was helping the counterrevolution was an act of legitimate defense ... if such a thing took place, he says . In other words, I think that any act . of Cuba helping the . revolution in such a country . was an
 "I perfectly understand, to put myself in the Americans' shoes, as my friend McNamara said, that the United States would be worried by this activity," he says .
 Risquet failed to address the central request made by McNamara, which was for specific details on Cuban support for terrorism in Venezuela in the period in question .
 Former White House Aide who followed Latin American affairs for Kennedy crystallizes what the Americans were asking for as a Cuban Church Committee Report .
 The Cubans were not prepared to do this in Antigua, for several stated reasons, including the paucity of documentation on these issues at so early a point in the revolutionary period, and the possible impact such revelations might have on present Cuban relations with countries such as Venezuela .
 Cubans showed no lack of eagerness to discuss the issue, although they preferred to defend such actions as they may have taken .
 Risquet evinced perplexity at the drift of the discussion . Subsequently, for example, he evinced perplexity . The French Open finalist said: "I'm not sure what's going to happen next."
 The conditions that seemed in the early 1960s to warrant policies of mutual destabilization have evaporated with the end of the U.S. Cold War, says Risquet .
 All agreed it is important to have a clearer understanding of what the 'this' is that should not be repeated, especially on the Cuban side . But it is also important, all agreed, that it is not the same thing .
 Historical accuracy is important because historical accuracy is always to be preferred to innuendo or fading memories . It is important for historical accuracy to be accurate and accurate .
 The world was brought closer than it has ever come to catastrophic nuclear war . The U.S. and Cuba have come clean on subversion by the United States and Cuba . It would be possible to understand how responses of one side led to responses from the other side .
 The meeting in Antigua had been intense, even bitter at times, as members of the U.S. delegation continued to press the Cubans relentlessly for details of their decisions to support leftist movements .
 Cubans refuse to reveal what they may have done, saying they were responding to U.S. aggression . The Cubans have repeatedly refused to reveal such information . They say they were only responding to United States aggression .
 This infuriated McNamara, Schlesinger, and others on the U.S. delegation . They claimed to want from the Cubans only information, not excuses, apologies, or accusations . The delegation was angered by the lack of information .
 It seemed odd that the Cubans, particularly Risquet, leader of the delegation, were concerned enough to establish the absolute sovereignty and autonomy of Cuba in the period of the missile crisis . Indeed, it seemed odd .
 Many Americans in Antigua and some Soviets concluded that the critical oral history of the missile crisis had reached a dead end . This led many Americans to conclude that the history of missile crisis in the U.S. and the Soviets .
 Issues such as covert activities on the part of Cuba and the U.S. and mutually hostile rhetoric might just be too sensitive, even in January 1991, for Cubans and Americans to discuss fruitfully .
 The Cubans, however, moved ahead with plans for a conference in Havana . The conference will take place in Havana, Cuba, next month .
 Organizers promised full participation of President Castro . Castro would come prepared to make a full disclosure of whatever the U.S. requested .
 Castro would, the Americans told, proudly take responsibility for Cuba's revolutionary activities . Castro would be proud of his role in Cuba's revolution, Americans were told .
 McNamara went straight to the heart of the matter in his opening statement . McNamara: Washington and Moscow are at odds with each other over the Ukraine crisis .
 Cuba's support for armed groups whose goal was to overthrow many, if not all, of the governments in Latin America and the Caribbean . Cuba's second concern was the support of armed groups that wanted to overthrow some of the world's governments .
 Cuban government "betrayed its promise of a free election and began to establish a dictatorship," says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 McNamara put the challenge to Castro and his Cuban colleagues . McNamara's challenge was to convince Castro and Cuban colleagues to join him in Cuba . The U.S. ambassador to Cuba was assassinated in 1961 .
 The United States delegation had agreed to walk out and end the conference at an appropriate moment . Failing to get an adequate response, the U.S. delegation walked out and ended the conference .
 The conference was by design focussed on US.-Cuban episodes that, in the view of Americans or Cubans, were connected with the missile crisis .
 Decision making in Moscow played a subsidiary role in the conference, just as it did in the deterioration of US. relations 30 years before . Decision-making in Moscow, therefore, played a secondary role in Moscow's decision-making .
 Troyanovsky was to facilitate the U.S.-Cuban discussion, rather than to reveal new facts about political decision making in Moscow . In other words, the central purpose of the presence of a Russian political delegation was to help facilitate the discussion .
 The conference agenda did not call for Castro to respond immediately to McNamara's blunt challenge . McNamara: Castro must respond to the challenge .
 General Anatoly I Gribkov was head of Operation Anadyr, the code name for the secret deployment of Soviet troops and missiles to Cuba . The conference was addressed next by the former head of the Warsaw Pact and, in 1962, head of ""Operation AnAdyr"
 Castro believed such a step would redeem Cuba's martyrdom for the socialist cause . As we have seen, Castro believed that such a move would redeem his martyrdom .
 Gribkov would argue convincingly that Soviet military leaders serving in Cuba during the crisis agreed totally with Castro, not with Khrushchev . Gribakov would now argue convincally that . Soviet military . leaders in Cuba agreed to Castro's demands that Khrush .
 He asserted that Soviet forces in Cuba were ready and authorized to initiate nuclear war, in Cuba, by the use of tactical nuclear weapons . General Issa Plieyev claimed that the authority for use had been delegated to the field commander on the island .
 The existence of tactical nuclear weapons in Cuba during the crisis was completely unknown to the Americans before Gribkov spoke . Gribkkov spoke to the U.S. before they learned of the weapons .
 None of the former Kennedy administration officials recalled even speculating about such a possibility in October 1962 . Indeed, none of the ex-Kennedy administration officials .
 For former members of the Kennedy administration who were present, who would have had to recommend an invasion to Kennedy, this was the most sobering moment in the entire oral history process . For the former . members of . the . Kennedy administration, who were . present, would have to recommend
 In October 1962, there was much concern in the Kennedy EXCOMM about the possible implications of killing significant numbers of Russians in Cuba . The Kennedy administration was concerned about the possibility of killing Russians .
 Most thought Khrushchev would have to escalate the crisis, perhaps by seizing Berlin or attacking NATO missile sites in Turkey, if the U.S. move massively on Cuba .
 Gribkov spoke in Havana, Cuba, about the implications of having dead American marines on Cuban beaches . He says he never considered the implications, until they heard the talk .
 Gribkov's portrayal of the Soviet military in Cuba as a group of nuclear age Robin Hoods was obviously idealized and one-sided . But his revelations tended to add weight to the claims made by the Cubans at the Moscow and Antigua conferences .
 Gribkov's revelations showed the Americans that their actions led to even greater nuclear danger than they had previously imagined . The Americans also believed that Cuban actions were inextricably linked to the chain of events leading to the crisis .
 Cuban delegation reacts angrily to Martin's presentation . Several members of the Cuban delegation reacted immediately and angrily .
 Carlos Lechuga, Cuba's OAS ambassador at the time, expressed the view that Martin was lying . Martin was accused of lying by Cuba's then-OAS ambassador .
 Risquet said that for many years the OAS was the Ministry of Colonies for the United States . He said that the U.S. was responsible for many of the world's most expensive foreign possessions .
 Lechuga, Risquet, and Escalante were indistinguishable from what was taken by some to be their unvarnished mud-slinging at Antigua conference .
 Martin had tried to get across the point of view of the U.S. government in the early 1960s . Martin had done so effectively, and he had done .
 Martin accuses the Cubans of taking part in anti-Cuban activities . But instead of providing facts, Cubans responded only with accusations .
 The absence of interest in supplying facts to the discussion seemed to imply that the Cubans were, most implausibly, continuing to deny that they ever taken part in covert operations .
 McNamara responded to the outbursts by the Cubans by reiterating his original request for information about Cuban actions that the U.S. government felt, at the time, deserved a hostile response .
 At lunch, the United States delegation agreed unanimously that if Castro did not respond to McNamara's and Martin's challenge in the afternoon session, they would terminate their participation . McNamara and Martin said they would "terminate" their participation if Castro didn't respond to the challenge .
 He said he was unaware that he would be asked to speak about subjects not directly related to missiles in Cuba . He explained that he was previously unaware of the question .
 Castro then followed with a 1-hour critique of the four concerns as expressed by McNamara and Martin . Castro: "I'm sorry for what I've done, but I'm not sure what I think about it."
 Working from notes he had taken during their presentations, he dissected the Americans' remarks point by point, and with considerable animation .
 This was much more than any of the other Cuban participants had admitted . This was not the first time the Cuban government had admitted that it had been involved in the shooting .
 Castro now asserted that what the Cubans did (and they did quite a lot, he asserted), was done as a response to United States actions . Whereas in Moscow and Antigua and Havana, the Cuban government held uniformly that they did nothing to provoke the United States .
 We didn't export revolution, because the concept of exporting revolution is impossible . We felt that we had the right to support the revolutionary movement in the rest of the countries of Latin America .
 From Costa Rica and other countries in the Caribbean, to attack Cuba, from the Dominican Republic, attack Cuba . The Dominican Republic is one of the countries that attacked Cuba in Cuba .
 Cuba had every right to act the way it did, very simply. And I believe a country attacked and harassed as Cuba was then had . The Cuban government had the right to attack and harassed the country, he says .
 Castro then said there was a new situation in Latin America . Castro then added, parenthetically, that there was "a new situation" in the region .
 Castro drew a distinction between Cuba's past support for subversion and its new policy of friendship with all the countries of Latin America . This was one of several such interventions by Castro, each more detailed than the last, to draw a distinction .
 Castro's response to McNamara's fourth concern, the betrayal of a democratic revolution and the establishment of a dictatorship, was utterly defiant . Castro responded with a defiant response .
 He argued, in part, that Cuba has a democracy, a point no one on the U.S. delegation was willing to grant . No one in the delegation agreed to grant that point .
 He argues that human rights, such as education and health care, should count heavily when evaluating the human responsiveness of a political system .
 Cuba is a leader in the hemisphere and indeed in the Third World, he says . On this score, he asserted, credibly, Cuba is an important leader, he adds .
 The issue remains the central intractable issue dividing Cuba from the U.S. Indeed, the issue remains a central part of the Cuban-American divide .
 Following Castro's ""trial"" intervention, there was no longer any talk in the American delegation of walking out of the conference . Castro's intervention led to no more talk of a walkout from the conference.
 There was agreement that Castro had gotten their point, as embodied in McNamara's opening salvo . McNamara: "There's no doubt that Castro got their point. In fact, there was agreement"
 Both sides-Cubans and Americans-must come clean on their hemispheric activities . The definition of the 'missile crisis' was to be enlarged to include the Bay of Pigs and the launching of Operation Mongoose .
 Castro's main presentation on Cuban decision making regarding the Soviet missiles, the crisis itself and the aftermath, took place the following day . Castro gave a presentation on the Soviet missile crisis in Cuba . Castro was the first president of the Soviet Union to visit Cuba .
 A putatively bilateral turning point in history has thus been shown to be thoroughly trilateral . The implications of the event have been revealed to be a trilateral turning point of history . A trilateral turn point has now been proved to be the case for the first time .
 The situation on the island of Cuba has been shown to be much more dangerous than anyone previously imagined . An event whose danger has been held by many to have been mostly imaginary has been .
 The causal link between trilateral defensive actions to the verge of nuclear holocaust has been established in fine-grained, multifaceted detail . Most important for those of us who seek durable understandings from critical oral history .
 The missile crisis may perhaps be thought of as something of a superpower confirmation or bar mitzvah, a nuclear coming of age in the nuclear age . That missile crisis was perhaps thought of by the U.S. President Barack Obama .
 Cohen would no doubt agree that, as with all such milestones, it is good and necessary that they happen but, in the nature of things, they only happen once . Cohen would have no doubt agreed that it was good to celebrate his 50th birthday .
 Participants in oral oral history of missile crisis in October 1962 . Some funny things have happened on their way into October 1962, participants say .
 U.S.-Cuban dimension must now be measured in years, even decades, to capture its dimension accurately . First, the duration of the Cuban-U.S. relationship must be measured by years, perhaps decades .
 U.S. and Cuba backed covert action campaigns backed by the United States and Cuba before, during, and after October 1962 . Second, far from being the bloodless scare it seemed formerly to be, we must admit into the picture tens of thousands of casualties from those campaigns .
 The missile crisis was the only episode of the nuclear age in which preparation for conventional warfare was significant and the use of nuclear weapons, tactical and strategic, was at various times seriously considered . The use of nukes was considered seriously considered during the missile crisis .
 The events of October 1962 can no longer be understood apart from the implacable hostility between the U.S. and Cuba since 1959, when the revolution came to power, and which still continues . Finally, we have discovered that the events of that day cannot be understood .
 There is an eerie contemporary resonance in the tale of a small, beleaguered Third World nation, suddenly gaining access to weapons of mass destruction, having no history of their management .
 The 'nuclear phenomenology' with which the missile crisis has been reexamined may be just as instructive . Political psychologists may be able to learn from the lessons of the crisis, particularly for political psychologists, from political psychologists .
 When this happens, according to James, what we need is a good dose of what he called radical empiricism, or nuclear phenomenology . The critical oral history has called nuclear phenomenologism .
 Allyn Allyn, Philip Brenner, Jorge I Dominguez, Mark Garrison and Mark Garrison, Mark Kramer, David Lewis, Edward Tabor Linenthal, Robert S McNamara, Arthur Schlesinger, Jr. and Thomas G Weiss, especially David A Welch .
 Notes of conversations in Cuba between Anastas Mikoyan and Fidel Castro . Presented to the ""Cuba Between the Superpowers"" conference, January 3-, 1991, Antigua, by the Russian Foreign Ministry, Russia .
 The 1968 ""secret speech"" of Fidel Castro and the rupture in Cuban-Soviet relations . Fidel Castro's 'secret speech' was the cause of the Cuban-Russian split .
 Radio and television report to the U.S. on the Soviet arms buildup in Cuba, October 22, 1962 .
 Statement by the president following the Soviet decision to withdraw missiles from Cuba, October 28, 1962 . Statement by president .
 Notes of conversations in Cuba with Fidel Castro, November 19, 1962 . Presented to the ""Cuba Between the Superpowers"" conference, January 3-8, 1991, Antigua, by the Russian Foreign Ministry, Department of Archival Administration .
 America's role in the world was shaped by Sputnik and Peking . The U.S. helped shape the world from the start of the Cold War to Beijing .