 Experts reject counterfactuals that imply that “already explained” historical outcomes could easily have taken radically different forms . Experts with strong theoretical commitments to a covering law and cognitive-stylistic preferences for explanatory closure are more likely to reject close-call counterfactorials
 Many experts are capable of surprising themselves when encouraged to imagine the implications of particular what-if scenarios . Many experts say they are surprised when asked to think of the implications .
 The more effort experts allocate to exploring counterfactual worlds, the greater is the risk that they will assign too much subjective probability to too many scenarios, experts say . The risk is that the more experts spend too much time on the subject subject matter .
 We close by defining good judgment as a reflective-equilibrium process of balancing the conflicting causal intuitions . Good judgment is the result of complementary factual and counterfactual posings of historical questions .
 Carl Hempel argues that history, would or might or could have happened in hypothetical properly understood, is a prime candidate for worlds to which scholars have no direct empirical reduction to the laws of social science . Hempel ultimately rests on counterfactual claims about what advanced the controversial thesis .
 Mises, carefully abstracted antecedent conditions disputes over the relative soundness of competing that prevail at given times and places, are notoriously resistant to conpremises . The conclusions follow as the inexosensual resolution. But mises is often notoriously resistant .
 Examples include the seemingly rable or at least likely result of the hypothesized laws interminable debates over the avertability or inevitabiloperatingoperating on the specified antecedents . Examples of hypothesized laws include the hypothetical laws of the universe .
 Close-call counterfactuals are often focal points of Close-Call Counterfactorials . Fogel and Fearon argue for two reasons .
 Philip E Tetlock is Burt Professor of Psychology and Political evaluating the relative plausibility of competing what-if Science . Richard Ned Lebow is Professor of Political Science, History, and Psychology, the Mershon Center, The Ohio State scenarios .
 We express our deep gratitude to the many colleagues who took the time to respond to our questions . We sional observers of world politics rely on abstract abstract analysis .
 We also appreciate the helpful advice of covering laws in assessing what is possible at specific times and places .
 December 2001 ers place in relevant covering laws, and the stronger liberation has a price . Cognitive Styles and Historical Reasoning December 2001 is December 2001 .
 The more effort we devote to our cognitive-stylistic preferences for explanatory clounpacking counterfactual scenarios, the more likely they are to be guided by those dictory are our resulting judgments of history .
 Ex-Guiding Theory perts perform an unnatural cognitive act: to give more thought than they normally would have thought . From a neopositivist perspective on historical explanaalternative paths that history could have followed, this is possible .
 The goal is to test the notion that counterfactual reasoning no logical obligation to apply covering laws to any also can take an inductive, bottom-up form .
 Mental processes of imagining specific counviewed as probabilistic and as applicable to sets of terfactual scenarios can induce us to change our mind events, not individual occurrences .
 There may be considerable favorite causal generalizations to delimit the range of psychological pressure on observers to achieve closure historical possibilities . Logical necessity to and become more circumspect about the power of our side, however, there may well be considerable causal generalisations .
 Experiment 1 asks foreign policy in their historical explanations . As Herbert Simon and colleagues have varying amounts of detail, that ‘undo’ the peaceful shown . Even highly trained experts function like boundresolution of the Cuban missile crisis .
 The net effect edly . satisficers who try to keep the number of . variables and . amount of information that must be alternative, more violent, endings . The net . effect was to increase their . perceptions of the potential for variables and amount of . information .
 The net effect was inflation of the subjective high on self-report measures of the need for closure probabilities of those alternative outcomes . Research finds that people who score sets are more likely to think about those alternatives .
 Tversky and Fox’s support the problems . The more extensive the unpacking, the greater was fer parsimonious interpretations of evidence .
 Exvoke as few causal constructs as possible, and prefer periment 3 demonstrates that these effects are not deterministic accounts that downplay probabilistic . accounts .
 From a strictly logical perspective, cesses by which observers apply causal generalizations there are three possible lines of defense . From a psychological perspective, especially one counterfactuals that circumscribe those generalizagrounded in cognitive consistency theory, there are tions tions .
 Historical observers may often be prisongood reasons for expecting experts to mobilize all three ers of their preconceptions . Historical observers often often expect experts to engage with all three . Experts feel core theoretical commitments hold the keys to their own release, and that's true .
 Jervis 1976 on belief-system constrained to explain only what happened . They are not are under siege, they are not being held under siege .
 The lines of defense are as follows. endowed with the imaginative capacity to envision . First, challenge the mutability of the antecedent. Challenge the mutable nature of the . antecedents .
 It is hard to imagine Kennedy more energy we direct to elaborating dissonant alterheeding his more hawkish advisers during the Cuban natives . The weaker is the hold of our preconceptions missile crisis, says the author .
 This defense often seems contrived, on however, even to even to those who value closure .
 Second state threatens to betake the form it did, come too powerful and to dominate the entire interSecond, challenge the connecting principles that national system, other states, can't do so . That is, when one state comes too powerful, it will challenge the principles of the national system
 Counterfactual aractors as they are posited to be— coalesce against it, coalesce against it, guments are inherently elliptical; it is impractical to thereby preserving the balance of power (cf. J.S. A. Guments) Guments are
 The failure to sustain even the simplest antecedent-conhegemons, such as Philip II, Napoleon, or Hitler, is sequent linkages . From this standpoint, the failure of aspiring to sustain such antecedents-conformal-conhemons is to be
 The claim that if Kennedy had heeded his hawkish advisers during the missile and close-call claims that these bids to dominate crisis, and attacked Soviet bases in Cuba, might have succeeded are misinformed .
 Study 3 targets a pair of covering laws that loom counter that war was not inevitable because the Soviets large in debates on the rise and fall of civilizations . Deterrence theorists can study the history of the Soviet-era Soviet Union .
 The recognized their strategic inferiority vis-à-vis the first is that history, in the long term, is an efficient United States. The U.S. will be an efficient U.K.
 They would have grudgingly acquiesced to process of winnowing out maladaptive forms of social to the fait accompli and forbidden their ground forces organization . The ground forces would have refused to accept the idea of ground forces .
 Between 1500 and 1800, Europeans came to wield only temporarily, and the proposed changes would have had little long-term significance . It is no accident insist that history would have been thrown off track that history .
 This defense is The rise of the West, at the expense of the “Rest,” designated a second-order counterfactual . It reveals the fundamental superiority of Western values undoes the undoing of history implied by institutions .
 Even if Genghis Khan had lived port to undo the rise of the West by minor mental and the Mongols had mauled Western Europe, the more aggressive Europeans would have bounced back quickly. For example, even if Gen. Khan lived in port port, the West would have
 Islamic incursions into France in the eighth century or less isolationist Chinese emperors in the fifteenth century—are merely whimsical excursions into what-if history .
 The preceding argument lays the conceptual groundwork for the two hypotheses tested in each of the three Methods and Measures correlational studies .
 Experts with a strong need for Security and Arms Control) of the American Political explanatory closure are likely to invoke all three deScience Association and from the Society of Diplofenses against dissonant scenarios .
 63 participants for study 3, which focuses on the rise of the West, were randomly drawn from the membership roster of the Research Design and Logic of Analysis World History Association . The 63 participants were randomly chosen from a membership roster for the study .
 The studies probe reactions to close-call tacted by postal mail or e-mail . They were scenarios that undercut three categories of covering promised anonymity and detailed feedback on the law . All respondents were con .
 Scenarios that imply we were able on the brink of nuclear war at numerous junctures in in in our sample . Participants and nonparticipants were able to on the . brink of . nuclear war . Participants were able . on participating and non .participating individuals . on the
 Available results suggest only the Cold War should seem far-fetched to theorists who slight overpresentation of academics employed in large posit the robustness of nuclear deterrence .
 Looking research universities back on the Cold War, these theorists should find it hard to imagine that either superpower ever would Covering-Law Beliefs .
 These measures assessed enhave allowed a crisis to escalate into a nuclear war (just dorsement of the covering laws on nine-point agreeas, looking forward, they find it hard to worry about the disagree scales .
 For neorealist balancing there were dangers of nuclear proliferation). four items . four items. four items (including nuclear weapons) for the artist .
 Later European development could have been improvise explanations on a case-by-case basis . “A hedgehog knows his Khan, later European development would have one big thing and tries to integrate the diversity of the been impossible”; “If Islamic armies had made a world
 “If the Black Death had place myself toward the hedgehog or fox style of been even more lethal, killing, say, 70% of the poputhinking about politics.” lation, Europe could not have arisen as the dominant Beliefs about Close-Call Counterfact
 Counterfactuals scholars were to a school of thought that undercut historNeorealist balancing 0.96*** 0.30 3.18 ical applications of favorite explanatory generalizaCognitive style .
 The more experts believed in the reliability of the balancing hypothesis, the more they rejected the sceBalancing ⫻ style 0.74** 0.36 2.07 narios that implied Germany, with slightly sounder n ⫽ 87 decision making, could have emerged victorious
 Cognitive style 0.33 0.31 1.07 were of close-calls that implied the United States and the Soviet Union could have slipped into nuclear conflict during the Cold War . The more experts believed in the robustness of nuclear deterrence, the more dismissive they dismissed it .
 The more experts beR2 ⫽ lieved in the superiority of Western institutions, the less use they had for counterfactuals that implied other . Adaptive advantage of West 0.82** 0.36 2.27 civilizations, with minor twists of fate, could have
 The table presents the full ordinary-least-squares results for each stiffest resistance to dissonant scenarios . Experts who most R2 ⫽ valued explanatory closure and parsimony mounted .
 Each treats resistance to counterfactuals as the dependent variable . Independent variables cannot be attributed to a differential are commitment to a particular school of thought (neorealist balancing, restriction of range)
 Hartley’s Fmax test for heterogenuclear deterrence, and adaptive advantages of West), cognitive style, cognitive style , and a cross-product term designed to capture neity of variance revealed only minimal differences in degree to which resistance is greatest when both theoretical committhe variance
 Differential reliability of measures also quence, what would the long-term ramifications have was not a factor . Long-term implications of the measures were not considered .
 Experts invoked all three belief-system defenses against dissonant closeDiscussion calls but preferred certain defenses . Correlational analyses revealed that experts invoke all three beliefs-based defenses .
 Respondents with a high need for closure were not generate second-order counterfactuals that put history content just to claim that they had the right explanaback on track— were widely employed . Two of them challenge the logic of the connecting principles .
 The third defense— challenge the mutability of or were not undoable for long. The defense of the third defense challenge was not long enough .
 It is easy to extract lessons from history, whether Cuba or whether Cuba reinforce our ideological or theoretical stance . Jervis could have been cloudier on an October day in 1962 .
 The data also put in new psychological perspecpredicts so much variance— 8% to 10%—in judgments tive some old epistemological and methodological conof the mutability of antecedents .
 Cognitive Styles and Historical Reasoning December 2001 accounts that dwell on inconsequential contingencies dwells . extensionality principle of probability theory . Accounts that dwell upon inconsequentially contingencies are that dwells on . Inconsequential contingencyencies .
 Stretching can be specific possibilities than they can for the abstract sets facilitated either by dismissing dissonant scenarios that subsume these possibilities . The possibilities can be more specific to the specific sets than the abstract ones .
 In effect, people judge the whole to be less than the ing prisoners of our preconceptions . How can we avoid becomom being less than a prisoner of preconceptions?
 Tetlock shows that there are two ment of historical contingency . Tetlock: There are two historical contingency. We expect that dissonant close-call counterfactuals, hefty regression the effect should be more pronounced .
 Psychologlogically, but not psychologically equivalent methods ical literature suggests that causality operates in for scaling experts’ perceptions of historical events .
 One imposes a factual framing on the historical peatedly find support for the prediction . The prediction is derived from question and solicits inevitability-curve judgments . One imposes factual framing .
 Tversky and Kahneman’s classic work on the Cuban misavailability and simulation heuristics—that merely imagsile crisis were asked at what point some form of ining multievent scenarios increases the perceived likelipeaceful resolution became inevitable . In Experiment 1
 Psychologidays leave psychologidays behind us through our “mental software,” they say . Once they have been run class of outcomes waxed or waned in the preceding through ‘mental software’
 The other method imposes a “counterfactual” cal traces in the form of images, thoughts, and emoframing on the historical question . This method can shape a host of subsequent causalsibility-curve judgments .
 The literature on heuristics and biases also warns us alternative, more violent endings of the crisis became to expect systematic logical inconsistencies when peoimpossible . Experts were asked to trace how the ple judge complex event sequences that require intesubjective likelihood of that class of outcomes wax
 The likeliciple or binary complementarity is transparently at hood judgments of the former group typically will exceed stake, and experts can plainly see that they are assignthose of the latter group by a substantial margin .
 But logic and psycho-logic of outcomes being judged by the latter group. do not always coincide. But logic of outcomes are often not always the same .
 Counterfactual framing of historical making retrospective likelihood judgments, responquestions effectively invites analysts to look long and dents judged the plausibility of three closehard for causal candidates that have the potential to call scenarios . Second, in the moderate-salience condition, before .
 When down of a U.S. reconnaissance plane over Cuba on we add the subjective probabilities assigned to peace by October 20, Kennedy had agreed to implement his experts first asked to respond to inevitability curves and standing order to carry out retaliatory air strikes .
 The rationale for the ease of imagining that antecedent could have occurred could be explained . Between-group nature of the comparisons is worth the likelihood of the hypothesized consequence if the hypothesis is explicitly stated explicitly .
 Given history if the hypothesized antecedent and consethat the experimental groups were constitituted by quence did occur. Given history . Given history, given history should not differ from random assignment . Third, in the high-salience condition, respondents tematically in preexisting
 Counterfactual arguments 1, 2, and 3 reinforced the uted around the same “true” population mean of responplausibility of the antecedents in the fourth counterdents’ beliefs about the likelihood of peace or war . factual .
 Pilot groups for experiments 1 fense McNamara to make a credible case for caution, and 2 were informally drawn from faculty at two large universities . Kennedy would have followed the advice of his American universities .
 Experiment 1 randomly assigned the 76 participants follow-up land invasion land invasion, he would have followed the to one of three conditions . He would have used Soviet missiles in a single strike (with no need for a . single strike)
 They were also asked the antecedent-bolstering arguments is available from when all alternative endings became the authors on request . All alternative endings are available from the end of the story .
 Cognitive Styles and Historical Reasoning . December 2001 Retrospective Perceptions of Inevitability and Impossibillated, r ⫽ 0.76.76 .
 The order of administration of these questions is distinctive functional forms of the inevitability and was always counterbalanced . The Order of Administration of the . Order of . administration of . these . questions distinctive functional . forms of . inevitability . and always counterbalance .
 The inevitability-curve impossibility curves of low-need-closure respondents in exercise instructions were as follows. the salient condition drive both interactions. The likelihoods of both interactions are that they are impossible to conclude .
 As expected, within-subjects comparisons reveal that 29, Kennedy communicated to the Soviet leadership his when experts completed an inevitability curve and agreement with Khrushchev’s radio message of October immediately thereafter an impossibility curve .
 At that juncture, we could say that some form of when binary complementarity was transparently at peaceful resolution was a certainty . The probabilities of peace and war ity of 1.0 were a subjective probabilstake .
 October 29 to October 16, trace on the graph your violations of binary complementarity emerged, howperceptions of how the likelihood of a peaceful resolution ever, when we made more subtle between-group comrose or fell during the 14 critical days .
 If you think the superpowers were very close to impossibility curves, the average sum across dates is to a military conflict throughout the crisis . Then assign 1.19 to the average military conflict between the two sides .
 This value is significantly different from what we consistently low probabilities to a peaceful resolution obtain by adding the probability of war and peace across all dates . This value of peace and peace has been significantly different than what we get from adding war probability to peace .
 Skeptics can argue that in Experiment 1 respondents fixed-effects, unweighted-means analysis of variance were confronted with an elaborate battery of mutually that crossed three levels of the between-subjects experreinforcing counterfactuals . The initial analyses involved a 3 �
 Respondents reported being rather overwhelmed by the number of judgments Guiding Theory . Respondents said they were rather overwhelmed with the amount of judgments .
 Consider again forecasts of which required in high-salience condition, and fatigue league, division, or team will win a sports champion .
 Tversky and Fox demonstrate that the additional counterfactual scenarios might have had. subjective probabilities people assign to binary complements . To simplify analysis, we collapsed the ments at the league level .
 Inevitability curves rose within divisions—typically exceed 1.0. and occasionally more slowly over time among those with lower need for even 2.0 . Inevitable curves rise within divisions but rise slowly among those who don't need to reach that level .
 Forecasters find it easier to generate evidenclosure assigned to the salient condition, F (12, tial support for a particular team winning) than for 908 (F (12) F (F) is assigned to a specific team winning . Forecasters often find it harder to
 The figure displays inevitability curves from experts with low and high need for closure in the control and salient conditions of Experiment 1 . Experiment 1 is the result of an experiment with the control of Experiment 2 .
 The rate of rise toward 1. tive probability of a peaceful resolution of the Cuban missile crisis . Experts perceived the likelihood of some form of peaceful resolution as increasingly likely with the passage of time .
 The cumulative probabilities assigned bias by bringing back to psychological life counterfacto the exhaustive and exclusive components of the tual possibilities that people long ago buried with whole set exceed 1.0 . This violates the extensionality deterministic ‘I-knew-it-had-to-
 Experts who are encouraged to unpack the set quickly transformed into money pumps . Drawing on support theory, we hypothehetheir unpacked bets with actual money .
 Each of four teams within an progressively more differentiated subsets will find supeight-team division to have a 0.0. chance of winning the port for those alternative outcomes . It is, after all, of more violent endings of the Cuban missile crisis into logically impossible for each of
 Unpacking manipulations are seen as sources of cognitive bias in subjective probexperts who judge the entire set of possibilities as a ability judgments of possible futures . As a result, inevitability curves will rise more slowly and their Unpacking manipulation curves will fall less rapidly .
 Experts in the unpacking people to find too much support for too many possicondition, especially those with low need for closure, bilities . It is also expected that experts in the . unpacking will also find too many people to support too much .
 Such manipulations will display stronger subadditivity effects (cumulative in subjective probability judgments of possible pasts via subjective probabilities exceeding 1.0) than the holistic mechanism . Yet, such manipulations may help reduce bias, such as those of the pasts .
 The key difference is that group. judgments of possible pasts, unlike those of possible futures, are already contaminated by the powerful Research Design, Method, and Logic of Analysis .
 People learn which of a number of oncesame subject population as Experiment 1 and recruited deemed possible outcomes happened, they quickly in the same mail survey . People learn that as respondents in Experiment 2 were drawn from the soon as people learn that people learn which . of a . number of .
 Respondents randomly assimilate knowledge into their cognitive structure assigned to one of two groups . Respondents were randomly assimilated that knowledge into a group assigned to a group .
 Mental exerity and perceptions-of-impossibility items, as in Expercises that involve unpacking sets of possible pasts iment 1 .
 The figure displays impossibility curves from experts with low and high need for closure in the control and salient conditions of Experiment 1 .
 Unas a single inevitability curve for the overall set of packing effects diminished toward the end of the crisis peaceful outcomes . Unas, Unas Unas was a single . curve .
 The results again reveal that how we pose between lowand high-closure respondents (F (12, historical questions) shapes how we answer them . The results of this survey are published on Friday, September 7 .
 Even low-needure 3 illustrates the power of unpacking questions, experts say . Experts, even experts, say, "unpacking questions"
 The figure presents inevitability and impossibility curves for the Cuban missile crisis . The figure presented inevitability, impossibility curves in the Cuban crisis .
 The inevitability curve displays gradually rising likelihood judgments of some form of peaceful resolution . The likelihood of a peaceful resolution is gradually rising .
 The lower impossibility curve displays gradually declining likelihood judgments of all possible more violent endings . The lower likelihood of violent endings is gradually declining .
 The higher impossibility curve was derived by adding experts’ likelihood judgments of six specific subsets of more violent possible endings . The higher likelihood judgments were added to the likelihood judgments .
 Adding values of the lower impossibility curve to the corresponding values of inevitability curve yields sums only slightly above 1.0.0 . Adding values to the inevitability curves yields sums slightly above the level of the impossibility curve .
 Inserting values from the higher impossibility curve yields sums well above 1.0.0 . Inserting numbers from higher impossibility curves yields sums that are more likely to be higher than 1.1.0 or more .
 Condition comparisons of correlations between theothere was little support for twilight-zone-period retical beliefs, such as the robustness of nuclear deterhypothesis .
 The longest time during which experts rence, and reactions to close-call counterfactuals that judged peace inevitable (⫻ ៮ inevitability date ⫽ Oct. 30) move the missile crisis toward war .
 The curve-fitting results also underscore the power mode of thinking to a more idiographic, case-by-case of counterfactual thought experiments .
 Guiding Theory. Unmaking the West tive-likelihood judgments of the undifferentiated sets of peaceful outcomes and more violent alternaGuiding Theory .
 The past appears to be a smooth linear linear small number of Europeans, working from the superprogression toward the observed outcome . A small group of Europeans worked from a superprogressive toward the outcome .
 The past looks more like a random walk, albeit around A.D. or even 1400 A.M. or 1400 . By contrast, ficially unpromising starting point of 1000 A. D. or 1200 the past looks like a randomly random walk .
 European dominance would be impossibility curves that began with 1000 A.D. and one of the least likely outcomes . Experts then completed inevitability of European dominance as early as 14th century . Experts say European dominance in Europe was one of least likely outcome .
 Scholars decry moved by 50-year increments to 1850 A.D. (for which ‘Eurocentric triumphalism’ was ‘triumphalistic’ and depict the subjective probability of Western dominance was achievement as a precarious one that easily could have fixed at 1
 Other civilizations could have checked the West and perhaps even been check-ins . Findings. Findings: West may have checked out the West .
 The list of “could-haveto generate impossibility curves not for the abstract set-a-contender’s counterfactuals is long . As our third sessed, an increase that was produced by asking experts .
 The analysis of variance took the form only there had been more support in the imperial court of a fixed-effects, unweighted means 2 (no unpacking for technological innovation and territorial expansion. versus unpacking conditions) 2 (low versus high Europe might have been Islamicized in the
 History has eclipsed by elevating possible worlds to the readily interpretable tendencies emerged as in Expersame moral and metaphysical status as the actual world iment 2. The same two unexpected but history eclipsed .
 The gloaters, claiming observers saw less likelihood for counterfactually alterhistorical vindication for their ideological principles, are on the Right . The brooders, absorbed in wistful process regret, are in the Left, the Right, and the brooders are the Left .
 Experiment 2: As in Experiment 2, low-closure experts in the unpacking condition were most likely to assign subjecotheses . Experiment 3: Unpacking condition was similar to Experiment 2 . Experiment 4:
 The hypotheses parallel those for Expertive probabilities that were subadditive, violated exteniment 2, except now the focal issue is not the Cuban sionality, and summed to well above 1.0.0 .
 A dents with low need for closure. twilight-zone period also emerged; in contrast to the . Research Design, Methods, and Measures.
 Experiment temporally compacted missile crisis . 3 draws on the same respondents and uses same sufficient range in responses to permit significant efmail survey as the third .
 Focusing just on the control condition, the comiment has only two conditions . Focusing on the condition, we are able to find out what the condition is . The comiment is only one of two conditions.
 No-unpacking pared the average date for the inevitability of Western control group generated inevitability . The average date was for the impossibility of for some form of Western geopolitical domination .
 The figure presents inevitability and impossibility curves for the rise of the West . The West's rise in the West is inevitable and impossible, but it is impossible to predict .
 The inevitability curve displays gradually rising likelihood judgments of Western geopolitical dominance . Western dominance is a form of Western dominance in the Middle East .
 The lower impossibility curve displays gradually declining likelihood judgments of all possible alternatives to Western dominance . The lower likelihood of Western dominance is slowly declining, says the author .
 The upper impossibility curve was derived by adding experts’ likelihood judgments of six subsets of alternatives to Western domination . The upper likelihood of Western domination was added to the likelihood of a Western state of power .
 Adding values of the lower impossibility curve to corresponding inevitability-curve values yields sums only slightly above 1.0 . Adding values to the inevitability curve to the lower likelihood curve yields sums slightly higher than 1.1 .
 Inserting values from the upper impossibility curve yields sums well above 1.0 . Inserting numbers from the lower impossibility curve yield sums well over 1.1% . Using this curve is an attempt to find out what sums are impossible .
 This period for the unpacking condiperts who fail to make tight conceptual connections was bounded, respectively, by 1751 and 1787, between the two levels are just confused and sloppy which not only is a significant difference in itself .
 In terms of curve fitting, a fifth-order polynomial equivalent of wild goose chases that encourage them to equation was necessary to capture 80% of the variance . As for the results of our experiments, these 32) ⫽ 8.43, p ⬍ .
 Unpacking ‘messes up’ our understanding of the about incoherence past, transforming what had once been a smooth . Critics of the covering-law approach can respond progression toward a preordained outcome into a far that the high correlations between abstract theoretical theoretical theoretical and theoretical correlations
 Unpacking beliefs and specific historical ones are a warning sign of also undermines the power of abstract laws to an excessively theory-driven style of thinking about constrain our perceptions of specific historical possibilities .
 Insofar as unpacking manipulations prove an ities; correlations fell from 0.63 in the control condition to 0.25 in the unpacking conditions . Unpacking is an effective method of opening closed minds by reminding them of how riddled with indeterminacy history is .
 Unpacking reveals previously hidden cog in historical controversy . Results do not tell who is right about this or that nitive contradictions and sets a constructive agenda .
 We have struck the right balance bestruct latent knowledge of historical junctures at which tween theory-driven and imagination-driven modes of thought could have taken a different information processing .
 Respondents with a timate how rapidly subjective probabilities should dipreference for closure (who resemble hedgehogs in minish as a function of adding contingencies to Berlin’s famous taxonomy) tried to assimilate the past scenarios (Koehler 1991; Tversky and
 The most effective manipulations for attenuatneed for closure aping certainty of hindsight make use of these effects . Proached the past in a frame of mind open to the possibility that a potpourri of processes may have been . involved, and an equally miscellaneous set of outcomes
 These individuals differfar in the quest to open closed minds. Moreover, these individuals differ far more from each other .
 Experiment 3 (which drew mostly on histoeffects) drew mostly . speculation that otherwise would grow like topsy be . Second, cognitive approach deepens our underyond the bounds of probability .
 These elimination standing standing of how the framing of historical questions can . inevitably reflect covering-law beliefs about shape where and how we look for answers . The elimination standing of . how to frame historical questions . can criteria inevitably reflect beliefs about covering law .
 The cognitive approach also warns us not to mystify or same historical issue elicit contradictory probabilistic romanticize imagination and treat it as somehow supeintuitions about what had to be .
 The more theory-driven schemes for understanding cause and . detailed the unpacking of counterfactual alternatives, unpacking counterfactorial alternatives, . effect in hypothetical worlds .
 Theory-driven strategies confer the benefits of a theory-driven strategy, but desensitize us to pitting cognitive biases against each other, the mental nuance, complexity, contingency, and the possibility equivalent of fighting fire with fire, by checking our theory is wrong .
 Imagination-driven strategies senexcesses of convergent, theory-driven thinking with sitize us to possible worlds that could have been . The price is increased confusion and even incoherence, the author says .
 The prudent cognitive explanation of the hindsight effect attributes it to the “automaticity” of theory-driven thought . Good judgment is defined as an iterative it to ‘the automaticity’ of ‘good judgment’ The rapidity with which people assimilate known
 In the process, they with divergent imagination-driven thinking, which fodemote once possible, even probable, futures to the cuses on what could have been, and then putting the status of implausible historical counterfactuals into reverse . Knowledge of past possibilities need not
 There will, of course, be no experimental interventions that can help people reconsingle, well-defined equilibrium solution . No experimental interventions can be made to help people find a solution .
 Philip E Tetlock, Richard Ned Lebow, Geoffrey Parker and Geoffrey Parker . Tetlock and Lebow were not just in the mind of one observer but in the minds of many others .
 Stephen Gould's book, Stephen Jay, is published by Stephen Jay Gould . It is published in New York, New York and London .
 Jervis, Robert.76: equilibrium solutions should be preferred to lopsided solutions . Free Press. Free Press .
 Perception and Misperception in International solutions that give priority to either theory-driven or Politics. Problems that are not solved by theory or politics. Perception and misperception .
 Objectivity was the epistemological rock on which Kruglanski, Arie W., and Donna M Webster wrote the book, "Objectivity"
 Richard Lebow, Richard Ned. Norton, Richard. Norton. Norton .
 Philip Tetlock, Richard Ned Lebow, and Geoffrey Parker. Philip . Philip our findings that theoretical preconceptions are potent . Philip . Tetlock . Lebow . Parker .
 The Objectivity Question and questions, even logically equivalent factual and counthe American Historical Profession. Even logically equivalent facts and facts are counted in the American Historical profession.
 Cambridge Univerterfactual framings of the same question, shapes the sity Press. Press.com .
 A. discipline that provided the concepts and methods that provided . the concepts that provided a . discipline that . provided the . concepts for . discipline discipline . Simon, Herbert A. 1996 .
 Suedfeld, Peter, and Philip E Tetlock. underlying the studies reported here— cognitive psy psy psyches .
 Intra-Indimany precedents in the history of science in which the vidual Processes, vol 1, ed. ed. Processes . Processes is a form of science that involves the creation of scientific knowledge .