 He could maybe emphasize his walkover victory with some celebratory air punches and maybe a display of manly force . But with good showmanship, clever image management he could perhaps emphasize his win .
 A large portion of the U.S. Navy is engaged in in the Caribbean, on October 25th, 1962 .
 U.S. enforcement of its blockade of Cuba continues despite the fact that the Soviets seem to have turned back all their ships . Four Soviet submarines still on their way to Cuba .
 The United States administration noted that the Russians were respecting the blockade . The military had noticed already two days ago . Yesterday, the U.S. administration said that the blockade was respecting Russia .
 Nikita Khrushchev wrote to US President John F Kennedy with a forceful rebuke of the United States blockade . U.S. preparations to confront the Soviets at the U.N. continued .
 This confrontation is incredibly important for the Americans, as they need the rest of the world to have no doubt whatsoever that the Soviets have installed both mid and intermediate range ballistic missiles on Cuba . The U.S. needs to have the world know that the Russians have installed such missiles .
 Up until now the USSR have neither denied, nor confirmed this, and while most U.S. allies believe it, the world public might not, and the Eastern Bloc countries stand with the Soviets .
 In Eastern Europe, Europe, and Latin America, the Soviets have mobilized their Communist connections to besiege U.S. embassies and demand an end to the blockade . The blockade has been in place for more than a decade .
 Adlai Stevenson has so far been the only person in the U.S. to vocally oppose all forceful actions to resolve the crisis, including the blockade . Stevenson is only person who has opposed all forceful measures to resolve crisis .
 His preferred course of action would be negotiating the closure of U.S. foreign military bases and removing the American missiles in Turkey and Italy in exchange for the Soviets leaving Cuba . The president's preferred course would be to negotiate the closure .
 Today, he must confront the Soviets in open session at the UN in front of the TV cameras of the entire world .
 Stevenson will most certainly meet his opponent, USSR Ambassador to the UN Valerian Zorin, in the ring . Unlike the Navy, Stevenson will not be fighting in the Navy .
 Zorin is a formidable opponent he is sharp and he is gifted in rhetoric . He is sharp, sharp and gifted in his rhetoric, says Zorina .
 He’s also something of a sad figure, which we won’t find out until after his death two decades from now .
 His real passion is music and he deeply regrets only being an amateur, and also never being a published poet . He deeply regrets not being published poet and regrets not having been published .
 There is grave doubt by many on EXCOMM, the U.S. committee dealing with the crisis, that Stevenson is really up to the task . Anyhow, there is also grave doubt that Stevenson will be able to handle the crisis .
 President Kennedy is under pressure to bring in someone else to replace him in the White House .
 Kennedy has stood by Stevenson and called in their mutual friend and presidential advisor John J McCloy as moral support for good old Adlai .
 Stevenson has promised to stand his ground, but it doesn't look great when he starts off in his traditional diplomatic and conciliatory tone . Stevenson promises to remain defiant .
 My government is most anxious to effect a peaceful resolution of this affair . My government has been anxious for a peaceful solution to the affair .
 We continue to hope that the Soviet Union will work with us to diminish the -not only the new danger which has suddenly shadowed the peace, but all of the conflicts that divide the world .
 The argument in its essence is that it was not the Soviet Union which created this threat to peace by secretly installing these weapons in Cuba, but the U.S. created this crisis by discovering these installations .
 The threat is not the clandestine missiles in Cuba but their discovery and the limited measures taken to quarantine further infection . This is the first time, I confess, that I have ever heard it said that the crime was not the burglar but the discovery of the . burglar .
 "His arguments get stronger and stronger, then he goes off script and delivers what he has promised the President," says Obama .
 But today -again, if I heard you correctly -you now say they don't exist, or that we haven’t proved they exist, with another fine flood of rhetorical scorn . But today, again, you now say . You now say that we don't . or that
 "I am not in an American courtroom, sir, and therefore I do not wish to answer a question that is put to me in the fashion in which a prosecutor does," she says . She says she is not in the American courtroom .
 You are in the court of world opinion right now and you can answer yes or no. You can do so in the world's court of opinion .
 U.N. Interpreter: "Sir, will you please continue your statement. Sir, will be able to continue this statement. ZORIN" ZORin .
 Stevenson then shows the photographs of the missile sites taken two days ago . Stevenson shows the low altitude shots of the sites . Stevenson also shows the photos of missile sites .
 Council asks again if Zorin denies existence of Soviet nuclear missiles on Cuba in view of this irrefutable proof . He explains to the council what they are looking at, and asks again .
 The representative of the Soviet Union says that the official answer of the U.S.R. was the Tass statement that they don’t need to locate missiles in Cuba . The rep says the official response was that Tass said they don't need the missiles .
 But the question is, have they missiles in Cuba -and that question remains unanswered . The question is whether the missiles are in Cuba .
 Stevenson has stood his ground and made the USSR look like the bad guys . Stevenson has done more than influence world politics on a historical level, he has also made television history .
 The moment has been replayed again and again as an iconic moment of the Cold War . Ever since, this moment was replayed many times as a Cold War moment .
 Hours before the confrontation in the UN, the Soviet Presidium has met again to discuss the crisis again . Hours earlier, the Presidium had met in the Soviet Union to discuss Ukraine's crisis .
 During the night they have received another direct letter from President Kennedy imploring them to not do anything rash and to initiate negotiations . President Kennedy also wrote a letter urging them not to engage in any negotiations .
 The Americans say that the missile installations in Cuba must be dismantled . The U.S. says that the missiles are in Cuba's Cuban territory .
 Operation Anadyr is a series of attempts to pitch the now failed operation as a success because it scared the Americans . The U.S. government has failed to find a solution to the crisis in Syria .
 He had used some of his last political clout to sell the idea in the first place . In fact, he had used that clout to push for the idea .
 It will take another two years for the rest of the men in the room to oust him and seize power, but in 1964 they will . In 1964, it will take two more years to oust the president, but they will.
 The presidium agrees unanimously and starts drafting a letter to Kennedy offering to withdraw missiles if the U.S. promises to not invade Cuba . However, the crisis is not over by a long shot .
 When you let out the leash on the dogs of war it risks slipping out of your hand, and that is what is happening right now . Like I’ve said many times in this series, many times, when you . let out . out of the leash, when . you
 Around Cuba, the U.S. navy is circling looking for something to do, or intercept . The United States Navy is circling around Cuba looking for an interceptor .
 U.S. wants to board two tankers, but since the Soviets look like they’re respecting the blockade on arms deliveries, the White House is uncertain . The White House wants to stop and board the tankers .
 People now begin to worry that it will look like they're not enforcing the blockade if they don’t board some vessel, even one that they know that they’ll let through, but on the other hand they don't want to provoke the Soviets . The military and the
 Admiral Dennison will lay on a plan for doing that, and we should give the instructions, and do so very promptly . But in order to allow him to lay out a plan, we need to give him instructions .
 USSR decide to let tankers through and go after a Lebanese freighter, the Marcula instead . USSR decide not to provoke the USSR while the prospect of negotiations at the UN are on the table .
 The Navy has lost track of it, pursuing a number of other ships they think might be it . Only one problem is that the Navy has never tracked it down .
 The first ship to be boarded and searched by the U.S. navy during the blockade . Tomorrow morning, it becomes the first ship boarded by the United States navy .
 The administration is not really certain what to tell the public about the blockade and if and how it's working .
 Robert Kennedy seems to be back to the idea of air strikes, this time as a way to move the confrontation from the Soviets to the Cubans . Robert Kennedy seemed to be moving the confrontation away from the Soviet Union .
 Russia could have knocked out their missile base, as the first step, as a first step . And ultimately, we might decide that it would be better, rather than have the confrontation with the Russians at sea, that it might be better to have knocked them out .
 CNN.com: "I don't know, it might—you know that’s more with the Cubans than with them. I don’t know what it might be," he says .
 We tell them [the Soviets] to get out of that vicinity in ten minutes, and then we go through and knock the base . And we go look through and we tell them . We then knock the Soviet base, and we knock it down .
 USSR Ambassador to the United States Dobrynin messages the Kremlin in Moscow that he overheard a conversation between journalists that an invasion of Cuba is imminent . While they continue discussing this, the ambassador says he overheard the conversation about an invasion .
 Four nuclear-armed submarines are playing cat and mouse with the U.S. Navy somewhere in the western Atlantic . The submarines are believed to be operating in the Atlantic .
 Fidel Castro is preparing his armed forces to ‘shove the Yankees back into the ocean’ if they invade, or at least shoot down some of those planes that keep on invading Cuban air space .
 Don’t forget to subscribe to our patreon.com or tg.tv so that we can make more awesome history like this .