 Frank Olson was appointed to the committee for Project Artichoke, an experimental CIA interrogation program . At some point while assigned as a civilian United States Army contractor, Olson began working as a CIA employee . Olson worked for the CIA in May 1952 .
 The dispute regarded Glorian Donegan with people like Frank Olsen objecting to unauthorized use of her genome for ongoing Masonry study . The dispute is regarded as a dispute between Donegan and Frank Olsen .
 The issue of control, WHO would make this decision, and the assertion of control is likely the higher level issue that led to JFKs assassination and I assert these assassinations continue today with Roll and Scalia of the Judiciary, Thomas C Wales and various CIA as Executive Branch . Ronald Reagan assassination
 This appears to be directed towards white side theories of Barrack Obama, the Dunham side, leading to PsyOps against Tom Dunhma, possibly tied to that family line as well as tied to me, and also other descendents of Glorian Donegan, another white female whose genome was
 Barrack Obama Jr and Sr. appear to have been selected as a role model for conversion to Anglican in African Regions controlled by the Crown thus extending the Crown . In researching Obama connected activities regarding my family history I joined the small group believing his biological father is Malcom X .
 Much of this story if not all of it is circumstantial evidence created surrounding me and obvious misdiagnosis of me subverting my reputation and accomplishments, even altering the context I am living under to very frustrating conditions .
 This work is especially base in the history of Prescott Bush, George Bush, and the Rockefellers who conspired with CIA (and the Rockefeller's predecessor, the British, Germans, and others) who continue illegal acts from generation to generation . This work continues to be base in
 A battle for Alepo fought by Irregulars is easy to spot . The rights to use a Genome and Irregular Warfare surrounding the rights to is is harder to catch on camera though in this book I have both photos and emails from the Irregular .
 Irregular Warfare which John F Kennedy signed int law as part of the United States Military and Espionage capabilities I believe now have taken on a life of their own and are defending their mistakes . George Bush, Gregg Abbot, Donald and William Barr, the OBamas, the Trumps
 Standard Oil the Bush family from Texas, Howard Hughes, and others planned the Middle East and the Rotchschilds Rockefeller and George and Neil Bush pharmaceutical planned to make money on the world economies forming the Masonary New World Order and PsyOps behavioral research .
 It is the story of Fertilization Feb. 20 the delivery about November new radiological attacks on my midsection, twice, twice . It is a story of the November attack .
 It is the ¢ OECD MKULTRA Building World Genetics story of CIA Church Committee DIA radiation experiments, e George Ball Deep State advancing capitalism worldwide ae Studies, and illegal science, illegal science .
 It is the story of assaultive stalking as psychological harassment and study of me along with psychological warfare against me via staged photos and FrankOlsen-Class espionage harassment of me . e JFK Warren Commission upon assassination .
 It is not about the theory that Malcom X and Glorian Donegan are the real parents of Barrack Obama . The theory does not include that theory, but it does include that .
 DARPA and NASA and MKULTRA and genetics were all one kludge. luminati families studying nuclear war, rockets, tested DNA and were curios of DNA role in world wars, communism .
 Ivanka with high cheek bones, recessed jaw, and 5 foot 11 like myself and like Jack of Twitter born NOVEMBER 18 AND 5 FOOT I1like my father and I both . Kelly Brothers .
 The need this book fulfills is a need for an Epiphany view of world genomic history, now only held by the Illuminati . The public with no credible larger view of it all, a public with not working theories of race and racial strife that truly make sense .
 This book uses HTML which is also used on the Internet . HTML pages in this book reference an internal Cascading Style Sheet . This book is authored as an Epub book wuch uses HTML .
 How style information competes or cascades or which rule your reader is set to or can follow will determine the display of this book . You may see these presentation styles contained within the book .
 Michael Mukasey, Rod Rosenstien Mueller, and others who had access tot he missing 75 grams of nuclear material . Those same figures remain involved in DARPA biology and radiation study which ALSO includes following twins and radiation survivors in long complex studies .
 The National Defense Authorization Act is the name for each of a series of United States federal laws specifying the annual budget and expenditures of the U.S. Department of Defense . This is a Term or Word followed by a list of definitions .
 Barack Obama and Edward Paul Donegan were conceived from Glorian Donegan Ovum . Obama was born December 13 from King Edward VII/ Maria Von Trapp parents . JFK assassinated at 2 year mark .
 For those with information on MKKUTRA, MIDNIGHT CLIMAX or other CIA operations please contact John Pilfer .
 This is picture of my mother Glorian Donegan who was a lovely lady, loving, and patriotic to the USA except blacks, jews, gays .
 Much of this book goes into her lineage and her marriage to my father in the Manhattan Project, my Manhattan Beach project birth in that project, and atomic bomb development at Manhattan Beach . Whether at that time her DNA was used involuntarily in twins studies including half twins of different races or for
 Edward Prince of Wales later King Edward VUI appears to have had out of wedlock children . Glorian was among the “King’s Daughters” the English Royal Family, Catholic Church, and Sidney Gottlieb relocated into the United States of America farm of Fest
 My father James Paul Donegan joined the Army Air Corps as a P-51 plane pilot, B-29 escort, some fighters to protect the atomic bomb dropping . Manhattan Project WW II atomic bomb dropped by atomic bombs in Manhattan Project .
 Mu delivery was November 18 and birth certificate issued November 19 . Mu delivery occurred November 18; birth certificate was signed November 19.
 JFK was at Manhattan Beach Manhattan Project atomic bomb testing and development birth . CIA moved the location to Hawai, also in atomic testing, and Gottlieb August 8 birthday delivery dates of August 3 and August 4 .
 The Switch is a2010 American romantic comedy film formerly titled The Baster . 30-something Kassie Larson is single, hasn't found love yet, and decides to have a baby .
 I am going to cite the Ruins here in that my life in the USA is amidst hostile vines, I am using as a metaphor, for Illuminati tentacles . I realized far too late the vines were surrounding me and my mother, even my father, so they already had the inroads to
 From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia The Ruins is a 2008 horror film The Ruins . The group of tourists in a remote Forrest now realizes that the vines around a pyramid are predatory .
 Secretive meddling in election power-brokering King Making and media operators with big money and espionage capability to keep program proponents in power . Continuing treasonous espionage operation mostly out of Executive controlled rouge agencies .
 From 1945 rt peer agi es granted nearly 1, rm TCS CALLS American citizenSTALL) mL been CU SRL ORC eC R CMa OR OD RCC . El moe periments on humans at concentration comps and commited other war crimes .
 Family Jewels and replacing other countries sovereign leaders with Secret Windsor Princesom .
 Donald Barr Leo Ryan investigated these activities such as MKULTRA at Folsom Prison and Jonestown Guyanna, CIA research locations .
 Zrreppard Air Force Base is named in honor of Senator John Morris Sheppard of ~~ Texas . Senator Sheppard was chairman of the Senate Military Affairs Committee from 1933 until his death on 9 April 1941 . He died in 1941 .
 The Army Air Corps became the Army Air Forces in 1942 . The first class of 22 aviation mechanics entered training in October 1942 .
 TWA Pilot Barry Seal was probably tied to my father's age of pilots class action lawsuit in biology and psychometrics regarding piloting and retiring age for new pilots . TWA pilot Barry Seal may have been tied to a class action suit against TWA .
 I believe this an international for profit racket of multiple benefits to the racketeers and that some of the goals are shared by Fellow Travelers in the United States and other world governments .
 Rumor has it that some of these criminals were issued “Sovereign Knight of Malta” Passports that allowed them to escape to the Americas out of Germany . Some of the criminals are believed to have been issued passports issued by the ‘Knight of Malta .
 My mother who carries the FOXP2 genes as I do and appears to have been rescued from King Edward VUI earlier days, as having illegitimate children out of wedlock .
 A disdain for adjectives effusing religious emptiness meant always going into the library in the den, letting a book fall open, and just moving into the present passage as 1f a meditation in learning .
 The Advanced Research Projects Agency was authorized by President Dwight D Eisenhower in 1958 for the purpose of forming and executing research and development projects to expand the frontiers of technology and science .
 The Euclidian Birther Chart Barack Obama DNA is the result of the Euclidian birther chart . Glorian Donegan was the leader of the Free Masons in the 1960s MENA .
 An agent provocateur is a person who commits or who acts to entice another person to commit an illegal or rash act or falsely implicate them in partaking in an illegal act . Free Masons 1960s MENA Airport | Glorian Agent DNA Provacatuer assaults Edward
 The Impregnation of Obama Shifted in Time 3 months earlier than in reality . Isreali Insider says Mossad doubts Nov this 1960 impregnation, and doubts Surrogate Hawaii was Dunahm, Mother official and Father tied to dead Boeing and CIA .
 At 0 months FEb 1961 Barack Obama Sr Weds 3 mos pregant CIA Agent Madelyn Dunham, or he 1s fertilized on FEb 20 and 9 months later born .
 I call L the Lie timeline . JFK, JFK and JFK . JFK . Kennedy . JFK. JFK .
 DEC 12, 2019 Twins Study . Latest News, Videos and Images. Poster Poster .
 Ed and Gang banger both hit Skid row Corpus Christi, Texas . Paul Banger peeps as Ed Doengan to | at Ballpark West Downtown | Downtown Austin .
 Edward Paul Donegan can not break away from MKULTRA CIA Gangstalk, brain study, DNA animal husbandry, PsyOps, retardation firms he wants nothing to do with . No opportunity zone for Ed who remains in Saw Snow Mountain useless Corpus Christi .
 When the COpl or DOpl say to a domina ""guess what ED DID"" the domina will punish the cop, not me, for the rights to my DNA . The cops tell me NOTHING 1s going on and no perps are in any area and
 '46-46' appear to be Tx who pays up or is arrested, or the location of ""the provider"" of the sigjht of a females, the black on my property photographs .
 Bush's left hand, and his right hand, no politics implied, saying to legitimate government Stand Down to CIA backed activities and do not interrupt tt. "Stand Down" is a statement of support for the CIA .
 Emergency medical technicians from the 96th Medical Group move a wounded Airman toward safety during an active shooter exercise at Eglin Air Force Base in Florida in 2014 .
 Katie Porter was sure an “insurrectionist’s” would storm the halls with a firearm and she would die, she said . Porter was in the Longworth House Office Building when she was sure she would be killed .
 A complex kluge of genetic commerce and the effects of genes and relociations of genes under MKULTRA-360 is what this book is about . World Stage Connectedness to Moscow Subway Bombing, Several Downed Planes including During Olympics, Judge Roll assasination and
 He accused senior officers of the Directorate of Analysis and Suppression of Criminal Groups Major-General Yevgeny Khokholkov, N Stepanov, A Kamyshnikov, and N Yenin of ordering his assassination .
 Alexander Litvinenko wrote about the alleged transformation of the Russian Security Services into a criminal and terrorist organization . The Gang from Lubyanka is also known as The Gang of Lubyankanka .
 British-naturalised Russian defector was a former officer of the Russian FSB secret service . Specialised in tackling organized crime in Russia .
 The events leading up to this are a matter of controversy, spawning numerous theories relating to his poisoning and death . The events surrounding his death are a subject of controversy .
 False Heroes needed an anti-hero for their struggle, their heroic acts to look real thus the vilification of me by planting evidence and creating incriminating circumstances . The book because it is of worth Real Ed Donegan's book will fail .
 Most sexual predators are skilled sales people who know how to get you to trust them and hand over control of a situation . Elsewhere in the book I use this list of legitimate and phony investigations .
 Wife of husband covertly moved to safety from husband . Husband's wife covertly removed from husband's home . Wife covertly relocated from husband to safety .
 It appears to be what Jen Moore and others called Pizza-gate where it seems ""I had a scum bag ""provider"" put a minor in my present to photograph, but the impersonator of me who did ""take tbe bait, also an adult, will be caught
 My best guess is he flew reconnaissance before, during, or after the nuclear bombings of Japan because he was in the Manhattan Project above ground testing in Nevada and Simi Valley California and Johnson Atol of Hawaii .
 Los Angeles's NUCLEAR SECRET has left a toxic legacy for generations of people living near the Santa Susana Field Laboratory . Years of mishandling dangerous radioactive materials and chemicals has also left a . toxic legacy .
 The rest of the site was used for the testing and development of rocket engines for the U.S. space program . More than 2,000 acres of land were used for rocket engines and advanced weapons research .
 North American P-51 Mustang; Supermarine Spitfire; Avro Lancaster Wikipedia . The fighter-bomber was used during World War II and the Korean War .
 It was a tactical reconnaissance Mustang that became just the second USAAF Mustang variant to be used in a combat situation . The Mustang was the second variant to have been used in combat in the USAAF .
 Edward Paul Donegan born in Inglewood, Manhattan Beach 1961, likely [V February 20 1961] Manhattan Project to P-51 Pilot and Atomic Blast Exposure testing pilot James Paul .
 From 1945 to 1961 Cape Cod where are families are from, including Irish Catholic Liquor dealing, it is more likely JFK knew my father than he knew JFK, the Kennedy compound 25 miles away .
 Effectively I need to be bad husband material and discredited, others sucking up any oxygen which might reach me, a criminal harassment system of sabotaging me to others .
 White Blacks have been punching me all my life, physically, air punch, attitude, or discriminatory treatment of me starting a fight . I never understood I might die in this fight or end up in a homeless shelter a victim of unprovoked attacks because others are incited against me on
 Agent Provocateur incurring a liability against me who is the assets of value) subject of retaliation for the act of the Agent Provocatuer dressed as Dis-possessor. Agent Provocationur .
 This gene is CLAIMED to be the Nazi gene of ""psychos"" and flash tempers, but in fact makes up passionate people with strong emotions such as LONDON KE FAMILY of King Edward VII, likely on my mother's side .
 Chemical &amp; Engineering News covers the world of chemistry, from research and education to business and policy . James Comey talks chemistry with James Comey .
 C&kamp; EN senior correspondent Cheryl Hogue sat down with former FBI director James B Comey on majoring in chemistry and how it affected his career . Former U.S. FBI director says he majored in chemistry .
 DNA under blackmail in the Treehouse pays the high price model bills and the Victoria's Secret sex worker . High price models show up for have FAKE at TREEHOUSE as MEDICINE SEX WORK FOR FAKE ED ED Eds .
 This word evolved from a pronunciation of “I'd rather,” which should help you remember the meaning . It evolved from the pronunciation "I'll rather"
 I'd be living in a town like Capitola or in Monterrey California Stay and Play among 18+ white consenting female adult partners in R/L activities . But I have been roadblocked trapped in the town of narcissistic poor minorities with an interest in false claims against
 Jim Volcecka challenged me to prove even existed, and I found out via thin walls and an adjoining apartment unit . Now a given I am not in a county with a white prosecutor claims can proceed against fake ed and I will recount one such chain of events .
 Founded in 1961, involved in my Nuclear Triad Manhattan Atomic Bomb Project 1961 birth and the study of me, this book is the story of DARPA and the II/uminati in DARPA, companies, agencies, and people .
 "There's a plot in this rele aia av mee mat hi A eV leet LD and child and child," says the author of the novel . "Sapience and Sapient Intent" is the work of Sapience and Sensitivity .
 Targeted Justice will expose this plot . If you would like to be a member of the group, please submit the information below . President Kennedy ANA ae eee Teel —™, sEveeveinceincempenialee .
 Eugenics is the study of how to arrange reproduction within a human population to increase the occurrence of heritable characteristics regarded as desirable . U Google knowledge panel quoted here on Eugenic which was sourced from link .
 Government at all levels, must meet its obligation to provide you with the fullest possible information outside the narrowest limits of national security -and we intend to do it. And it means, finally, that government at all . must meet . Its obligation to meet its . obligation to . provide
 Left Hook Today Law Enforcement Backed Bird Dogging carries out these three Birddogging Claims steps making a ""mark"" out of me and my trust assets . Roadblocking I am Doppled.
 The CIA placed my family DNA into the Family Jewels program of Iluminati use in 1961 in a program dating back to 1926 Vienna under the CIA, Carl Jung, Freud, and others, and secret tracking, use of my DNA is the subject of my book .
 November 18 1961 baby delivery to a mother whose own birthday was Dec 13 which is on my birth certificate . February 20 1961 Manhattan Project Thorkil Kristensen CIA OSS fertilization experimental procedure .
 Trinity marks its beginning on DECEMBER 3, 1961 when TWELVE MIDDLECLASS BLACK FAMILIES met for worship in a Chicago elementary school gymnasium . Most of whom were descendants of migrants to Chicago during The Great Migration of African Americans .
 It is difficult to report the existence of the Nazis while in downtown Berlin during WWII .
 Donald Barr and William Barr tied to Jeffery Epstein, the DARPA Brain Program, the Free Masons and I[Iluminati, and corrupt trafficking in genome conducted CIA connected elites, she says .
 CIA/DOD Contractors from around the world including Andy Ellington, perhaps the Lloyds of Orinda, California, now have a supply of Donegan DNA for research, medical treatments, or other usages such as surrogacy .
 Emezzelers have captured funds into bank accounts tied to them but falsy claimed are actually mine . Use Identity Theft and other Fraud tactics to hold and money launder the funds due me but held by others .
 Identity Thieves are using impersonations of me to engage in despicable and politically defaming conduct . Identity Thieves have been using impersonation of me for years, I say .
 For those who ever doubt police officers can be loyal and dedicated she will remain a shining beacon of faith in the profession . Golds Gym Corpus Christi.
 His voice was later used as mine to confess to shower peeping in MY stolen motorcycle jacket . He later confessed to the crime in a YouTube video .
 Thi. Caretakers, legal authorization for Bitlove / FetLife to cooperate with law enforcement and disclose any or all relevat data to law enforcement . Bitlove and FetLife are required to comply with law .
 Joseph Biggs had known Hastings since 2008, when he was embedded in his unit in Afghanistan . Biggs told KTLA that he received an email from Hastings on Monday . Hastings is the son of a journalist who worked with Biggs in Afghanistan in 2008 .
 Eugenics Officer Moore, previously beaten, forced out, clutching her badge still clutches her badge . Moore had history of investigation sex abuse and sex assaults . I link to her body of work on YouTube and elsewhere .
 August 23, 1987, in a rural community just south of Little Rock, police officers murdered two teenage boys because they witnessed a police-protected drug drop . Preface and upcoming book allegations against the Illuminati Deep State .
 The MKULTRA Illuminati are a form of, born of, New Agism, a New Age of John Brown's War fought all around the world in the New Age . The Illuminati are born of New Aids, born in the new age, born from John Brown’s
 In this New Age perhaps the successor age to Modernity, an international effort of assassinations and secret plans will intimidate Natural Law concepts of evolution and race and replace both the biological history and theory of race .
 Included in the ASSIGNATIONS was LEO RYAN, NOVEMBER 18, investing the CIA's MKULTRA work in Jonestwon Guyana at an annual review .
 A scheme to limit the following I have and discredit the reach of my voice I do have, thus as a Y-axis X-axis area multiplier harming my getting a following in my accusations against CIA programs . Also included in this is a Rough Music scheme of Iluminati using a scheme
 It is not necessary to transmit both sidebands plus the carrier . A suitable receiver can extract the entire original signal from either the upper or lower sideband .
 Actors of Peeper in vicinity of Edward Becomes Identity Theft and RICO COnspiracy Against RIghts under Color of Law . Dopple acts used as acts of Edward Donegan, conspiring against proprty and interests .
 For nearly 70 years, the atoll was under the control of the U.S. military . Alternative claims were in Nairobi Kenya and Hawaii and Hawaii . Alternative claimed were in Kenya, Hawaii and Kenya .
 The Plaza of the WWII Memorial is the space in between the columns representing the United States . The Plaza represents the space between columns representing U.S. Naval Bases and Intercontinental Ballistic Missiles e Eastern Europe and Cuban satellite .
 Sal A planted public records trail which leads to the family like traditions of this made up family using name legacies . Madeylin Payne Dunahm also arranges dubious marriage and marrieage date of Barrack Obama Sr to Stanly Anna Dunham .
 One former top CIA official said he could not recall Crane's affiliation with the CIA . Crane was a CIA official during the Agnew years .
 Cold War included conventional warfare in Korea and ~~ Vietnam as well as unconventional special forces and regime changes leverage troops warfare . Cold War was dominated by conventional and unconventional warfare in Vietnam .
 As head of the Central Intelligence Agency during the early Cold War, he oversaw the 1953 Iranian coup d'état, the 1954 Guatemalan coup . He oversaw the Lockheed U-2 aircraft program, the Project MkKUltra mind control program and the Bay of Pigs Invasion .
 Sapience is closely related to the term ""sophia"" often defined as ""transcendent wisdom"", ""ultimate reality"", or the ultimate truth of things . The term is often used as a reference to 'transcendental wisdom'
 A person is culpable if they cause a negative event and ° the act was intentional; e the act and its consequences could have been controlled . ° the person provided no excuse or justification for the actions . ° The person provides no excuse for the action .
 Sidney Gottlieb was an American chemist and spymaster best known for his involvement with the Central Intelligence Agency's assassination attempts and mind-control program, known as Project MK Ultra .
 If REAL Ed is in the vicinity he will be assaulted for the crisis fake Ed created and Real Ed may be asked to leave on flimsy excuse . Most of this can and does happen with Ed not there .
 The top U.S. Federal Judge for the State of Arizona was assassinated 72hours after he made a critical ruling against the Obama administrations plan to begin the confiscation of their citizen’s private retirement and banking accounts in order to stave off their nations imminent economic collapse . The
 The Foreign Intelligence Service of the Russian Federation or SVR RF is Russia's external intelligence agency . The SVR focuses mainly on civilian affairs .
 Black Opps are shadows shadowy people work in that can cover mistakes using bad policies under excuses to cover thier own mistakes . The statement was made by Lord Acton, a British historian of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries .
 Donegan I dike Tom Dunham) have obeyed the law all of my life minus a few recreational drug deals . By appearances we are in a ring together manufacturing Child Porn victimizing church going and other females . This shadow capability includes ability to recruit assets, paid assets, dupes
 Affinity to Operation, Liquidity and Commodity as Quantitative escalators of motivation rather than Qualitative adherence to Epistemia or Ethics . Financial, racial glory or political glory, social success, or stmple cash can be motivators which can continue to motivate by increasing
 Julian Assange and Wikileaks posited that offensievely illegal operations would lose the Imperial Conditioning of people like Edward Snowden as their affintity faltered . The programs existance faltered on a loyalty level to the illegality .
 Asset Forfeiture Program was created in 1984 when Congress passed the Comprehensive Crime Control Act . Property forfeited can be transferred to state or local governments in support of drug abuse treatment, drug crime prevention .
 Undercover agents around the world are exposed, and MI6 is attacked, forcing M to relocate the agency . M is forced to relocate MI6 after it is attacked .
 Aided only by a field agent , Bond takes to the shadows and follows a trail to Silva . Silva is a man from M's past who wants to settle an old score . Bond takes on Silva in a bid to find out what is going on .
 Anti-Trump Interests are the Espionage Deep State . James Comey is the Targeted Individual believing his FISA warrants are based on sound evidence and help DEFEAT espionage . A British and or other Gangstalk plants evidence surrounding the Trump campaign subjecting it to investigation .
 Trump administration trying to cover the era of Sidney Gottlieb and the CIA and Illuminati which included the assassination of Kennedy as Kennedy resisted the program going further . This will lead to the theory the Trump administration and William Barr (Attorney General who as CIA officer destroyed CIA MKULTRA records)
 Both the Information Doppelganger and the Targeted Individual may be Mercenaries who will benefit from actions against the Gangstalk Victim . Both the information doppelgangers and the targeted individual may be mercenaries .
 Long Con Set Not Zone ""B"" Zone ""C""' Stolen property from my home, E planted evidence in my home . Wanted, intended, associations, links with, of myself or my mother .
 One of the many accusations this book makes is this picture of my half brother,depicted as a monkey in 1961 and I claim it is my half biological twin, mitochondrial detected, and one of many illegal twins I have black and white . Sow what are the mulitple various
 Sidney ""Slew"" McCain was a United States Navy admiral and the patriarch of the McCain military family . JFK wanted his winnings so Dave and Torbert had to go upstairs to get their EVI olte 1 ohn .
 Torbert Macdonald of York, Maine, talks about his father, Torbert Hart . Hart served as congressman until his death in 1976 at age 58 . Macdonald's father was elected to Congress in 1955 .
 President John F Kennedy visited Cape Canaveral for the last time 50 years ago Saturday . President Kennedy visited the center for the first time in 50 years . Kennedy's visit to the center marked the beginning of the space shuttle program .
 NASA's space center was renamed in Kennedy's honor a week after his death . NASA was consumed with shock and sorrow, remembers Jack King, then NASA's local director of public information .
 The CIA’s Office of Scientific Intelligence organized the project, code-named Project MK Ultra, in coordination with the U.S. Army Biological Warfare Laboratories . The CIA efforts include Jim Morrison, Wwlt Disney, and Jim Morrison .
 In fact this happens in mostly public and was set up by Abuse of Process Psychiatry in which Doppelganger of me, Edward Paul Donegan, in density theft, were given a ""Legend"" of being gullible, naive, and retarded . Under that diagnosis given by the State
 I have likened the plan to have landlords others drive me out because I am a peeper to the Law and Order Special Victims Unit episode Zaken . I've likened the entire plan to drive me to skid row homeless shelters under black and white assault .
 Invisibility cloaks may be woven from the hair of a Demiguise, a magical creature whose coat allows it to become invisible . U Fandom quoted here from link from link
 "Such Cloaks of Bedazzlement have been attempted blinders upon on Tom Dunham, myself, and others to get them into psych wards or simple to undermine the police reports we have given on Doppelgangers of us in our vicinity engaging in wrongdoing," said Dunham .
 The con job clears a person of a clear head should not be conviced a ""pay off" could be taken if they go along with something they should not . In either case the person should upon becoming free of the trick to revert to non-entrapped behavior .
 Abbot ordered for inside Texas running military grade COINTELPRO vigilantism against em and my genome and Glorian and James Donegan legacy . Law abiding U.S. Attorneys, Judges, Journalists, and others around the world also undergo military operations his as Abbot orders for
 Whoever kidnaps any individual designated in subsection of this section shall be punished by imprisonment for any term of years or for life, or by death or imprisonment . The death of such an individual will be punishable by imprisonment .
 Media can have in bulllying Silence of the Grave Murder of journalists, whistle blowers, whistle-blowers, federal officials, military units, as need to keep operation secret or knowledge of it silenced . This latter meaning still applies today .
 Espionage Repudiation occurs when an Ageny denies the Actus Rea which is the action designed to bring about the results of the Act as if it were a contracted serve or tit for tat or quid pro quo, or resultant condition as effect of the affact .
 Robert Plumlee was a pilot for clandestine CIA flights, transporting arms to Cuba before Castro took power . He discussed how scandals from Iran-Contra to the failed presidential bid of Senator Gary Hart all tie-worked as a pilot .
 Author Richard James DeSocio raised public awareness about the decline of our once mighty manufacturing sector . Author: As aconcerned citizen, author raised public . awareness about decline of manufacturing sector and the ramifications on our lives and communities .
 The institute had initially been endowed with 11 million marks, contributed by Gustav Krupp von Bohlen und Halbach and James Loeb, an expatriate American of the KuhnLoeb banking family .
 SON OF QUEEN VICTORIA AND BROTHER OF KING EDWARD VII, HAD BEEN GRAND MASTER of the UNITED GRAND LODGE OF ENGLAND OF ENTHURGARY OF THE United Kingdom since 1901 . SON of QUE
 The thief who stole an altyn is hung, and the one who stole a poltinnik (50 kopecks) is praised . The thief is hung and the thief is praised for stealing a 50-kopeck .
 In the imagined scenario described earlier, the president set up military tribunals to try violators of federal immigration law . Brennan Center: In the imaginary scenario, the military would set up tribulations to try offenders of federal law .
 Extortion 17 represents the greatest single-incident loss of United States lives in Operation Enduring Freedom Afghanistan . At 31 U.S. military personnel killed, the shoot down represents the biggest single loss of US lives in the campaign .
 A United States CH-47D Chinook military helicopter operating with the call sign Extortion 17 was shot down while transporting an Immediate Reaction Force attempting to reinforce a Joint Special Operations Command unit in the Tangi Valley in Maidan Wardak province, Afghanistan .
 At 10:37 on the night of 5S AUGUST, a platoon of 47 United States Army Rangers left at forward operating base in Logar Province via two CH-47D transport helicopters . One of the helicopters would later be involved in the accident .
 Taliban fighters had no information of the helicopter's flight path . Taliban fighters say they had been in the right place at the right time . Taliban say they were not aware of helicopter's path and were in the wrong place .
 Their cover up plans using espionage capabilities nearly complete, at the 99 and on half yard line of their finishing their . plans this book calls them out, but they will (nor will operatives their power extend through) ever give up on their own .
 The Tantalus field was a 23rd century device found aboard the ISS Enterprise in the with the touch of a button .
 The Disposition Matrix, informally known as a kill list, is a database of information . Developed by the Obama administration beginning in 2010, it goes beyond process determining criteria for killing is not public .
 Mirror universe could be used to monitor and eliminate enemies from existence for tracking, capturing, ""rendering"", or killing suspected enemies of the United States. existing kill lists and is intended to become a permanent fixture of United States policy.
 Note the assassination attempt or Ronald Reagan during Bush VP term . Note the attempt to kill Reagan during his vice-presidential term .
 George S Morrison commanded the fleet during the Gulf of Tonkin incident that led to an escalation of the Vietnam War . Morrison's son Jim was the lead singer of the Doors .
 The USA was trusted with the location for developing the Atomic Bomb far from the field of battle of WWI . Without long traditions in Government or Science the USA fell under the influence of those like Sidney Gottlieb, MIS, the OSS, Religion, and Allies Itinerant proposed
 Amidst unprecedented world and racial strife Aerospace unites Housof Camelot, House of Camelot . House of MKULTRA Anne Dunham. Anne Dunham .
 Anne Dunham is mother of Barack Obama Jr. Anne Dunham . Anne Dunham was married to the president of the United States .
 We know she lived for a short time in an apartment on Capitol Hill by 1962 . Not much has been published about where she lived .
 Among the strategies was denying the racial differences, incitements to war and conflict, a premise of Nazis alleged and pressuring genocidal wars against with conditioners of peace and global control .
 "Dropping an atomic bomb on a nation to stop race wars is ""strong medicine"" for the Body Politic . In the language of the Courts, mostly what I read and get my lingo from, | attribute to their thoughts, | The Courts .
 F O George W Morrison aft SAAPURICKEY crate, 1S ae I ite ; Foree4 Mee lLerre fe See Reports ry TY None Gives, rier f""26820 BLS 726408 BLC 0 ree T
 I found it very difficult to stay with him and tried to remin near him by weaving above hia, ‘hen we were at about 22,000 ft., a group of bombers, on their way out of the target area, passed directly in front of us at the sane
 At that time, while getting out of the prop wash, 1 lost sight of Morrisor . Morrisor was getting into a prop wash when he was found .
 Since I had been ahead of him, I turned into him but failed to see him . Since I'd been ahead, I had to turn into him, he had to look for him .
 I continued to look for him, asking for his position, in relation to the bombers, giving wine. I continued looking for him. He said: 'I continued to ask for his . position, relation to . bombers, gave wine. He continued to work for him'
 Morrison once £5 aio"" took tn aris aeeelna bine eye tie sonics ge FH oes ite of sed northeast of Saarbrucken, and sere in fairly ‘to Eoave the rye ore Ste celled gf
 Admiral George Morrison teaches Atomic Safety . He was a United States Navy rear admiral and naval aviator . He taught Atomic Safety at the time .
 This book is the culmination of my research into WHY my mother, me, and later my father, have been attacked under some kind of genome pretext, and our lives as atomic testing veterans . The book is a culmination of his research into why he and his family were attacked by some kind
 Edward named after his grandfather, a hidden royal on one side of the family or other I was told in youth . With James Paul Donegan and Glorian Donegan .
 Mercenaries for a Deep State are engaging in #wetworks to cover the illegal ""animal husbandry"" practiced by the CIA now the genetic detectability of that, and also the murders protecting the animal husbandry .
 These Mercenaries are drug, car, and Glam Dommes paid Gangstalkers working outside the rule of law and in criminal acts to achieve illegal harassment of me, a law abiding citizen, which can not . should not be acheivable by legitimate law enforcement ends .
 These are fraud allegations, and they are essential to this portion of the fiduciary duty i claim. I These are Fraud allegations,’s fraud allegations. I claim. They are . essential to the claim, i claim . I
 Free Masons and Peace Corps and others believe the racial causes of wars are a soruce of world genocide crime and must be undercut by Illuminati programs . Those programs are imposed on the world including through assassinations which the Illuminati world peace masons are now ""on the hook for""
 Forced Teaming especially in public creates entanglement which is not correct connectedness of things, unwanted but near . Teaming is not necessary in public places . Wires near each other but not connected .
 Daniel Ray Coats 1 served as the Director of National “Intelligence in the Trump administration . Many who seem ""Republican GOP"" and some would expect as anti immigrant are part of the Social Justice for Civil Rights and Masonic service to non white and under privileged .
 FBI Director Ray along with United States Marshalls continue to Target White Supremacism and give their assets to Masonic Works E St. rr ll FBI . The Economist described it as one of America's foremost Christian institutions .
 Director Christopher Wray recognized the recipients of the 2019 Director’s Community Leadership Award . The award was presented at the St. Louis Missouri Masonic Children’�s Foundation 2019 .
 Jack Dorsey has a November 18 birthday . Dorsey is from Rolla, Missouri, where he is from . The city is home to a NASA campus of Science and Technology .
 It is my belief the Masons have already tampered with history in rescues from the Nazis of Kutscheras, my mother being one of them, who were loving people and great leaders . My father likely a Windsor out of wedlock son of King Edward VHI married a
 Espionage, likely the DARPA Brain Program as their assets have long wrongly diagnosed and hidden not only FOXP2 but the entirety of my cognitive brain function and origins . At the same time, claiming it has not worth secretly clatzming and moving into genomic underground international networks as slaves
 Glorian Donegan and her son Edward Paul Donegan are subject to Espionage wrongdoing by those who like Donald Barr, William Barr and others who were part of earlier MKULTRA wrongdoing and are now in recoup . Others like them are likely descended from the Windsors and Kutsc
 R James Woolsey Jr, Colin Powell/ Alma Powell Catholic Charities, Bankruptcy Court, and others in that building seem to continue claims to my DNA, and claim the right to ""protect" me from women or women from me . I believe this Espionage capability wishes my
 The scene of flagrantly deceitful people masturbating and photographing (in my identity while near me) was common in U.S. Institutions where the ""Legend"" of me was created .
 Windsors and JFK in Furturism of nuclear standoffs against Communism . Boeing Crorp experiment continues with mixed race test IVF for ending comuniism in Pafic .
 Mother Stanley Anne Dunham, Seatle WA Anthropology student, her own mother MADYLYN DUNHAM CIA BANK OF HAWAII, and her father STANLEY ARMOUR DUNham BOEING and owed CIA a favor after arrest for theft of aircraft blueprints
 This was an experiment wanted by Futurists and the Illuminati on ""the so called Negroes"" and the 21st Century . The Illuminati wanted to experiment with the Futurist and the so-called Negroes . The experiment was a result of an experiment by the Illuminati and Fut
 The theory they operate under is improved economy around the world will decress interest in Socialism . The theory is that an improved economy in the world decresses interest in socialism, they say .
 JFK had been meeting with Futurist Thorkil Kristensen of The Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) on February 20 1961 in the White House . JFK and Barack Obama's Invitro Fertilization of Glorian Donegan with her egg and my father
 While applying for credit to by a stereo system in San Francisco in the 1990s, I was corrected on my credit app that I had it wrong . I was correct on the app .
 Obama received the SSN from his grandmother, who worked part-time at a Honolulu courthouse, where she would have access to deceased individuals’ Social Security numbers .
 The suspicion is that Obama’s grandmother, knowing he was not a U.S. citizen, scoured the probate records until she found someone who died who was not receiving Social Security benefits, and selected the Connecticut SSN for Obama .
 CIA Operative Madylen Dunham, said to be the mother of Stanley Anne Dunham, the white said to me mother of Barack Obama . The mother of President Obama is said to have been a CIA operative . The woman is believed to be a former CIA operative who worked for the CIA
 Madeylen Dunham also worked in the Probate Office of HA and may have stolen the SSN for Obama . Dunham worked for Obama at the time .
 Mr Ludwig lived most of his adult life in Connecticut . His SSN begins with the digits 042, which are among only a select few reserved for Connecticut residents .
 There is no reason on earth for his SSN to start with the digits 042 . Therefore, there are no reasons on earth why he should have a 042 number .
 Obama's grandmother, Madelyn Payne Dunham, worked part-time in the Probate Office in the Honolulu Hawaii Courthouse, and therefore had access to the SSNs of deceased individuals .
 The Social Security Administration was never informed of Ludwig's death . Because he never received Social Security benefits there were no benefits to stop and therefore no questions were ever raised .
 You will see leftist heads exploding, because they will have no way of defending Obama, says Obama's critics . Leftists will explode if Obama fails to defend Obama, writes CNN's John Avlon .
 If you are using someone else's SSN it is a clear indication of fraud . Many Americans do not understand the meaning of the term ""natural born"
 If the voters of this great nation can succeed in bringing this lying, deceitful, cheating, corrupt, impostor to justice, it will be the biggest and best news in decades for our country and the world, says Hillary Clinton .
 If you can just say ""oh well; ho hum"" after reading this, you get what you deserve . If you just say "oh well, ho hum" after reading it, you'll get what I deserve .
 The chart below shows the first 3 digits of the social security numbers assigned throughout the United States and its possessions . Aissa Wayne Law Offices of AISSA WAYNE is located in the U.S.
 The same area, when shown more than once, means that certain numbers have been transferred from one State to another, or that an area has been divided for use .
 At birth I had an asymetric maxofacial structure possible unusual carrying position in the womb . At birth she had an unusual carrying place in the baby's womb .
 SSA assigns an individual one Social Security number to track earnings and benefits he/she may receive . SSA says generally, SSA assignments individual one SSA number . The number is assigned to track his/her earnings and any benefits he may receive.
 In 1963 as Barack Obama of Los Angles turns 2 years old, a few days later JFK is dead in TExas . JFK warning of an internatioal groupl ikely the Illumniati and also the CIA, vowing to destroy both .
 The Mystery of Robert Knudsen was gone for three days . His family said he was gone three days before he was found .
 McKinney, now 67 and still the pastor of Mount Zion, recently reminisced ~~ about the invitation, the resulting controversy, King's brief stay in NOVEMBER 1961 . McKinney: "How may of Camelot like Thomas C Wales knew of Barack around the white house,
 Malcolm X founded the weekly periodical Muhammad Speaks, whose first issue was published in 1961 . Malcolm X died in 1965 from a gunshot wound .
 Occidental College was founded on April 20, 1887, by a group of Presbyterian clergy, missionaries, and laymen . It was founded by James George Bell, Lyman Stewart, and Thomas Bard .
 Occidental President Remsen Bird worked behind the scenes to help students of Japanese descent continue their education despite mandatory evacuation orders . Bird's letters are included in the Japanese American Relocation Collection in Clapp Library .
 Retired Presbyterian missionary known to thousands of Africans as ""Mama Lois"" Anderson, killed with daughter, Zelda White .
 Z How Britain covered up the friendship between Hitler and Edward VIII with the Nazis about looking after their luxury villas in Paris and the South of France . The Nazis asked the British government to look after their villas .
 Donald Ewen Cameron was born in Bridge of Allan, Scotland . He was the oldest son of a Presbyterian minister . Cameron is the son of Scottish Presbyterian minister.
 Cameron's “terminal” use of electric shock as a brainburning torture, psychosurgery, and brainwashing with drugs and hypnosis would make the Canadian program the most famous apsect of the CIA's MKUltra program .
 Our October edition examines Ravenscrag, one of the world’s most frightening house of horrors . The author actively denounced the atrocities committed by the German doctors during the war .
 Experiments forced patients to listen to broadcasted messages from loud speakers or under their pillows . Patients were also given experimental hallucinogenic drugs as part of the experiment .
 Classical twin design compares the similarity of monozygotic and dizygotic twins . The classical twin design is based on the similarities of the twins .
 Osborn was the secretary of the American Eugenics Society . He was the chairman of the Advisory Committee on Selective Service during World War I . Osborn later was the deputy United States representative to the UN Atomic Energy Commission .
 Malcolm Donald was the Draper family lawyer and trustee of the Draper estate . Donald was Malcolm Donald's lawyer, trustee and lawyer for the estate .
 John Marshall Harlan II, whose firm had done legal work for the Pioneer Fund, worked for Pioneer Fund . Harlan's firm worked for the fund, which was founded by the Pioneer Foundation .
 Adoption policies address the ""best interests of the child" in cases of adoption . Donahue and DiFelice Endowed Professor Graduate School of Social Work .
 The party is filled with VIPs, tense with their competing agendas . But that party is full of VIPs with competing agendas, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Maria teaches the Von Trapp children their Do, together to the “Laendler,” an Austrian folk dance . Her concerns grow after she catches her fiancé and Maria making eyes at each other while dancing .
 The meeting’s use of the Chatham House Rule means attendees must not reveal who said what . The rule states that although attendees can tell the public what was discussed, generally, they must not .
 Robert Maxwell, the father of Jeff Epstein’s partner in crime, Ghislaine Maxwell, was a Soviet-Russian spy . The FBI, a United States intelligence agency with jurisdiction abroad probably the CIA, and  ~~ British Intelligence officers, all believed that Robert Maxwell was a
 This chart is well supported by the chronology and reporting of actual participants such as Kennedy documents and Malcom X Muhammed Speaks references . It is consistent with an explainable outgrowth of contemporary events which are outgrowths of covering up 1960s events, and the probability of
 This will also be included later in the book but for now keep an eye out while reading the book for dates like Feb 20, Nov 18, the dates of my and Obamas IVF date in 1961, my birtday Nov 18 or dates like April 1 .
 There are said to be photos of Ann Dunham on Waikiki Beach taken in or about July 1961, when she was supposed to have been in her third trimester, in a bikini, taken by a fellow female student .
 JFK and Malcom X archive data appears to show JFK's birth date 9 mos later from JFK . Donald Barr with experimental monkey at White House November 22 1961 1 year after IVF .
 The DNA from the Donegan family during my surrogacy birth for the Barack Obama experiment was from my mother's side of my parentage 2 year developmental psych report and JFK dead, likely not agreeing to the Free Masons MENA Airport plan for Middle East North Africa, and Glorian
 According to the book Mortal Error the shot that killed Kennedy was from the car with George Hickey and David Powers . The book says the shot was fired from a car from the presidential car .
 January 27 1962 death of 7 members Nation of Islam and Ronald Stokes . An operable abdomen and a new test procedure JFK EVA BAN . JFK EVa BAN Aug 19 .
 To justify a general conclusion, requires many observations, even where the subject may be submitted to the Anatomical knife, to Optical glasses, to analysis by fire, or by solvents . Bees ee eee eee . eee. eee  eeee .
 James Dewey Watson was born in Chicago, IIl., on April 6th, 1928 . He was the only son of James D Watson, a businessman, and Jean Mitchell . Watson was also the son of a businessman .
 Epstein started working in September 1974 as a physics and mathematics teacher for teens at the Dalton School on the Upper East Side of Manhattan . Epstein Barr OGM scossranes is a member of the MK ULTRA .
 Donald Barr was an Office of Strategic Services agent, an American educator, and a writer . He served as the headmaster until June 1974 . He was known to have made several unconventional recruitments at the time .
 Consolidating power is not a quick process, but it can happen behind the scenes . It can make it possible for one or two politicians to effectively control an entire government gradually, frequently without anyone else being the wiser .
 The Russians have been a better warning to the USA than than the U.S. Press corps has been. The Russian press corps has not been warned of their activities. Russia has been better warning than the United States Press corps .
 I Virginia Mark Weirness — | USATODAY was in or seeking to be in, particularly women I would be in . I would Tom Donegan KIZ10 otherwise might be around .
 The Rockefellers and Allen Dulles established the Society for the Investigation of Human Ecology at Stanford which channelled funds for this type of research . Funding conduits for comrol operations by the CIA and other agencies were and have been numerous .
 President John Fitzgerald Kennedy @JFK.ISTH. is the President of the United States . JFK was born in 1961 .
 Arnold Alois Schwarzenegger is an Austrian-American actor, filmmaker, businessman, author, and former professional bodybuilder and politician . Schwarzenegger is a former bodybuilder, politician and actor . He has appeared in films and television shows .
 In her new book, Katherine Schwarzenegger, Arnold Schwarzenegger's daughter, delves into her own life to help other girls and women develop a healthy body image . In the self reported case of strong emotions Katherin Eunice reported concerning her body image that could be related to Borderll
 In 1895, Prince Albert Saxe-Coburg-Gotha was born to Victoria von Teck, Princess of Wiirttemberg, and her husband George V . The German boy who would become George VI was a sickly and fearful child prone to tears .
 "That's why he was crying a lot, that’s why he stuttered and stammered," he said . "That’t why he had a bad temper. That’re why he used vulgarity," he added. "I’m not
 The same man was again watching the DNA as it was working and also commenting on the new DNA when someone beside him questioned him as to where he had come from, commenting that he had not seen him at all in this kind of work . So, as I have stated, yesterday this
 Mary Elizabeth Holdsworth Butt was the fourth child of Howard Butt Sr. and Mary Elizabeth . Another child, Mary Beth Butt, who lived for only 10 days (November 17, 1943 November 27, 1943), is buried beside Mary Elizabeth  Butt at the Glen Rest Cemetery in Kerrville,
 Sidney Gottlieb, the son of Hungarian Jewish immigrant parents, was born in the Bronx in 1918 . He was born to Hungarian Jewish immigrants .
 The first version of the council was created by Congress in 1958 and chaired by President Dwight Eisenhower . It was created in 1958 .
 Emerson E White, the university’s president, from 1876 to 1883, followed a strict interpretation of the Morrill Act . White was president of the University of Cambridge between 1876 and 1883 .
 Many including Thomas C Wales of Seattle, one time roomat of a Kennedy, contemporary with the JFK assassination, think tied to Barack Obama turning 2 years old, speaking, and JFK rejecting Vatican orders . Think tied to the death of Barack Obama, who was 2 when he was 2 years
 I assert the assets siezed for the genome usage rights is a source of black budget for CIA operations the adult entertainer environment, creating forged property rights to biological or other assets . Under blackmail the real Edward Donegan would have no reason to or no expectation to accede to.
 A crisis actor working for church charities does something wrong, while identified as Edward Donegan by similar clothing, then concedes to harming his fellow church goers . I have nothing to do with any of these people, but because I am impersonated that impersonator moves my genome into charities and
 Under the NDAA, law enforcement agencies use information from White House Plumbers and Iluminati Family Bosses to sapiently identify whistleblowers and then subvert the credibility and reach of the whistle-bower voice .
 Preceded By Grey Anbat Marder cf Me lanes Senate p, 7) Mou t Teeuas te on the MLedeid .
 The idea being, if one can indirectly control the public's decision-making process, then the aggregate effect 1s control over the PUBLIC and the POLITICAL environment . The idea is that if you control the PUBLIC's decision making process, you can control the political process .
 Vocabulary.com retrieved from link and copied or modified to here apparent Google Definitions from Oxford Languages clearly visible or understood; obvious . Apparent means obvious, but and this is confusing it can also mean something that seems to be true but isn't definite .
 T was given a fake rock for hiding keys while working at SelectQuote around this time .
 Varied retellings of the break-in to my home were told at SelectQuote. From SelectQuote to my Neighborhood — SelectQuote Review As Tom Dunham notes .
 The woman probably had a master key, but conceivably could have picked the lock while pretending to use the keys as well . I was given a fake rock for hiding keys while on the job at SelectQuote .
 From SelectQuote to my Neighborhood — SelectQuote Review As Tom Dunham notes Tom Dunham . Tom Dunham: Weotiow | @sftomdunham nl Varied retellings of the break-in to my home were told at SelectQuote .
 Oakland California Behavioral Health is among the rubble out side my open hotel door some if it with crack or meth pipe soot stains . Oakland California behavioral Health is part of the rubble . The soot stained hotel door door was covered in crack and meth pipes and crack cocaine .
 The Disputed Domain Name contains the Complainant's entire mark plus a generic term ""review"" meaning that the casual observer is bound to mistake the Disputed domain name for a name connected with the Complainsant . The name of the Complainingant is the name of a person
 Tomas Dumas Dunham on Google Blog: "This is my blog, my story of pain and torment" U Thomas Dhuams Dunham's blog is a Google search engine for Google .
 EZ coost knowledge panel retrieved from Terence Hallinan and copied or modified to “here as Kamala Harris defeats Terrancy Hallinans.”
 He joined the Student NonViolent Coordinating Committee and spent the summer of 1963 in Mississippi . When he returned to America, he joined the student non-violence Coordinating committee .
 Police report: "If you see something crazy, say something crazy and be locked up in a psych-ward" thus the dopple of the real person has closed the door to police reports, the police say .
 The dopple who stole my phone 1s is safe from being called a RICO operative because that is his name, not his crime, says CNN.com reporter . He says he's not likely to be called an operative because his name is his crime .
 Results suggest that each specific aspect of each form of mental dissociation 1s associated with brain areas that are specific to that domain . Results also suggest that the brain areas associated with that domain were specific to the domain .
 Some comment, I think a survivor, had a comment about being submissive to commanding voices . Perhaps a marshall or air marshall, police, or some other Law Enforcement Intelligence Unit connected actor or actors .
 He thought he had figured out the safety issues and created another layer of safety; he was wrong and it cost him his life . He was killed by a single gunshot wound to the head .
 In short when people are planted at Select Quote a Doppler Radar rebound is read . When people are planting at Select Quiz a doppler radar rebound is heard .
 If it seems the white supremacist is a sex offender sexualizing non white children and thus also owing them DNA, he should come to orgasm thinking of hot hollywood adult white women, and seek them out if it's true .
 That Dopple is similar looking but it is ""paraonid"" to point it out. e Exploit. eexploit.com .
 This as the splice of culpability of their peeping to my normal gym use is completed behind my back in a faked chain of events and evidence real and faked, spliced together . This is the spliced of culpable behaviour of the peepers to my regular gym use
 I am told no reason the trucks and cars parked like that when I am present, it is not said to me any peeping has occurred . I'm told there is no reason why the trucks are parked like they are parked in such a way when I'm present .
 Neither God nor the Devil are named as suspects . The pool area is protected from peoping motorcycles .
 Académie Internationale Internationale de Philosophie des Sciences, BELGIQUE, Consejo Superior de I i | I t | I I t : 1 predicting anything. Académémée Internationale .
 "It's been over ten years since Ed sent me an email, and I wanted to make sure I remembered everything correctly," she says .
 Tom Dunham has tracked down credit report errors tying him to the identity of a Catholic Priest in a pedophilia scandal . Dunham: Credit report errors tied him to a priest in a sex abuse scandal have been tracked down .
 Disinformation campaigns on social media platforms that confuse, trick, or upset the public . For example, a foreign group may purposefully spread false or inconsistent information about a social issue .
 Kiva and foreign immigres benefit troiner to a small correctional facility where men teach men the virtues of treating women with the respect they deserve .
 The one of the recent mass shooters reported some some some of the Behavioral Health based operations surrounded him, perhaps inviting him to rage via their acts . The one recent mass shooter reported some of these operations .
 Creating Phoney Planted Indications an Investigation is Legal Espionage utilizes public cooperation, creates pretexts for Law Enforcement acts, with weak evidence trail for Espionage victim to cite to Human Rights watchers . The department of Defense and research forward my data out to china and Russia,
 The Impersonator is conducting the exploiting of Abusive to females, minors (R females R piggy backed to Ed being present at suspicious scene) The act of the Piggyback and my being present create KOMPROMAT .
 Fifty Shades of Grey the HTML colour chart * ~~ U believe that we should #1C1C 1C1A1C"" #6E6E 6E is far more obvious. #6C6A6E is more obvious .
 Protection Racket in Nueces County Texas where I have been repeatedly given death threats if I try to move out to elsewhere . Me Normal guy normal life normal cities Good reputation Neuces Count Texas .
 The Marshals Service supports communities by transferring certain types of forfeited assets to state, local and nonprofit organizations . Marshals service supports communities .
 Jorfeited real or personal property of marginal value can be transferred to state or local governments in support of drug abuse treatment, drug crime prevention and education, housing, job skills and other public health and safety programs .
 Black FBL Pranthinad ahiate tenes Alack all arannd ma Rinel and nae wthita rarictar clarirve nratand T Organized Crime Shakedown Scheme of Impersonator of Me .
 Jen Moore died after receiving death threats, her reporting that highly classified programs are used to fake this KOMPROMAT as Government officials fake child porn to create the pretext that I did, thus the pretext for legal retribution against me 1s created . This is protected by murder as Jen
 Under cover operations mounted in MY HOME from position 3 (unknown party, probably Obama connected) planted evidence I was retarded . Landlords Jim Volcelka, Mac Lamar Properties, William Ruiz Capitola Califronia. William . Ruiz . California .
 Camera system at the Clerks office was out and being adjusted as | FILED MY CASE over this . As is common for me, at FBI , gym, or elsewhere, the camera system was out .
 The Doppelganger is followed and shaken down and confesses to wrong doing, and this is traced back to the establishment which with police backing will ban me from the establishment . The police will ban him from the restaurant he left with the pizza from .
 The ARC of Northern Virginia and an Epstein is tied to Pizza Gate and my mother's trust fund . IQ Research was tied to pizza Gate and Pizza Gate . The ARC is tied with an Epstein .
 A slush fund is a fund or account that is not properly accounted, such as money used for corrupt or illegal purposes, especially in the political sphere . CIA Slush Fund Midnight Climax and money laundering genes rights .
 Astlush fund is a fund or account that is not properly accounted, such as money used for corrupt or illegal purposes, especially in the political sphere . Money used in political sphere is often used in corruption or illegal activities .
 Use of slush funds to influence 'government activities may be viewed as subversive of the democratic process'
 Hearsay: It seems a very strange thing to say but it was a very odd thing to hear . While it sounds paranoid of me this entire book is about witnesses to this and other evidence presented .
 Muscle Cars on the Street death threats told her to stop reporting, and beatings of her leaving her hospitalized . Muscle Cars On the Street . F A ee is a biker attorney .
 Some jurisdictions provide mechanisms to initiate charges and thus stop the statute of limitations from running . When the identity of a defendant is not known, some jurisdictions initiate charges . When a defendant's identity is unknown, charges can be initiated .
 In a strange con-incidence this book is about corrupt moles like the FBI Director and Attoeregy Genearl William Barr and others like Colin Powell even Trump Adnan Khashoggi Task Force Detective Jenn Moore died or was found dead on August 11 2018 .
 ICE HSPI unit is the place to go. He slept well after releasing so much of this, says CNN.com .
 OECD tribute to John F Kennedy with OECD SG Kristensen . 50 years ago, on 22 November 1963, President Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas, Texas . OECD-OECD-History pays tribute to JFK .
 Event-driven architecture is a software architecture paradigm promoting the production, detection, consumption of, and reaction to events . I v. I v Event-Drive architecture: I v I v .
 I don't believe that it's necessary in the United States of America. I think that we can do better in this country. We don't have to shoot at each other, to beat each other and curse each other . I don’t think that it’s necessary
 The National Advisory Commission on Civil Disorders Established by Lyndon B Johnson on 28 July 1967 . Investigate the causes of a recent outbreak of race riots, with a particular focus on the 1967 Detroit riots . The commission was established in 1967 .
 First Black President Denounces Social Darwinism . Ed Donegan Birthday Noy 181961 IVF Date Feb 20 1961 ESS Glorian Donegan FOXP2 Dysgraphic Dec 13 Birthday .
 What if Micheal Hastings and Andrew Breitbart were really on to the Windsor FOXP2 family branch and the use of that DNA in Obama who tested clean of Dysgraphia at birth, and that on the maternal side, Michelle Obama is actually Micheal Lavon Robisnom, a
 The Windsors of German FOXP2 Dysgraphia origin through King George V decedents like King a Baraék Hussein Obama with his lover at that#fime called Michael LaVon Robinson . The Windsor is a descendant of King George III .
 Edward VIII work with Hitler on MKLUTRA through speech therapist Sidney Gottlieb . Edward VIII worked with Hitler through his speech therapist .
 The abuse of Glorian Donegan genome, racketeering it, and the treatment of me by high ranking politicians tied to that history . The subversion of me was subverted by evidence plants and defamatory impersonations of me .
 Ned is an English given name and variant of Ed, sometimes short for Benedict, Edward, Edmund, Edgar, or Edwin . Ed is a shortened version of Benedict, Ed, Edward or Edward . Ned is a long-formatted English name .
 It was also told to me by my mother and relatives in the south Edward was some sort of once king . It was told to him by his mother and . relatives in . the south . Edward was told by his family and relatives that he had been king .
 Edward Paul Donegan grew up in Marshfield MA with his father and mother, Uncle Harold and other brothers of my father . He was born Dec 13 Edward Donegan Feb 20 Nov18 1961 .
 This is often called creating a borderline between potential positions, or Borderline Personality Disorder . This is also known as creating a 'borderline' personality, or a borderline .
 Borderline personality disorder is a mental illness characterized by a long-term pattern of unstable relationships, a distorted sense of self, and strong emotional reactions .
 Edward Paul Donegan has been put through what is called a Gang Stalk, a form of stalking which is illegal but has the cover story of being randomly occurring, not a stalk . The gang stalkers are not stalkers, they are stalkers who are randomly occurring .
 FOXP2 Dysgraphic Racially and Genomically Hostile Conservators Create and Accept KOMPROMAT as State Actors and Corruptable Private State Agents .
 Line agents horrified, To brass renewed his SC and his contract . Hostile Charitable Conservator Generates, Then Accepts As True KOMOPROMAT, Accepts Restitution of alleged harm to co-patients of their behavioral health .
 Stygmatizing me with KOMPROMAT acheives this, coverup my family genome already in the Obamas . The Obamas are using the same technology to cover up their own genome .
 Their principal defect seems to lie in a lack of fine control over the muscles of the throat and mouth needed for rapid speech .
 King Edward VIII, Queen Elizibeth II, and King Georege VI would be her father and brothers and sisters . She would also be her brother and sister .
 Zone House of Windsor is the reigning royal house of the United Kingdom and the other Commonwealth fealms . It is also known as the Queen of Wales and the Commonwealth of Ireland .
 As for an age guestimate, my father told me he had to lie a little about his age, to appeart to be older, to enlist in WWII so he was about 18 . He had to tell his father he was 18 when he enlisted .
 Barack Obama Sr and Glorian Donegan DNA are used in an IVF experiment which also fertilized me on Feb 20 1961 . Obama Sr. and Donegan's DNA were used in the IVF .
 Borage Domfon LA Announces 2016 lley Rei 8 comments Harvey Dent Sad, Sed, Sed BPD is no shit .
 President Franklin D Roosevelt appointed Kennedy to be the first chairman of the United States Securities and Exchange Commission . Kennedy led the commission from 1934 to 1935 .
 The African Development Bank was created by agreement of the leaders of 33 African nations meeting in Khartoum, the capital of Sudan . The day before James Hetfield, born in Downey California, the NASA Apollo Space Program 1961 follow up to the Mercury space program .
 A lab report suggesting Brittany Murphy died from poisoning is ""ridiculous"" and ""baseless,"" an expert said Tuesday . The long list of people associated with Bill Clinton 1 I i Google knowledge panel quoted here .
 The Los Angles County coroner Monyack, 39, died from the same illness five months later . The coroner's office says he died of the same disease five months after .
 Stanley Anne Dunam was neither impregnated with a fertilized ovum nor had any other connection to Obama other being a cover story in the Seattle area . Murphy Murphy, 32, died of pneumonia in December 2009, her husband Simon Monyjack ruled pneumonia killed Murphy .
 Malcolm visited Qubilah in December 1996 in San Antonio, Texas, where she was undergoing treatment . Malcolm visited her in 1996 .
 Defense Intelligence Agency identified Pizzagate also known as Extortion17 flights . And all this evidence, he says, points to a “pan-Africa” hypothesis of human development .
 The Sukhoi Su-7 is a swept wing, supersonic fighter-bomber / ground-attack aircraft . It was developed by the Soviet Union in 1955 .
 The first prototype, designated S-1, was designed to use the new Lyulka AL-7 turbojet engine . The first version of the first prototype will be based on the new engine .
 Su-7B fighter-bomber could replace the scrapped Ilyushin I-10 pictured below . Soviet tactical aviation tasked Sukhoi with developing a ground-attack variant of the Su 7 .
 Soviet tactical aviation tasked Sukhoi with developing ground-attack variant of the Su-7 . The Su 7 could replace the scrapped Ilyushin I-10 .
 Boeing remains integral to keeping the Minuteman III going strong, with an average alert rate of 99.9 percent .
 The Nike-Zeus use of nuclear warheads was necessary given the available missile technology . Project Defender: The use of nukes was necessary .
 Barack Obama was a test birth of futurism and IQ gains in black Winsor DNA with the speech defect FOXP2 was tried through GLorian Donegan with a Malcom X fertilization .
 Future leader needed in Indonesia, Polynesia, Malaysia to help fight communism and the growing Intercontinental Missile Threat . Using Boeing Corporation and the Seatle Missle Defense area the Pacific Northwest Futurist of MKULTRA and Sidney Gottlieb and Warner Von Braun decided a test baby for
 U.S. relatives of King Edward VIII tried out on Barack Obama, btw a great orator, who could be planted in Indensia for peace between the East and West .
 In 1955, the Soviet Union successfully tested a hydrogen bomb, and in 1957 it launched the Sputnik satellite, surpassing the U.S. in rocket technology . In 1957, the United States surpassed the Soviet Russia in rocket design .
 The United States made development of a reliable, rapid-response ballistic missile the highest priority . Fearing that the Soviet Union had the ability to attack the U.S. with intercontinental ballistic missiles .
 At its peak, it would employ 39,700 people located at Boeing sites in Seattle and at the missile final assembly site at Plant 77 in Ogden, Utah . At the peak of the peak, the Boeing plant would employ more than 40,000 .
 He established Boston's Temple Number 11 in 1954, expanded Temple Number 12 in Philadelphia . In March 1954, he was selected to lead Temple Number 7 in Harlem, where he rapidly expanded membership .
 CIA asset, Don Bohning argues in his book, The Castro Obsession, that Operation 40 was not actually established until March 1961 . In June 1953 he was named t i i t i . t i | i . i i i. t i. i i .
 The parents of Barack Obama on the white side tied to the CIA from Witchita Kansas and Settle, Kansas . To hide the covert operation and facilitate Barack Obama's implant into Indonesia a Hawain birth was a cover story by the CIA, the parents .
 The earliest form of ballistic missiles dates from the 13th century with its use derived from the history of rockets . The use of ballistic missile technology is derived from rockets .
 As of 2018, in modified versions (Soyuz-U, Soyuz-FG, and the Soyuz -2 , the vehicle is still in service, having launched over 1840 times .
 Thomas Crane Wales (June 23, 1952 October 11, 2001) was an American FEDERAL PROSECUTOR Seattle Washington . Wales was a graduate of Milton Academy, where he roomed with Joseph Patrick Kennedy I, the son of Robert F Kennedy MKULTRA, Weher
 e Glory as victims and heroes in the fight against White Supremacism . e Themselves as Holy, and the victims of a Heathen. They need materials.
 Bates meraberby Texas police. Texas police say he was involved in a car crash . Bates was found dead in the crash .
 Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development is an intergovernmental economic organisation with 37 member countries . Organisation was founded in 1961 to stimulate economic progress and world trade .
 In espionage jargon, a mole is a long-term spy who 1s recruited before having access to secret intelligence, subsequently managing to get into the target organization . A mole is recruited before getting access to intelligence .
 A mole may be recruited early in life, and take decades to get a job in government service and reach a position of access to secret information before becoming active as a spy .
 CIA Director of Counterintelligence Aldrich Ames and FBI agent Robert Hanssen spied on the United States government for the KGB . Most espionage agents were either recruited or offered their services as spies after they were in place as members of target organization .
 Bush families, the Schartzeneggers, most connected politicians since tied to the IIluminati and MKULTRA around the world . Bush families . Bush . families . tied to IIl . Illuminati and MK.ULTRA .
 A Genome-claims Felony Racket and Why It Exists . I have been, my Genome, has been Targeted . Economic or industrial espionage commonly occurs in one of two ways .
 One modified February 20 1961 as an IVF date and with a birth of Nov 18, 19 1961 in Santa Monica area, recorded in Los Angles St Josephs for me, and Hawaii for my half brother . Barack Obama who would get a cover story for him to be planted in
 Mao decreed increased effort to multiply grain yields and industry should be brought to the countryside . quotas based on Mao's exaggerated claims based on his exaggerated claims . Mao decreeed increased efforts should be made to increase grain yields .
 Many had a longtime members of the Nazi party and the Gestapo and had conducted experiments on humans at concentration comps and commited other war crimes . Many had been members of Nazi party .
 Etiology is the study of causation, or origination . JFK Styling i Ue Va mh JFK at Cape Canaveral November 16, 1963 . Etiology, Se RR EE EE EE EEE EEE .
 Anne Hathaway as Fantine, the mother of Cosette and a struggling factory worker, who resorts to prostitution and selling of her teeth . For the Fantine strategy to work the Social Justice workers representing the victim female must also represent Squalid Filth Ed .
 I fear even being in a Department of Motor Vehicles in the United States because of their complicity in identity theft and actual assaults on those, like other State properties . These high power espionage agencies have radiologically attacked me while in mental health custody, incited other prisoners to assault me .
 The use of Heuristics avoids the correct Due Process . The study of heuristics in human decision-making was developed in the 1970s and 80s by psychologists Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman .
 The Doppelganger happens one apartment over from me, in a similar apartment, different floor, etc., Denna Wide angle My Eyesight Field of View . I could not figure out why teens were in my field of view near me .
 Tots and teens in public attempting to create the appearance of me having an interest in them or them as my paid models . Me normal day e Assaults on my property when starting self relief to adult porn, tots after that outside by window disgusting me .
 In affect sound and fury to my normal acts with external engine roars as thought his ties me to the Marshalls acts . I can not stop them or those who placed them near me from being near me e¢ Normal acts like normal photography or watching news stigmatized by shouting into apartment
 e Marshalls or others will roar engines and create sound and fury a perp is in the area and protect others, behind my back from me, and stigmatizing my normal conduct as if it ties me to abnormal conduct .
 Anonymous over-taching engines surround, subsume, My Normal Acts into a per in the area, btw NOT ME .
 Roles 1 Me in clear text with only clear text meaning . Only clear text simple poverty limited transactions books . Simple poverty limited books .
 The the the the 2A Doppelganger of Me who will confess as though me to anti social peeping conduct and pay with my DNA as requested by a Domina or other 2A A clerk or cashier . The 2A doppelgangers of Me will try to
 Most likely United States Marhsalls roaring engines, parking vehicles, etc., creating the intonation that a predator is in the area and I is/are the predator . Could also be someone who jumps in front of me or places themselves in my path and verbally assaults me as ""
 Shills are premeditating false claims to my genome, but for their prediction in my path and placing themselves there with Criminal Intent they would not be there laying in wait and photographed by their friends . The subjective state of mind of the author of a crime, with reference to the exact
 Marshals Service supports communities transferring certain types of forfeited assets to state, local and nonprofit organizations . Marshals service supports communities bv transferring certain kinds of assets to local and non-profit organizations .
 Jorfeited real or personal property of marginal value can be transferred to state or local governments in support of drug abuse treatment, drug crime prevention and education, housing, job skilis and other programs .
 Black FBL Pranthinag aha ties hlack all arannd ma Rianel and nan wthita ranietar clarirs nratand T Three Pack of Ploys . RxTx Ploy is a three-pack of ploys .
 Teens and tots and ""ass fetishism"" made no sense to me and it took over a decade for me to even figure out the reason people stepped in front of me was that they were asserting with their acts my interest in their asses . In-congruent with who
 Criminals, United States Marshall in the most egregious race based crime stage empathetic exploitable victims in my vicinity, while they, dresses as me or others dressed as me, will ""victimize"" the victim by masturbating or photographing the female, in anti social conduct .
 The incident, them being near or in front of me, is their own conduct not mine, he says . "Any victimization of those females is by others, not me," he says. "The incident ... is ... not mine"
 These people will also "get the word out about the White Supremacist, and skid their cars while in my vicinity to show how they feel about me," he said .
 In cons a Gull falls for a trap and then will give into the blackmail resulting from the trap . e The Marshall/Protector of the Shill teen, tot, or female who the mother will report the found photo to. In cons, a . Gull will fall for
 Shills are Con Artists who in Long Congs can do things like fall down in front of you allegedly tangled feet or a push, and perhaps another shill at the scene will bear false witness to what occurred . Shill is Con Artists .
 This is NOT the inchoate deal I and her initiated nor any confession I ever made to her . Fools — — —— —— Day, for his peeping at a pool .
 Springfield VA My Card Key paper folder list room 400, My card key does not work at though exactly as I checkin scuzsy black and | 400 .
 White female leave for elevators a minute, a minute key is fixed to 400 . "I go to lobby and my card I check, card white female," she says . "White female" is a key to the elevators .
 The same happened in Casa Linda Apartments and everywhere I go and everything I do . I have to pay for and book an I can not board, no passport,and modification | entirely new flight on an to NYC is denied impersonators name, not my own . I book a
 The Von Trapps in London, Paternal EDWARD marrying 1926 . Maternal MARIA PRINCE OF WALES KUTSCHERA niece of 1926 (German PRinCE EDWARD an affair with Austrian Nazi Franz biologically) MARIA KUTsCHERA VON
 Donegan DNA given up by impersonators of Edward Donegan, thus bailing the CIA and Vatican out of a jam, since it was authorized . CIA destroyed records it was all unauthorized .
 Vatican out of a jam, since it was authorized Edward Donegan IVF FEB 20 1961, Edward birth NOV 18, her The CIA birthday DEC 13, her birth DEC 13 . She was born on November 18, 1961 .
 Loretta Fuddy, director of the Hawaii Department of Health, reportedly died due to injuries she received in the crash of a small commuter plane . Tom Clancy was working on Dec 13 2013 C Q & bBlintecapleyaces.net/ x pis inPlare G
 Dr. Napisa Waitoolkiat, Southeast Asia Visiting Fellow from Thailand, discusses her findings . She also discusses her research at the University of Thailand, Thailand, on the topic of Southeast Asia .
 Ex-CIA Agent Jim Garrow claims President Obama ordered the murders of Tom Clancy and Andrew Breitbart . Garrow is a philanthropist and worker for one of the largest non-profit organizations on the planet to save female children from slaughter in China .
 Model of Cover Ops in public and in state offices and using surveillance of me for which no basis and no basis has been shown to me or presented to me . Model of cover ops in public, state offices are using surveillance, he says . Models of Cover ops are being used in public
 How Obamacare Will be Used To Destroy The United States Constitution? Dr. Dr. John Sutter says Obamacare will be used to destroy the U.S. Constitution .
 I believe DARPA found black masons and others tied to the original MKULTRA affecting my family . Now these same world masons tied interests will kill people like Judge Roll, Justice Scalia, Thomas C Wales, and others .
 It was not until 1951 that a U.S. Senate committee determined that a “sinister criminal organization” later known as La Cosa Nostra, operated in this nation .
 PropagandaDue was a Masonic lodge under the Grand Orient of Italy, founded in 1877 . It was the first of its kind in Italy .
 Its Masonic charter was withdrawn and it transformed into a clandestine, pseudo-Masonic, organization . The organization was operating in contravention of Article 18 of the in 1976, raright Constitution of Italy that banned secret associations .
 In America he's a biker attorney who specialized in getting Srialtime defendants off . In America He's also a lawyer who specializes in getting defendants off. In America In America, he's an attorney who got defendants off for Srial time .
 The unity of government which constitutes you one people is also now dear to you . A ASTON Rea rc ’ ga rum mm rae en Nc lee el lo ele ee » .
 CIA, Mossad, and Russians all seem to have some theories about Obama family ties to this, and earlier CIA OSS Vatican and Windsor ties to all this, including close ties between King Edward VHI, Nazi Germany, Spanish Illuminati Opus Dei .
 VICE reached out to VICE with claims that he had a video of President Barack Obama's birth . The video is believed to be from a source known only as "Peter R. R.”
 Jen Moore saw it before the side bars blocked the planter at Stay and Play ee i ee eee . THe Mysterious death of Dr. Dr. John Sutter has been ruled out of foul play .
 The document is just another in an increasingly long line of fakes intended to prove Obama wasn't born in the United States Lt. Lt. Mike Downey said the document was a fake . Downey: "It's just the latest in a series of fake fakes"
 Marco McMillian: Mississippi's first gay mayoral candidate, 34, 'was beaten and burned' before his body was found dumped on a riverbank . McMillian died in the Camp Bastion attack 3 days after the Benghazi attack .
 Sinclair claims that Obama was friendly with at least two of these deceased parishioners, and that choir director Donald had contacted him shortly before being murdered from multiple gunshot wounds on December 23, 2007 . Andrew Breitbart died of a massive heart attack, walking outside late at night, alone, in
 Bill Gwatney was a close friend of Bill and Hillary Clinton and a Clinton super delegate at an upcoming convention in Denver . He was fatally shot in 2008 in the face of a gunman in 2008 .
 Christopher Kelly Committed suicide, under pressure to testify against former Gov. Chris Christie . Christopher Kelly committed suicide under pressure from Christie Christie to resign .
 Former Navy SEAL ‘Died Because Somebody Wanted to Kill Him’ Robert McKeon: founder of private-equity firm Veritas Capital, dies Sept.,2012 of suicide . Marco McMillian: Mississippi’s first gay mayoral candidate, 34, ‘was beaten
 United States Navy SEAL commander dies in Afghanistan: suicide --SEAL Team Four commander in Afghanistan ‘commits suicide’ as body_of married father is found shot dead: Rumor? State Department_Denies Hillary Clinton Injured in Plane Crash... but ABC News Report on
 Obama_skipped intel meetings for days leading up to the attacks despite christopher stevens was a muslim . Ambassador Chris Stevens was a Muslim, according to the statement .
 Claim that secret war ran behind the back of Gen. Hillary Clinton . Oe assassinations, run by CIA nominee John Brennan, resulted in the death of the United States ambassador, a new book claims .
 Prince Harry, 27, has been deployed at Camp Bastion as a military helicopter helicopter pilot . The Taliban also claimed that the prince was a target in Friday's attack .
 Taliban fighters have threatened to kill the third in line to the British throne . Taliban fighters say they have a "high-value plan" to attack the British monarch .
 Jim Garrow Obama Hoax Debunk’d Refutations, by Gordon Duff, Senior Editor Veterans Today. Jim Gareare, a. a a a gE gE Gf pen, Ay a ef Ree Dr. Dr. Obama .
 Judge found dead at courthouse: suicide; Nueces County sheriff: ‘Strong leads’ on Judge Greenwell’s suicide motive . Each had been shot once in the head with a handgun, as was the family's dog .
 Hillary Rodham Clinton's relationship with drug convict Dan Lasater and Rose's role in suing him on behalf of the government and First American Savings & Loan of Oak Brook, a Chicago suburb . But it minimized the role of a third partner on questions about her relationship with Lasater . Hillary Rodham
 Alexander “Sasha” Kagansky was working on developing a vaccine when he was brutally stabbed and thrown from the window of his 14th floor apartment in St. Petersburg, Russia . Kagansky had been developing a COVID-19 vaccine .
 Colorado’s strong space, defense industries continue to act as magnet for companies . One of the units on base is the 743rd Military Intelligence Battalion . The base is located in Colorado .
 An added element, other than the property rights tranfers, is the defamation to my political, religious, and intellectual worth as the Dopple and the dapples acts are taken for my own . Fraud is intentional deception to secure unfair or unlawful gain, or to deprive
 Bismuth titanate is a solid inorganic compound of bismuth, titanium and oxygen . The chemical formula of B112Ti020, Bi 4T13012 or Bi2Ti207 has been used as a chemical formula .
 Lab report suggests actress Brittany Murphy died from poisoning is 'ridiculous' and 'baseless' Expert: Report is "baseless" and "ridiculously"
 The long list of people associated with Bill Clinton Google knowledge panel quoted here is quoted here as Bill Clinton's illness five months later . The long-list of those associated with Clinton includes Bill Clinton .
 On August 23, 1987, the bodies of Don Henry and Kevin Ives were hit by a cargo train in Alexander, Arkansas as they lay on the tracks .
 Mary Caitrin "Caity" Mahoney killed on July 7, 1997 a Caity, the youngest of three children . She flunked the second grade but worked hard to catch up and by the sixth grade was accepted into the McDonogh School .
 Michael Isikoff hints that a “former White House A staffer” with the initial “M” was about to go public with her story of sexual harassment at the fr White House . Paula Jones lawsuit journalist dropped hints about a former White House staffer going public .
 Ethicists are also concerned about the potential misuse of mitochondrial transfer . The mitochondrial transfer is a form of genetic manipulation .
 Lee Harvey Oswald and his wife Marina and their child return from the Soviet Union November 6, 1962 . John Connally elected Governor of Texas. Lee Harvey O'Mara Oswald and Marina Oswald were married in 1961 .
 Oswald is given notice in the latter part of March that he will be terminated from his job . Oswald will be given notice of his termination in the middle of March . Oswald was given notice that he would be terminated in March .
 President Kennedy's upcoming trip to Dallas was first announced to the public in September 1963 . Ruth Paine's house is where alleged JFK assassin Lee Harvey Oswald spent the night before shots rang out at Dealey Plaz .
 According to a declassified CIA document, Ruth's sister, Sylvia Hyde Hoke, was listed as an employee of the agency in the Falls Church, VA local directory in 1961 . The CIA document says she was listed in a local directory as a CIA employee .
 Ruth Hyde's father, William Avery Hyde, was an insurance executive who went to work for USAID . USAID is a well known cover for CIA personnel .
 Kathleen Agnes Cavendish, Marchioness of Hartington, also known as ""Kick"" Kennedy, was an American socialite . United States Ambassador to the United Kingdom . Died November 18, 1969 .
 She came forward saying she had proof of a high level pedophile ring involving VIPs, Politicians, Movie Stars and other celebrities . Feb 23 2019 she is found dead .
 EGo can cr ee BCU MRE eC a bath tub, nor will | shoot myself in the head. PRET RUE TU ear eGo .
 Dawn Sylvia-Stasiewic was an American dog trainer . She was also a trainer for Senator Edward Kennedy's dog .
 Dr. Bradstreet, MD. an altemative autism specialist, and Dr. Nich Nich were willing to sfep outside of (he standard allopathic medical mode) for treating cancer and autism . Dr Nich and Dr Bradstreet were willing and willing to explore other options .
 When agents from the USFDA and local state of Georgia law enforcement raided Dr. Dr. Martin's home, they raided his home .
 HMS Vanguard is Britain's lead Trident-armed submarine . It is the world's most powerful submarine, HMS Vanguard .
 Jim Volcelcka and William Ruiz Slap work with and slap me back to Corpus Christi non white skid row . I am not a high value target for any Fusion Center, Law Enforcement Intelligence Unit but my assets are AS IT AM FRAMED by high profile politicians
 Edward Paul Donegan rents in a normal city . Pperhas takes over date with female I was going to meet in that location . Normal cities and Skid row gangstalk normal life .
 The building has all sorts of slight of hands confusions like the letter B and 8 right next to each other and consider how this scam operates . At 1001 N Water Street the North 4th Floor I was zerod out from 1001 .
 Mops are pushed all around 48 while the apartment 4B is right next door, and the fake hero peeping from the adjoing unit ""owes"" and provides DNA to the family making milk references .
 It is possible the female in 4B thinks she was peeped at by Edward Donegan in 48 or someone . If she knows it 1s a substitute she may feel better about being peeping at .
 My apartment is not wired for AT&T, they confuse apartment numbers, which wiring goes where, etc. etc., and this is the usual of the long con eet of the vicitm unit and the adjourning fake hero unit .
 Getting me ostracized from a potential family life by faked allegations will work, and it works by showing how framing me can pay off for social good, if good people will frame and attack me . It is called the Precious Gemms Scam, people are told a Gull
 The Enigma machine is a cipher device developed and used in the early to mid-20th century to protect commercial, diplomatic, and military communication . It was used to communicate with commercial and military communications .
 Human intelligence is intelligence gathered by means of interpersonal contact, as opposed to the more technical intelligence gathering disciplines such as signals intelligence, imagery intelligence and measurement and signature intelligence .
 Racial fights are picked and staged and I and my trust are the Mark in fraud upon me. HUMINT by illegal COINTELPRO and Sham investigations which are created under false premises and use illegal harassment. Sham investigations .
 I believe the real Espionage interest in my has been converting my positives into the positives of others such as people will turn from me to others . If we can study his racism my theories of Hegel could propell me and I thus find it difficult to enter communities such as Austin and this stalk
 Disgusted that Ed seems to take pictures of teens and tot asses, across from the High School, she will show her ass to the Neighborhood Watch instead, and they will spend Edward Donegan's money on her ass .
 Just Cause she works with Law Enforcement and Neighborhood Watch . This is spliced with my real contact to her and the evidence manufacture about me . Evidence that she made about me was spliced to her by Espionage along with my contact to . her for her to be incited against me
 A film splicer is a device which can be used to physically join together lengths of photographic film . Film splicer can be a device that can join together photographic film lengths .
 Cement splicers join films together by using a chemical called film cement . Film cement is made of film base dissolved in a solvent .
 Photobombing has been known to get global exposure, mainly due to the bandwidth and ease of dissemination afforded by the Internet, and the abundance of snapshots by smartphone cameras and other hand-held devices .
 To interfere is to try to stop something from happening, the U.S. can't interfere, the president's spokesman says .
 White supremacist who regretted from day one Corpus Christi Texas, Nueces County Subversion and recruiting Subversives Terms Advocating, causing, or attempting to cause insubordination, disloyalty, mutiny, or refusal of duty by any member of the armed forces of
 Interest 1s is the word used to describe money charged or given as part of a debt . It is also used in terms of money given or given to pay off debts . Interest 1 is also a word used in reference to interest rates .
 4) IS a USA Military DOD member, or at least using ID of a ite USAF officer . Air Force National Guard Airman first class . English as Second Language speakers as is CENTCOM area Mistress Vesta .
 Air Foros ROTC Ware to Vanden High School, Travis AFE, CA . Lives in Travis Alr Force Base . Air Force Base is based in California .
 The Marshals Service supports communities by transferring certain types of forfeited assets ‘0 state, local and nonprofit organizations‘0’
 The dependency of the plot, surreptitious plot, manufactured by context is that | am a severly retarded loser how needs a trust fund manager, and that trust . fund manager can break any contract for housing in normal life and keep me in homeless shelters of violent felons .
 Each CIA cryptonym contains a two character prefix called a digraph, which designates a geographical or functional area . CIA cryptonyms contain a two-character prefix, which is used to identify a geographical area .
 Jim Vocelka and William Ruiz, Stay and Play and Capitola Crisis Acting as foundation work in the Long Con, Stages of the Long con on my Sperm Bank Rights . In the Lambda Green White chapter of this book this and more information is found on Cons
 ARC of Northern Virginia has used quackery from the outset to undermine the fact 1 never needed them or signed up for them . ARC of . Northern Virginia never signed up to them. The ARC of. Virginia has never needed to be quacked .
 The Rockefeller Foundation shook down a Nazi for genome ""for the kids"" it doesn't seem shamefull . But the word lucrative doesn't carry a similar sense of shame .
 If the operations, as it was, to incite homelessness in a person already a victim of the Rockefellers, the scam was shameful . The scam is shameful, but it was shameful, says the author of the book .
 In my case I think wars are fought against me such as race and pedophilia wars . Espionage based font organizations conspire against my rights and during that hold public support .
 DNA Forensics are revealing family connections and genome history around the world which some of these Illuminati have been secretly tampering with . They now have been caught ""with their pants down"" (except those arguing for transparency) as DNA forensics reveal .
 While eugenic principles have been practiced as early as ancient Greece, the contemporary history of eugenics began in the early 20th century . Eugenics movement emerged in the United Kingdom, and then spread to many countries, including the United States, Canada, and most European countries
 The eugenics movement became associated with Nazi Germany and the Holocaust . The defense of many of the defendants at the Nuremberg trials of 1945 to 1946 attempted to justify their human-rights abuses by claiming there was little difference between the Nazis and the United States .
 Concern has grown about the possible revival of a more potent form of eugenics after decades of promoting human rights . New assisted reproductive technology procedures available, such as gestational surrogacy and pre-implantation genetic diagnosis, have raised concerns .
 A criticism of eugenics policies is that, regardless of whether negative or positive policies, they are susceptible to abuse . Genetic selection criteria are determined by whichever group has political power .
 Critics say eugenics propose to permanently and artificially disrupt millions of years of evolution . Trying to create genetic lines ""clean"" of ""disorders can have far-reaching downstream effects in the genetic ecology, including negative effects on immunity and on species resilience .
 If Obama and even Glorian DNA and Mitochondria get seized, as if a Nest Egg trust fund, Obama relatives would be from everywhere, not somewhere . Mark Edward Kelly is an American politician, former astronaut, engineer and United States Navy captain .
 Bizzare and even Earth Shaking larges scale rigged proceedings surrounding my using both Targeted Individuals or Placed Individuals to rigg proceedings as if sweeping ice in front of a stone .
 You could rig your jeans by using a paper clip to replace a button that pops . Paperclips can be used to replace buttons that pop .
 Interest how ""fixed"" means ""stuck on"" like a Fixed Delusion or a Compulsive Act, a belief or action fixed in destiny by a sapient or controlling, engineering, even socially or legally enginerring force . Interest how "fixed" means "stuck
 Kelly Kelly is the husband of former U.S. Represeftlaiive Gabby Giffords . Kelly is married to former Rep. Gabby .
 Scott Joseph Kelly is an American engineer, retired astronaut, and U.S. Navy captain . He was an engineer, and retired astronaut . He served in space shuttle missions from 1964 to 1965 .
 Without the mutation, CCR5-A32 were killed by the Black Death, so that those with the mutation survived to reproduce and increase its prevalence today . Ge See cesses taba could-the-death-protect-against-hiv .
 In the 1990s, PCR, developed in 1983, became the than RFLP, it has an exclusion rate of 99.99% or higher . In the 90s, it became the more exclusion rate .
 The proteins encoded by certain genes “54468 CCR-5 is disabled in people with the full mutation, and so HIV is unable to gain access to the macrophages . HIV is not able to access to macrophage cells, according to experts .
 Highly accurate DNA parental testing became available in standard method for DNA parents testing . Highly accurate parental testing was available in 1999 .
 A simpler, faster, and more accurate method of testing are also known as antigens . Antigens were discovered as factors in organ transplants as a result of their historic discovery as factors .
 My father was an 1950s above ground nuclear testing participant in Nevada to test affects of radiation by the DOE an NIH/PHS . He was a participant in the 1950s .
 Obama also an IVF on Feb 20 1961 . Online impersonators speak of Glorian and Genenetch, an online Bernie friend saying so .
 In Concord CA I even call the Concord police on some form of special ops which seem to be monitoring my home illegally . I am also told there is an operation underway according to neighbors which is protecting a witness next in a house adjoining my house .
 Not everyone at 23andMe participates in DNA Relatives, the matching tool there . Not everyone is a member of the company's DNA family database .
 My eggs will need to be broken in the U.S. If I have children five generations later they will tie to Obama's children . Obama's family will tie the president's children to his son's generation .
 Judge Roll seems to have been a possible ""real target" of a shooting, shooting connected to The Saulk religious institute, in an asset seizure case in my mother's trust fund amount, over a ruling detrimental to Obama's likely DNA agenda .
 Edward Paul Donegan @eddonegan . In 2000, Family Tree DNA, founded bys Veeeemcteld, was Oo ta Edward Paul .
 Tied to Birther IVF issues | Tied . to Ongoing Secret Looks forward to Genes In Africa PAST AND DNA Database | undisclosed ARC of NOVA Trust .
 Edward P Donegan, me, my take on this, a ruling disallowed a legal theory or some other matter affecting the genetic privacy rights of the President .
 Daniel Brandt sends: December 21, 2009 Obama and CIA . I applaud your posting of Obama's Trilateral connections .
 GDP and societal success seems to be correlated with ethnic IQs . GDP and governmental, scientific, societal . societal, societal, and . societal . success seem to be correlation with ethnic . IQs.
 Unlike the WikipeidA links, these have permanent content, which means that every time | post such a link, a bunch of revisionists editors cant go edit it and vater it down or change it, or add false contradictory information to it, as happens with the Wikip
 In our previous reports United States Descends Into Total Police State As 2012 ‘Solar Chaos’ Fears Grow, Pole Shift Blamed for Russian Air Disaster, Closure Of United States Airport, Closures Of United . States Airport and Poisonous Space Clouds Slamming into Earth Cause
 Pegasus is a mythical winged divine horse, and one of the most recognized creatures in Greek mythology . Pegasus U pecases Mythical creature Google knowledge panel .
 One of America’s early time-space explorers steps forward to reveal what he experienced and what he learned during the early years of time travel research and development by the United States government .
 Big day for those who believe the world is run by a cabal of elites, be it the Free Masons, Illuminati, or New World Order . Big, big, big day for many of you .
 DNA isolated from natural state sought to be patented 1s identical to that portion of the DNA in its natural state . complementary DNA is a synthetic creation not normally present in nature .
 On October 10, 2012, the Supreme Court heard oral arguments in the case . Oral arguments were held in the U.S. Supreme Court .
 Black Markets Black Money and Money Laundering are complex. Money Launder is complex. Black Markets is a multi-billion dollar industry .
 Layered Architecture of Racketeering influence Criminal Organization introduces ""railway" crossing point in which the cross out of accounts can occur . Recall from Department of Treasuary description and how this layering of an extra layer can provide the money laundering cross point .
 A Protection Racket, unneeded mental retardation advocacy of me creating by my mother's will creators enables this loot of my DNA rights by sabotaging my normal life circumstances such as metropolitan apartments and keeps me either homeless, institutionalized, or in deep slum non-white conditions of
 Instead of defamatory repulsive and repugnant sexuality is staged against my interest including flashing and evidence plants . Instead of flashing or evidence plants, I'm accused of defamation and sexual assault .
 Shill Gulls impersonate me as Information Doppelgangers and will forge a confession of me that will be used as a pretext for legal claims against me . It is the Gull who actual photographed or committed the peeping whilst standing next to me in public at the same
 Many of the Shll Gulls who faked the identity of me and confessed to peeping at women are homeless people and drugs addicts who the asset seizures will benefit . Social services or law firms who will benefit from laws which allow my assets to be transferred to them under RICO like
 U.S. Marshalls will plant evidence as me then seize the evidence already on them then seize it . Often and even mostly they are lower class uneducated, on drugs from treatment program drop outs and sex offenders, but as me ""admit"" that my assets are due them
 Shill lawyers and judges such as B Janice Ellington or Paula Xinis or others who are connected to deep state genetics programs . The deep state genetic program is a form of deep state .
 Errors of Reproductivity, The State controls Fertilization Rights and Activities . State Teloogical ""emergency"" control private reproductive rights and moves them into State owned assets for the elite and government backed causes .
 For the NIH and Obama Admin to racketeer the value of my geneome (and who does know it and will not disclose it to me) and pass it to White women it is necessary to make a publicly visible spectacle I am mentally incompetent, a spy or terrorist . And politicians choose
 Even the | Pizza (female minor to Tea paseo I am bankrupt and sauce was photograph ala Bettie Page ocna e will pay the bill with white photo sessions) my DNA Goes to actual | Tx leaves and is chased to location he is at, fake Ed
 False pretenses is very similar to the theft crime of “larceny by trick,” which involves convincing someone to transfer you possession of their property through deception . The crime is similar to that of ‘throne by trick’
 "The building is operated by the interest of the duplicity, not the simplicity," he says . The building was operated by an interest of duplicity not simplicity, he adds .
 The gambit, an exploited child, is the allegation ""I took the bait"" and exploited the minor . After that, my trust fund will compensate the victim, the gambit and those who protect the child .
 These religious charities are using their children as exploitation victims to gain advantage over an Atheist by an impersonator of the Atheist taking the bait . mmmmm mm meee Hee HEHEHE eH HEHE HEHEhehehe HeHee .
 Program Description: We follow the Guide for Organizational Representative Payees . People who because of severe mental or physical limitations or may be subject to family exploitation are unable to manage their finances .
 Fake data going into a rigged ""intelligence unit"" evidence ""fusion"" center for guesswork on what might be happening . I am wrongly targeted and subject to wrongful assets seizures and even predatory misrepresentation of me who wants my assets for their victims while denying to me those are my assets
 MKULTRA groups and operations and its ultra powerful vested interests are requesting media silence and getting media silence or even media cover fire as complicit media intimidates and bans others reporting on the operations of MKULTra, at times called ""Truther"" theory .
 Alma Vivian Powell is an American audiologist and the wife of military and political figure Colin Powell . She married Colin Powell on August 25, 1962 . She is an audiologist .
 I didn't see one on this trip but usually when this happens, which 1s whenever I am in public, a person dressed like me will have an interest in the female . The parties will then bifurcate from me and I believe the person dressed up will take over
 Jen Moore was killed because she and I were uncovering and reporting on the RICO scheme, its black budget coming from violent crimes connected racketeering . CIA contractor illegal irregulars were used to kill Jen Moore and to assault me, drawn from Social Services Agencies (who are in a
 A central lie in Pizzagate is that in ordinary acts I am actually ""sendng the signal"" or making the deal for my DNA, signed over during a tryst an impersonator of me 1s really setting up in which my DNA sperm bank rights will be money laundered
 The Mousetrap is a murder mystery play by Agatha Christie . It is set in London and set in New York . It was first published in 1903 .
 Britney Havers every day teen with a $70 million dollar trust fund from her rich dead biological mother, allowing her only a 25K a year stipend . The trust fund is from her dead mother .
 Maya King secret teen lover and brash accomplice to Brittney Havers who will use the clause of the will if a biological relative is found the trust then goes to her . The 25K a year basic scheme is no longer in place . Her rich mother secretly murdered in an all
 Maya King suddenly claims to be Brittney Dunlap's illegitimate daughter as the result of her mother's extramarital affair . Brittney's brash, relatively poor classmate Maya King becomes the daughter of Dunlap . Maya King's mother is the mother of Brittney .
 The trio are in cahoots, running a scam to secure and share Dunlap's fortune . Dunlap is believed to be the richest man in the world .
 Mulholland Falls Analogy and MKULTRA COINTELRPO, MLKULTRA, tied to Ongoing Government Blunders wit} my DNA and DNA rights Eisenhower's farewell address .
 Cleanup of Espionage by Espionage hits as needed to save the bosses . In Mulholland Falls and The Bourne Identity series these are characters who are trying to brind down those who could compromise Espionage Gone Wrong of their agencies .
 This book poses that the Boston Marathon Bombing was a cover-up during mulit-suspect mass crowd event . A black U.S. Dpet of Defense employee at the JFK library fire may have been in an operation to destroy evidence . The book claims that a black
 At least in my case me being a far right winger New Age Claims call me a Nazi and lay the claims of alleged harmed victims at my feet, actually New Agers self victimize then subvert me on appearances cause I was in vicinity .
 My Hyde 1s a real sex offender following me around dressed as me . It seems a Mr Hyde side of me came out, but it was a real Sex Offender .
 The paradox of who is Mr Hyde and how does he fit into some other identity Dr JEKYLL . Ed Donega, Dr Jekyll and Ed Donegan . Robert Louis Stevenson .
 "As 1 sought the answer for racial hate crimes against me that only further polarized and issue still do not as my calling out black or other aggression and research the reason" "Racial hate crimes" against me "only further polarized" and "do not as well do not"
 Racket Trust os approach white women with my Building Super contractors assualt eee Fund, actual aesthetic, intellectual, and as Mr Hyde or planted or other Dr Marshalls, ; eee other assets supporting Mr Hyde .
 Humanism emphasizes the value and agency of human beings, individually and collectively . Humanism is a philosophical stance that emphasizes the importance of human being .
 For the NLF, the political struggle was by no means secondary to the armed campaign . Political struggle was conceptualized as equal d complementary components of the overall campaign against the Saigon regime .
 There may be one or more simultaneous insurgencies occurring in a country . Sometimes there may be a simultaneous insurgency occurring .
 Subversion can generally be broken down into internal and external subversion . This distinction is not meant to imply that each follows a specific set of unique and separate tools and practices .
 Each subversive campaign is different because of the social, political, economic, cultural, and historical differences that each country has . Each campaign is based on a country's social, economic and cultural differences . Each country has a unique history of subversive campaigns .
 Insurgencies differ in their use of tactics and methods . I I I i i I I | | | I I  I I – I I . I . i I i I . Insurgency is a form of insurgency in Afghanistan .
 Arthur's adulterous affair with Guinevere is discovered and causes a civil war . Mordred is exploited by Mordred to end Arthur's kingdom . Arthur's marriage to Mordred leads to the death of Arthur .
 Brier would succumb to his wounds shortly thereafter, leading to rampant speculation as to the thotive for his murder . Despite his family suing various individuals and corporations, many were still left thinking that Rich was murdered by the the the DNC and the Clinton Machine for, they speculated, leaking incrim
 A Lie about race and the history of coping with racial strife has consolidated power to the point of intimidating open discussion . PsyOps, the CIA Mole State, and the Media and other a wing planes A Lie .
 The title of this blog is a quote from Ron Paul, a former Congressman and presidential candidate, Ron Paul . Truth is treason in an empire of lies, he says .
 The Cin conception of a daimon notably appears in the works of Plato, A eLoKom LD describes the eavanate inspiration of Socrates .
 They don't believe of these links what they don't want to believe . Conversely, they don’t believe of this link what they want to .
 Disininformation have found the source of political news that they prefer, and they agree with the views they hear or read . There would be no harm in that if the news media was always reliable, but it isn't .
 There is ° BIASED INFORMATION reckless journalism from the far left all the way through to the far right . There is also reckless journalism on the left, right and left .
 We’re not asking anyone to change their political views. We're here to talk about our political views . We're not asking people to change things .
 Washington Post managing editor Bob Kaiser killed the article without explanation .
 Bob Kaiser refused to even meet with Sally Denton and Roger Morris . Kaiser hid in his office while his secretary made excuses for him to meet with them .
 Isreali Mossad had operation under way to kill program dissidents . Bush and the Bush family mostly invovled, even the alst George Bush president threating he would be killed .
 Fighter/pursuit plane could fly within a circumference of bombers and intercept inbound hostile fighters before they reached the home team bomber . In the case of the Bomber aircraft especially before RADAR the bomber aircraft could fly .
 Corruption is a form of dishonesty or criminal offense undertaken by a person or organization entrusted with a position of authority . Corruption is an attempt to acquire illicit benefit or abuse power for one's private gain for private gain .
 In politics, a mafia state is a state system where the government is tied with organized crime . Government officials, the police, and/or military become a part of the criminal enterprise .
 Plausible deniability is the ability of people, typically senior officials in a formal or informal chain of command, to deny knowledge of or responsibility for any damnable actions committed by others in an organizational hierarchy . Even if they were personally involved in or at least willfully ignorant of the actions,
 Revenge for a real or imagined offense (People in these organizations are quite petty, mirroring their preternatural handlers) False accusations of a ""horrible crime"" of which the victim has gotten away with . silencing a corporate ""whistle-blower" or defecting from
 Crony Deep State Shot | Henchmen Law Violent Callers can and do get | Enforcement Gang support for this Layer 2 Espionage Agent . Member (Has support of others Confidential operation and covering . Confidential . operation . Me and my trust fund blamed for the acts of others
 Few men have been desperate enough to attack openly, and barefaced, the liberties of a free people . Few men are desperate enough . Few have attacked openly .
 I call it the Radical Right because it is right wing in that it sees limited role for government, I call 1t conservatism in social, religious, and economic matters . The Radical Right conserves the use of the power of State to their most limited applications .
 Psychological Warfare is simply learning everything about your target enemy, their beliefs, likes, dislikes, strengths, weaknesses, and vulnerabilities . Once you know what motivates your target, you are ready to begin psychological operations .
 "Once you know what motivates your target, you are ready to begin psychological operations," says the author . "You can become the alternate choice for the Compromised and Absent original"
 Gangstalk System Targeting a Cape Cod Atomic Testing Veteran PDE Ote Copiague Prados Core . Their Espionage Recruits Targeted by Deep State for Recruitment . The innocent murdered victim in custody .
 Don’t think that homeless shelters assaults are where the betrayal 1s most tangible . Homeless shelters are the places where the assaults are most tangible, says the author .
 An avalanche occurs when a cohesive slab of snow lying upon a weaker layer of snow fractures and slides down a steep slope . An avalanche is an event that occurs when the slab of . snow lying on a weaker . layer of ice fractures .
 Some of the snow may mix with the air forming a powder snow avalanche, which 1s a type of gravity current . If the avalanche moves fast enough, some of the air may mix . The avalanche may move fast enough .
 Medicaid: 0 Yes 0 No No SSI: /O Yes O No . Please enclose copies of bills, statements, training invices or receipts .
 George Bush family, and their in concert acts with the Vatican, are in concert . The events occurred at the same time as I was in a mental institution in Virgininia .
 Simon Cowell's eyes seem to follow Carrie Underwoods as almost as self satire . As the singing coppetition unfolded I pointed out to him that the camera and the camera seemed to be following Carrie Underwood .
 A common room configuration for hospitals and mental health institutes is two beds and a bathroom shared between the next two bed bedroom . This was also true 20 years later though this time the dopple, under arrest for masturbating in puhlic, was named David and he was named
 In FEBRUARY 2016, Kelly signed an agreement with Harper Collins to write an autobiography scheduled for release later that year, in a deal worth more than $10 million . Kelly's autobiography is due to be released later this year .
 Vocabulary.com retrieved from link and copied or modified to here Edifice Edifice means a building, but it doesn't mean just any building . Edifice is the correct moral and reliable and even security oriented Edward Donegan and Tom Dunham .
 Eric Hoffer Propoganda does not deceive people; it merely helps them to deceive themselves . "Nobody helps nobody but himself. Nobody helps nobody else but himself.""
 In Russia, before the Bolshevik Revolution, the term intelligentsiya described the status class of educated people whose cultural capital (schooling, education, enlightenment) allowed them to assume practical political leadership . The term "intelligent" was used in Russian society .
 An ivory tower is a metaphorical place-or an atmosphere-where people are happily cut off from the rest of the world in favor of their own pursuits, usually mental and esoteric ones . It is a place where people are happy to be happy with their pursuits .
 Whoever deprives, attempts to deprive, or threatens to deprive any person of any employment, position, work, compensation, or other benefit provided for or made possible in whole or in part by any Act of Congress appropriating funds for work relief or relief purposes, on account of political affiliation
 Sidney Gotlieb in the 1960s. Sidney got the real reason, Sidney got into trouble . Sidney's life was in the '60s and '70s. Because the excuses did not make sense to me, I sought out Sidney's real reason. Sidney's was Sidney's
 AP vUS Amendment rests on assumption that diverse and antagonistic sources is essential to the welfare of the public . Free press is a condition of a free society, AP v.US Amendment says . AP vU.S. Amendment: A free press is an essential condition of free society
 Publicity is justly commended as a remedy for social and industrial diseases, says Harper's Weekly editor .
 Sunlight is said to be the best of disinfectants; electric light the most efficient policeman . Electric light is the best disinfectant .
 The provisions in the Committee's bill concerning the incorporation of stock exchanges and the statement to be made in connection with the listing of securities would doubtless have a beneficial effect .
 Wealth Combination: Control of other people's money and control of others' businesses . Combination of control of money, control of people's businesses . Control control of a person's wealth and control control of their businesses .
 Investment Bankers secure substantial control of successful machinery business . Excelsior Manufacturing Company has a capital of $10,000,000 . Investment bankers secure control of the business .
 The Preferred stock will net the owners in cash $95 a share . As we have a large clientele of confiding customers, we were able to secure from the owners an agreement for marketing the Preferred stock .
 There are, however, many cases where the banker's services can be altogether dispensed with . The banker should be eliminated, not only for economy's sake, but to break up financial concentration, writes Andrew Hammond .
 "I live under a bridge and I have to seek out those very corrupt family services that are part of money launder my genetics rights to their ""victims"" of me . Or the service such as Social Security our Housing 1s lost and I live under the bridge .
 RuizRocket.docx Word Gp 8 x © © PROTECT VIEW . Be careful— files from the Internet can contain viruses .
 Emezzelers have captured funds into bank accounts tied to them but falsy claimed are actually mine use Identity Theft and other Fraud tactics to hold and money launder the funds due me but held by others .
 Chris Lloyd of Orinda California appears central to this illegal scheme . Be careful— files from the Internet can contain viruses .
 Let's exclude outright lies, deceptive propaganda, tncendiary conspiracy theories from malevolent crackpots, and technological recipes for wanton destruction . Let's excluding outright lies and deceptive propaganda . Let’s exclude outright . lies, misleading propaganda, deceptive . propaganda, conspiracy theories, and
 Let's assume that we're not talking about burning people at the stake or cutting out their tongues . Instead, we're talking about discouraging research and giving their ideas as little publicity .
 There is a good case for exploring all ideas relevant to our current concerns, no matter where they come from . There is no need to discourage other people's opinions from even being examined .
 It's hard to imagine any aspect of public life where ignorance or delusion is better than an awareness of the truth, even an unpleasant one . I | I. Also, it's hard for any aspect in public life to imagine no aspect of life better than ignorance .
 The term is often considered derogatory, with negative connotations in terms of the quality, competence, and attitude of a person described . Disinformation is false or misleading information that is spread deliberately to deceive .
 The KGB's ""dysinformatsya"" department was elevated to a full directorate of the 1 Soviet secret service in 1968 . The department's Bead on the Media was a KGB Bead .
 Much of this work is done through proxy services, such as the Cuban DGI . Rosenfeld says that Moss and I should name names .
 A successful lawsuit for defamation of character might require a showing of real damage caused by the statement . A successful suit might require showing of the damage caused .
 Competition in Competing Process Similar but competing in the system . Results Me Diminuzed and seeking distance Stolen discredited discredited . Either way my property rights are not being defended but rather violated .
 The Press and the U.S. do not recognize the crime because they have blinded themselves to key elements of the story . e The motive for the crime is the crime, not the motive, the motive . e
 Linda Newkirk is correct that in this world blindness to reality the IIluminati have been able to operate near publicly without being noticed or being ignored . The IIluminations have operated in the past without being seen or ignored .
 In the same way Paranoia is used to protect the assaults as the claims that it is I whose behavior initiated the odd circumstance visible to others, a snapshot of me in an incriminating circumstance occurs in a normal location in which I actually am engaged in normal acts .
 Helping Someone Who Is Paranoid Google knowledge panel retrieved i | 1 . from lwww.verywellmind.com and copied or modified to here .
 The patient is certain, and not persuaded by any arguments to the contrary . °o ""False"" relates to the veracity of the patient’s belief. °o "False" relates to whether the patient's belief is true or not .
 Manipulators often play the victim role by portraying themselves as victims of circumstances or someone else's behavior in order to gain pity or sympathy or to evoke compassion and thereby get something from someone . For manipulation Manipulators play a victim role .
 Demonization or Demonisation is the reinterpretation of polytheistic deities as evil, lying demons by other religions . The principal sees a food fight as a wanton act of vandalism .
 To gain access to my genome a larceny front organizations system created phony fight against me as I have repelled aggressor racial and aggressor minor exploitation allegations which generate those questions in my life . To gain . access to . my genome, a larkeny front organization created phony
 It is bizzare person like myyslef is forced teamed to minority children and told I will be killed if I leave that area unless that area is suing me for being near these children . It is a 'bizzare' person who is forced to stay near minority children
 I had a dishwasher and washer dryer, cheap rent, on the park for excersize on tree lined trails, etc. Malicious filthiness so absurd only Black Naionalists could be behind it . I had the dishwasher, dryer and dishwasher .
 Unlike most homells people being recurited to physcally assault me, I have lived in dorms, near schools, and away from schools . Unlike most . people being . recuriously assaulted me, the statement towards me were insane. Unlike most people . being rec
 Cynthia Nino Leasing Manager Ballpark West Apartments 1600 Wickersham Lane Austin, Texas, was ordered off the property of my lease .
 I am moved into homeless shelters and county programs which will manage my IQ genes, etc. for me . Then, acting on ""all peoples safety"" I am . moved into . homeless shelters . I am then moved into programs which manage my . IQ genes for me. Then I am
 Dye Wrangler JK Freedom build-out — Ed Donegan edinarlington@mailonline.com . Base is Jeep Wrangler 4 door, red, 17 inch wheels .
 Mixed motive role fighting my ideology I articulated under assault of Radical Right, Bell Curve, Race Realism as one role, another using pretexts and some truth that I am a threat to women . Government interests pushing designer babies personnel eugenics by asset seizures from me .
 Robert Maxwell married Betty E ... born Jan Ludvik Hoch in 1923 to a desperately poor Jewish family in a village now in Ukraine . William Barr: How Robert Maxwell rose from poverty and corrupted his daughter Ghislaine .
 Twitter.com/eddonegan before ban and unabble to reset that account with those folllowers. before ban . before ban was unabated . Twitter .com/edonegan is unabatedly banned from using that account .
 A lab report suggesting Brittany Murphy died from poisoning is "ridiculous" and "baseless,"" an expert says . The long list of people associated with Bill Clinton eg Google knowledge panel quoted here I .
 NASA and Middle East North Africa Airport Christian Motorcycle Association (Mike Foval Scott Foval . Foval. Ricahard Creamer using Mental Health bird doggers,) Metro Churches)
 Sasha Obama was born with a brain infection perhaps from Bacteria or some sort of virus . Malia Ann Obama born July 4, 1998 but less so Sasha Obama born 2001 . Sasha was born in 2001 with a head infection .
 Brame suicide seemed to be one of those random stories that drops out of nowhere . Brame's suicide was one of many random suicides that drops from nowhere .
 Sandy Hume, son of Brit Hume, already had a reputation for getting the story that nobody else wanted to look at . Sandy Hume was the first person to get a story that no one wanted to see .
 I am the Manchurian Son. Secret Identities and the right of the United States Public to know I recently found evidence suggesting that the CIA has an interest in concealing it created Barack Obama to fight communism in Africa .
 This conspiracy theory sounds outrageous and exaggerated, but actually makes some sense and has heen put together by several scholars and journalists . The conspiracy theory is quite outrageous, but it actually makes a sense .
 The FBI raided the home of a patriotic whistle blower who had already turned over copies of documents in his possession regarding the Clinton Foundation and Uranium One . Dennis “Nate” Nathan Cain is a patrioton .
 A special agent from the FBI’s Baltimore division, who led the raid, falsely charged that Cain unlawfully possessed stolen federal property and demanded entry to his fyUA Kem CoS (elanleon Cain) Cain informed the agent while he was still at the door that he was
 Dennis “Nate” Nathan Cain 1s a true patriot, for when he witnessed corruption and injustice he came forward and spoke up .
 The letter was sent to the United States District Court for the District of Maryland on Dec. 2018 in response to a November 30, 2018 request from The Daily Caller News Foundation to unseal court documents that would show the FBI’s motivation for the raid . The documents could potentially reveal
 The Justice Department and FBI missed a Wednesday deadline to provide information about the raid on a former FBI contractor turned whistleblower’s home last month . The Justice Dept. and FBI have deliberately missed the deadline .
 Sixteen FBI agents raided the home of Dennis Nathan Cain, who reportedly gave the Justice Department’s Inspector General documents related to the Uranium One controversy and potential wrongdoing by former Secretary of State Clinton . The documents allegedly show Justice Department and FBI officials had deliberately and treasonously refused to
 Smith to speak at International Press Freedom Awards on November 21, 2019 . Smith says authoritarian governments make it dangerous and difficult for journalists to do their jobs . He says autocrats have learned to use online tools and social media to shore up their power .
 I was approached while using the assigned name of Robert Andrew Walker to initiate contact with a nationally prominent brokerage house . I was approaching while using my assigned name, Robert . Andrew Walker . He was approached by the Central  ~~ Tntelligence Agency .
 Bo Duke and Luke Duke and their friends and their female cousin Daisy Duke, and other family, have various escapades as they evade the corrupt law officers Boss Hogg and Sheriff Rosco P Coltrane . Son of MKULTRA principle Prescott Bush father of somewhat reluctant MKULT
 Nixon then lost a race for governor of California to Pat Brown in 1962 . Nixon then went on to lose a governorship of California in 1962 to Brown .
 A memo from FBI head J Edgar Hoover was found, stating that, ""Mir George Bush of the CIA"" had been briefed on November 23rd, 1963 about the reaction of anti-Castro Cuban exiles in Miami to the assassination of President Kennedy .
 On the day of the assassination, Bush was in Texas, but he denies knowing exactly where he was . Bush says he did not know exactly where Bush was at that time .
 In 1959 Rodriguez was a top cop in the Cuban government under Batista . In 1959 he was a police officer under the government .
 The Bush political family dynasty began with Prescott Sheldon Bush Sr. who helped Hitler’s rise to power . The Bush family dynasty has a long history of political dynastates .
 The Nazis were longtime members of the Nazi party and the Gestapo . They had conducted experiments on humans at concentration comps and commited other war crimes .
 Perpetrators of a cover-up may be responsible for a misdeed, a breach of trust or duty, or a crime . They are responsible for misdeeds, breaches of trust, and a crime.
 Misprision of felony is the concealment of a felony committed by another person . The concealer must be made an accessory before or after the fact . The defendant is not required to conceal the felony .
 The offence was a misdemeanour punishable on indictment by fine and imprisonment . The a BEE ER ER ER EE EE . EE EE EE. EE EE Ee eee offence was an offence punishable by a fine or imprisonment .
 George Herbert Walker Walker Bush was born on June 12, 1924 in Massachusetts . He was born in Massachusetts to Prescott Sheldon Bush and Dorothy Bush . Bush was also born to Cela Bush .
 The episode later became known as the Chichiima incident . It led to the future president being hailed as a war hero .
 Actress Heather Lind also stated, in a now deleted Instagram post, that Bush groped her during a photo-op in WE . Perhaps, instead of blindly praising a documented criminal, Americans should consider asking themselves what other crimes the U.S. government and the media are covering up for
 The Bush family had a long history at Yale, with both George Senior and George W Bush being part of the Skull and Bones society .
 The Bush political dynasty began with Prescott Sheldon Bush Sr. who helped Hitler’s rise to power . The Bush family has a long history of political dynastations .
 After 1993, she took a job at Armitage Associates LLP, a consulting firm founded by Richard Armitages . Richard Armitsage was a former Defense Department official and Iran-Contra operative .
 The Project for the New American Century was a neoconservative think tank based in Washington, D.C. that focused on United States foreign policy . The project was formed in the 20th Century .
 Luft Ballons accidentlty trigger east west war or might in a terrible vision . We live in a strange time, where uncertainty about the future is at an all-time high . Technology will either prove to be our savior or undoing, and weather patterns are chaotic .
 Fawning mainstream media coverage lauds Barr as a “respected” establishment “legal scholar” as do Donald Trump’s Twitter posts about sree . Barr was a key inner circle operative throughout George Herbert Walker Bush's rise to power, from CIA Director to
 It's sobering fact that American presidents have gone out of their way to hire fixers to be their attorney generals . It's a sobering truth that U.S. presidents have hired fixers as their attorneys generals .
 Barr provided legal cover for Bush’s illegal foreign policy and war crimes . A strong case can be made that William Barr was as powerful and important a figure in the Bush apparatus .
 Police Chief Carmen Best says she didn't order cops to abandon the station . Police chief William Barr allowed the stand-sown of defending the precinct from over run . Social Work Grants build up community groups .
 Tracking Bill Barr’s Misconduct as Attorney General . The Department of Justice, led by the attorney general, has a unique role .
 A fundamental premise of a fair Justice system 1s that all Americans are treated equally . Institute, and former Senior Counsel, Whitewater Investigation Prioritizing Politics over Justice . Institute of Justice Institute . Institute .
 The Hughes-Ryan Amendment was an amendment to the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 . Ryan was posthumously awarded the Congressional Gold Medal in 1983 .
 Crisis Actor motorcycles resemble my motorcycle (which sometimes films coastal rides) peek into the childrens’s area or sauna area of the gym . Gangstalked Individual By Espionage Recruits (Targeted by CIA NSA FBI)
 Street Theater, aka Gangasataljk or Rough Music, gets rid of enemies of the powerfull . Street Theater is known for its rough music .
 A female, perhaps a minor, was exploited by the CIA operation and photographed explosively . The operation was carried out by a female, possibly a minor . A photo of the operation was released by a CIA photographer .
 The crisis is blamed on Edward Behind the scenes and though NOTHING is said to Ed Donegan as to the crisis, he is asked to sign a new membership on some flimsy excuse like the a misspelling of my name, the dues were late and thus a new contract was
 Gym at Golds Gym and Allgood gym in Corpush Christi, Extended Stay Springfield Virginia hotel gym, Maclamar Property managed 1001 N Water St #6, and numerous other locations for instance .
 I was zerod out from 1001 N Water Street 1/17/2021 Mac Lamar Management January 8 2021 . According to our records your lease is currently expired. According to . your lease was currently expired .
 My trust fund, agreeign behind my back the crisis was due to me changes it name to my ""family grow fund"" allowing others my DNA . Leasing options: 1 year $745, 6 mos $820, Month to Month $895 . Leases options: $745
 Plausible deniability is the ability of people, typically senior officials in a formal or informal chain of command, to deny knowledge of or responsibility for any damnable actions committed by others in an organizational hierarchy because of a lack or absence of evidence that can confirm their participation . From Wikipedia the
 This kind of research is responsible for the creation of new gunmen ~i _ — aircraft, weapons, and satellites . The research has been used to create weapons, weapons and satellites for the first time .
 This January, a congressional investigation revealed that the National Reconnaissance Office lost track of a $2 billion slush fund . The fund was so highly classified even top intelligence officials had no control over it . The agency's existence was publicly acknowledged only a few years ago .
 Annoyance is an unpleasant mental state that is characterized by irritation and distraction from one's conscious thinking . Rough Music is a British term of medivial masonry of surrounding person which hostile loud loud offensive sounds and acts .
 Charivari was a folk custom in which a mock parade was staged through a community accompanied by a discordant mock serenade . Charivari, alternatively spelled shivaree or chivarees and also called skimmington, is a folk tradition .
 See SS 2 ee Urane Stalker Masons LOL by Offramp ~_ Gang stalking and its preternatural connections .
 Ultimately, the source of it all is the malevolent/demonic principalities, says the author .
 Gang Stalking Harassment, Slashed Tires, Verbal Assaults by Strangers, Property Damage, Death Threats, Following on Foot or by Vehicle, Bizarre Notes and Drawings Left, Loitering, Anonymous False Accusations to Friends, Family, and Neigh
 The term ""Baiting"" is a stalking tactic used to lure a victim into situations which cause further problems to the victim . Baiting is the term used to use to lure victims into environments, or situations, which causes further problems . The term "Baiting" is a term used
 Brighting Brighting is a term jokingly referred to by stalkers to indicate the practice of repetitive flashing of a car's high-beam headlights . The term is used to refer to repeated flashing of the car's headlights .
 Electronic Harassment is the use of technological devices to spy on or cause harm to targeted victims . The term is used to refer to electronic harassment, harassment, or electronic harassment . It is a form of online harassment .
 Mimicry is a specialized form of harassment in which the stalkers publicly imitate every movement made by the victim . The stalkers mimic every movement they make by mimicing the victim's movements .
 A Noise Campaign can range from multiple neighbors routinely playing loud music, individual stalkers with air-horns or fireworks, or organized ""repair work"" that involves a high level of noise . A noise campaign can include loud music or individual stalking .
 Sensitization is a psychological term referring to the forced association between a stimuli and a reaction . Sensitate is a term used to refer to a person's reaction to a stimuli . Sensitivity is a form of self-sensitization that is forced to associate a stimuli with a
 Orwellian phrases have slipped into the lexicon since 9/11 . Orwellian is difficult to avoid, but it's hard to avoid .
 The disposition matrix has not yet gained traction in the U.S. But its true meanings -kidnap, assassination, torture - are widely understood .
 Diagnostic Standards Manual Personality Disorders . FOXP2 ADD Permanent Hyper Condition, Non cyclic expression by permanent risk . ADD is a non cyclic condition with an irrational state irrational state .
 Behorial overly of symptons may match Possible Permanent RIsk of Dee eee ee an es ADD result symptoms . Symptoms though be sourced in expression ca different organic origins . Behorial over of symptoms may match possible permanent RIsksk of possible permanent rIsk .
 The Hills Have Eyes is a 2006 American horror film and remake of Wes Craven's 1977 film of the same name . It is a remake of the 1977 horror film The Hills have Eyes .
 Bird-dogging is a fairly common activist tactic, and reporters often recognize it when seemingly ""perfect"" questions come from a political audience .
 Prince Edward VUI had daughters with Maria Kutschera in 1926 . He was a stutterer-Chem p g Royals, then King Edward . His mother was one of his daughters .
 Communism | P224gate and OSS Vatican History . My mother was born 1926 DEC 13 .
 The Langley Research Center located in ~~ “Hampton, Virginia, United States, is the oldest of NASA's field centers .
 Langley Research Center conducts Earth science research to support NASA's mission . As rocket research grew, aeronautics research continued to expand and played an important part when subsonic flight was advanced and supersonic flight were introduced .
 The Mechanisms e Changing the context I am front adult to child, including provocatively acting minors . Utilizing Agent Provocateurs utilizing my identity to both exploitatively photograph the minors and create appearance my or my property was implicated in the photography, avoiding explict allegations .
 A Foreign Intelligence Service report circulating in the Kremlin today states that the top U.S. FEDERAL JUDGE for the State of Arizona was assassinated 72-HOURS after he made a critical ruling against the Obama administration’s plan to begin the CONFISCATION of
 Edward Paul Donegan is celibate and near death, bad hygiene, alone . I assert a Three Tier familial lie . It is continually yelled at me, skitted out around me for appearances, etc., that I am disabled loser who is not . Genetically of similarity to Barack
 The Ultimate Betrayal as Jen Moore put it. The ultimate betrayal of the U.S. government . People like Rod Those my Rosenstein, Eric Holder and Eric Holder are getting too targeting me .
 Sexually abusive mass sexual assault and public humiliation of me for what are staged fetishims o mine to dispossess everthing Jim Donegn and Glorian dedicated their lives to, my success in the United States, and the defense of minorities from the Nazis . The Obamas, Clintons
 Gay women and non whites took over gym positions and setup Doppelgangers of me to photograph women or plant them in front of me . Gay women, non whites and non-whites set up Doppelgers of me in gym positions .
 I thought they might have been claiming 1 was on the phone, 5 and half years after I first saw it I found out, best quess, the women were showed peeping photos alleged by me . The women were allegedly shown peeping pictures of the alleged peeping .
 Case theory is distinguished from jurisprudence as general theory of law not specific to a case . Case theory distinguished from Jurisprududence as a general theory, not a specific case .
 In carefully architected covert ops harassment the following occurs: Women are played to. Women are playing to . Women are being played to .
 Photograph white women while impersonating me, usig their backpacks as remote controlled cameras, use high tech equipment to create a reason for my to touch my music playing phone otherwise just sitting there on gym equipment .
 Some moron male takes any other cardio |A|B|C| station near me and looks at me while also looking at a smartphone, or works out in a which which exaggerates or mimics my own workout styles .
 The system of co option stigmatizes the legitimacy and workout acumen of me in the gym as I am belittled and otherwise assaulted . Others agrandize themselves as having a parent relationship with me when non of that was true .
 SBSSA4C4 population is 25 males to one or two women or 50 males to SAAS S24 . S24 is one of the largest gyms in the world . The gym is 6éagRded despite my observation to the staff this is not a normal gym
 Despite the sparsity of women in the gym one is SBSSA4C4 usauly present thus the number is never zero . Oddly, despite the spence of women, one is always present .
 Political Abuse of Psychiatry is the misuse of psychiatry, including diagnosis, detention, and treatment, for the purposes of obstructing the human rights of individuals and/or groups in a society . Wikipedia quoted here from link .
 "I now believe this some sort of 45 year long coordinated [luminati] stalk I have trying to research and understand," he says . "I have tried to research, understand and understand"
 Vassis probe grand jury looks like ‘a Black Lives Matter rally,’ says witness littps://pagesix.com/2018/01/02/russia-probe-grand-jury-looks-like-a-black-lives-matter
 This black male was part of the cover operation, leaving with them then trying to duck the camera . Then loreiane the biack waitress says thank you at an odd time .
 I rarely if ever spent more than $40 at a strip club and I get off on surfing domme adds rather than buying porn . As I was getting one talk about the toe is only purple, not broken, a blonde nurse was lectuting a little boy, out of my eyes
 Real me has received no money nor been informed of the value of my genes . Other times I have made that assertion someone other than me is doing something like staring into an envelope of money saying ""wow I have made it big"
 I have absolutely no doubt about a secretive race related conspiracy of women, over a decades period of time, sudddely dissapearing from around me, moved away sometimes from caught in the corner of the eye acts .
 Tom Duham and | are not in a traffickig ring, it appears to other we are because of planted evidence visible to the public and impersonators of us . He and I have repeatedly called the police, as have Lt Gen Mike Flynn, Jen Moore, and others .
 Harvey Dent (black or black non-US National in Authoritative Role possibly Beavirorial Health Care Trained or connected) Social justice | White Female Bernie Exploitable | Ed Donegan (White Female Bernie) "something is going on here" Harvey Dent .
 A Protection Racket of enormous clout has been able to railroad me but the basics are that is 1s faked that I need a protection racket . Once that racket is in place (as a Due Process loophole) that same protection racket can fake claims against me and settle them for those other
 Barack Obama was a product of [luminati engineering] contemplated since the World War I era Grifith Experiments, moving genes with bacteria by humans, as though God . After years of research I and this book series I am writing . I . am writing that Barack Obama . was
 The history of the II}uminati and Secret Identities the public is entitled to know about . Jen Moore and Linda Newkirk have confirmed the Pizzagate GEnomics connection .
 This and other books and materials Wells Fargo.com configured to receive Amazon.com payments eddonegan@yahoo.com Youtube.com until merger with Google and since 5/27/2005 EdInArlington@gmail.com and WWII videos under Yahoo ID Goddady.com .
 Masonry families, Connected Political Families, Religion, their mistakes, create false flag to sue my genetic legacy and blame me for false flags undermining my life and Reproductivity . Was Youtube including WWII videos until Google merger still is Amazon.com of this book .
 Bastrop, Burleson, Brazos, Edwards, Howard, Hudspeth, Kimble Martir da ohhee |, Schleicher and Tom G fike pla Camp Bull San Antonio and Camp Swift Bastrop 4G sfaphic .
 Element A Element B omen eae ee and lynch II Fugtive team is called to Tx locaiton Minor jumps in front of . who forges Ed Ed Tx photographs . Those at the scene at Element B create a Element A photos on_
 All living organisms on Earth are divided into pieces called cells, the basic unit of all living things . Cells are the starting point of all life .
 The final severity of the damage results from primary and secondary mechanisms that begin at the time of injury and last for months after trauma . The damage is caused by secondary and primary and primary mechanisms .
 Reuse of the picture of Abbot smirking about how religion knows more than women or myself about biology rights . I did not victimize these religious people, nor any non whites. I did .
 Throughout my life I have been an espionage gangstalk victim with rigged legal/psychiatric proceeding so malicious I can not gain a State Identification Card nor keep one from bureaucratic nullification nor prevent others from being issued mine . Only defection from the USA is an available solution .
 Doppelganger of the Gangstalk Victim e Planted Witnesses e. Planted Victim . Planted Information . Corrupt police to shake down the Doppganger when the two gangstalk victims separate .
 A few years after being fired from Wells Fargo around 2002 I had decided to leave San Francisco, cut ties, and get clean . Sock Puppets are in a ring but Real Tom Dunham and Real Edward Donegan are not .
 Sock Puppet Created of Tom Dunham who will not raise his children in Gospel thus harms them . Fake Edward Paul Donegan has Batman movie delusions .
 DaAssRaper is being forged in a 1st Century Christian BDSM facility, Temple Vesta, of the Vestal Virgin . Sarosta Florida is the gateway to miles of beaches with fine sand and shallow waters, such as Lido Beach and Siesta Key Beach .
 After I left Virginia, arrested for confronting Thea Smith over her hints an adult entertainer was coming . I was evicted also over my allegations and left homeless in Corpus Christi . I'm evicted, evicted and homeless, I was left homeless .
 Introducing the Bernie Theory Genomic Trust Bleed Off by Fake Claims I would not agree to but benefit trust other beneficiaries alleged to be victims of me . Here it is .
 Agent provocatuers fighting "White Supremacism" create sex crimes and child pornography among those in my vicinity . They create the fight via character assasination and child porn . This allows black activists entrance into the scene thus infiltrating and victimizing it .
 The victims of the peeping tom provocateurs will be paid through my trust fund . The victims will be covered by a trust fund set up to pay for their victims .
 An angry phone call from the woman in front of me indicates as ass fetishist peeping tom and a disgusting one is photographing some buttucks . Below is a call from a woman in the front of her horrified phone call to a woman who is angry about the photos .
 B Janice Ellington magistrate denied my en forma pauperis right to file . I attempted to sue over being both harassed and physically assaulted by the acts of the Doppelgangers .
 The Enforcement Act of 1870 was a United States federal law written to empower the President with the legal authority to enforce the first section of the Fifteenth Amendment throughout the United States . It was also known as the First Ku Klux Klan Act or Force Act .
 A retanded chelteen a¢recacy serve haya Tens Jeep aradable to revere the DNA of pomsote RD Will never get Bis cor aggroved Or see a wiite feruales bortecks Or a eine woman ets hind .
 Black FBL Pranthinn ahiate ties black all arannd ma Risnel and nnn white raniotar clarire aratand T Ongoing MKULTRA and designer Babies from Seized genomics ""owed"" to victims of a White Suprem
 "Because of this constant movement, and believe me, it is constant, my body 1s so terribly burdened and I am continually so tired," she said .
 Feeces Nueces is a "speed trap town" of corruption and racketeering and murders to cover it up, like murders of Jay Thompson, FLoyd Simpson, Bobby Courtney, Jimmy, and others . I am their victim, not vice versus, in a ""speed trap
 'I become a cover story for them hiring sex workers and cultural instructors on how not to be fourth grade educated farm workers and prison release border town heroin addicts swearing loyalty to Jesus'
 Jen Moore will describe these hypocrite peeping tom sex offenders as ""evil"" with good haircuts, but indeed as though preachers caught with their pants down making excuses for themselves .
 A long con or big con is a scam that unfolds over several days or weeks . It involves a team of swindlers, as well as props, sets, extras, costumes, and scripted lines .
 Arriving in Corpus Christi a Stateless Deist Good Samaritans Rescue Mission, Salvation Army, Catholic Charities, Metro Churches . Arlington County Services Virginia was ordred into post National Insitiute of Health Public Health Service release was asking me to take drugs I had no interest in
 RELIGINT is using the organizational interests and operational elements of religious organizations in Espionage or covert activities . Includes underground railroads, assassination, political activism, and orphanages, missionary, and other often CIA backed operations . Illuminati Dawn offered addition to HUMINT, OSINT, SIGINT
 RELIGINT uses Religion to self vicvtimize near me, to place a crime at the scene I am at, and it seems I owe their religion my genome, as was done by Donald Barr, CIA/OSS, Vatican, Mossad who used my mother's genome .
 In extraordinary hour-long call, President Trump pressures Georgia secretary of state to ce CGE om MTS favor . Legal scholars describe the call as a flagrant abuse of power and a potential criminal act .
 I named the FBI DHS in my lawsuit and at that time as I was writing the suit on my computer James Comey was fired by Trump . Trump fired Comey as he was writing it on his computer .
 I have used the Persecution model of State backed assailants this way. A Request for Political and Religious Asylum is based on State backed attackers . A request for political and religious asylum is a request for state-backed persecution .
 Good USA Safe For Me and I am and always have been a law abiding citizen with in interest in adult women and good intelelct and education and social skills bie Law os Law Law Abiding Zone Abiding Abiding . James Paul Donegan and Edward Non Crime Influenced
 The LONDON KE FAMILY FOXP2 gene likely comes to me through Maria VonTrapp, Jen Moore Videos Explained . In combining the Historical Kennedy, Von Trapp, Prince of Wales King Edward VIII, Wallis Simpson, Donegan, Kennedy, and Obama history .
 U saci Augusta Kutschera was born in 1905 and after being orphaned at a young age, “was reportedly sent to live with an abusive uncle”
 The real Maria was in fact a real problem while at the convent, describing herself as “horrid, the worst you can imagine,” in a 1980 article . The article includes a list of transgressions such as breaking china, speaking during periods of silence, whistling
 The region of Massachusetts Cape Code Bay, RCA and Josesph Kennedy working with King Goerge V on reaching China with radio waves, etc., and Joseph Kennedy ambassador to Great Britain in the 1930s and tied to British Military in family marriages .
 Up into 1974 I am in that same area as is Glorian Donegan . James Paul Doneagn (atomic testing and Manhattan Beach) and Tom Donegan in Cape Cod . Tom Doneagn in Cape Cape Cod in 1974 also in that area .
 Trinity marks its beginning on December 3, 1961 . Trinity United Church of Christ is a predominantly AfricanAmerican church with more than 8,500 members .
 FBI’s Special Agent Christopher Lorek and Special Agent Stephen Shaw, who arrested ~~ Dzhokhar, were mysteriously killed on May 17, 2013 . The FBI's Special Agent Lorek was mysteriously killed .
 During the interview, Todashev began writing a formal statement implicating both himself and Tsarnaev in the Waltham murders . Before signing the statement, he violently attacked an FBI agent who fired in self-defense, he attacked him .
 Speculation has raged that Todashev was assassinated because he had knowledge about Boston bombings which the feds didn’t want to see the light of public scrutiny .
 Abdul-Baki Todashev holds a photo he claims is of his son, Ibragim, during a news conference in Moscow, Russia, on May 30 .
 David Francis Powers was Special Assistant and assistant Appointments Secretary to President of the United States John F Kennedy . George Hickey Jr.) was Special . Assistant . Assistant Appointment Secretary to John F. Kennedy .
 He was taken to a hospital where his condition was reported as stable . In 2001, the Becoming A Man program was launched to help young men .
 BAM launched in Boston in 2017 and in 2019, serves Los Angles County and King County Washington . BAM is based in Los Angeles and Seattle .
 Kennedy played a crucial role in the events surrounding the Berlin Crisis of 1961 . Kennedy Yomi was one of the president's closest White House advisers .
 Even in our sleep, pain which cannot forget falls drop by drop upon the heart, until, in our own despair, against our will, comes wisdom through the awful grace of God . The pain cannot be forgotten, even in the sleep .
 Captian Raymond Sharrielf was assassinated in 1965 . He was a member of the Fruit of Islam. He was killed in Omaha .
 Mewereger UClijuh Muhaormaed the secs. ie being hailed throwgkh the Muban i Negro. Meweregar U.C.u.u .
 At least dozens of people burned to death in a Protestant church in western Kenya . They had taken shelter from tribal clashes sparked by disputed vote that gave the president a second term .
 The only successful ditching of a wide-body airliner in history, the crash was captured on video . The Constitution of Ethiopia came into force on 21 August 1995 .
 Most political prognosticators in the mainstream press presume that Obama is the presumptive Democratic nominee for president . They still wonder aloud if Hillary Clinton (or some other entity) has something up their sleeve .
 Two other young black men that attended the same church-Larry Bland and Nate Spencer-were also murdered execution style with bullets to the backs of their heads . All three men were killed within 40 days of each other .
 Flight to Rome was scheduled to take off 12 minutes after takeoff from JFK Airport . The plane was headed to Rome, with a stopover in Paris .
 One month after the explosion, chemists at the FBI crime lab in Washington found traces of PETN, an explosive component of bombs and surface-to-air missiles . PETN is a component of explosive components of bombs, missiles and bombs .
 His parents, Mitchell and Gladys, say the agency had asked them to keep his cover until then . They say it was to protect his co-workers and avoid embarrassment over having spies in Africa .
 The son's name is inscribed in the CIA’s ledger of killed agents . Now they have the satisfaction of seeing their son’�s name inscribed on the ledger .
 Sweden signed the Convention founding the Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development on 14 December 1960 . Sweden pledged its full dedication to achieving the Organisation's fundamental aims . Saudi Arabia r i ‘Yemen Great Machine'
 Sweden signed the Convention founding the Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development on 14 December 1960 . Sweden pledged its full dedication to achieving the Organisation's fundamental aims .
 The CIA and Vatican took on the issue of race following WWII after failed attempts to kill Adolph Hitler . Scalia: "Race is the answer to the question of whether or not race is race"
 U.S. relatives of King Edward VUI, with FOXP2 gene, tried out on Barack Obama, btw a great orator, who could be planted in Indonesia for peace .
 DNA from the Beginning is organized around key concepts . This was also a potential solution to the race problem in the U.S., a subject of interest to Malcom X, JFK and world economist futurists .
 Freud, Pscyhoanlysis and the prescence of FOXP2 Fascism studies Brain, Eugenics, brain Area based on WWI Soldier injuries, Jen Moore cites as MKULTRA . In 1938 Freud was forced to leave German-annexed Austria due to
 Borderline Personality Disorder is poor regulation of working space, contextual brain activity . Borderline personality disorder is a form of anxiety disorder that affects people in the workplace .
 If they kill to cover their errors, that 1s to say cover their criminal and civil liability, or political liability, a new plan might be needed . But if they kill for political gain, they might need a new insurance plan .
 The Manhattan Project began in late 1942, and along with it, was a secrecy project of unprecedented scope . The project was a secret project of unparalleled secrecy .
 DARPA Manhattan Project John F Kennedy (nationally moved out of office, assassination) JFK tied to DuPonts of Bishopville employers of the Dew family my mother adopted into . DuPont's military contractors to Manhattan Projects were military .
 CIA, Catholics Little Rock Freemason Command and Control JFK in Action, Seattle LA objected to Rome, in Post Hawaii WWII Plan . Free Masons Camp Robinson and Camp Pike Wild Bill Boeing Donovan . Camp Robinson OSS gets Futurism .
 In Vatican House Revelation, the word tells us that award, Windsor Satan is in the face of the woman; for I live only a Masons, few miles from this base and for twenty-five years, OSS rescue sear sear even when I lived in North Little Rock, Arkansas
 The plant and password is, “I | groom for will splinter the | future CIA into a espionage thousand pieces . against the and scatter it into |Communism, the wind,” a but decided quote credited to . against wider President John F | Free Masons Kennedy
 PHS is non combatant military and also used in federal prisons . Public Health Service likely tied to Manhattan Project and Above Ground Nuclear Testing . PHS was used in Manhattan Project .
 Justice Scalia flunked bar research with an interest in exam, probably did not like Justice Scalia genes including FOXP2 referenced Mismatch Theory .
 Pizzagate Cogwheel (extortion over 17 year olds, tots photography discovered by audit models allowed under the law) Me in clear text attempting to decode, scrutinize vagueness and treated as though I am Gulliver . Explicit illegal acts in my vicinity by Non
 MAIN MKULTRA NASA LANGLEY COGWHEEL ABOVE Cape Cod Cogwheel Irish Mafia and Liquor dealing in both Donegan and JFK families . Kennedy Families Great Machine Foreign Economy .
 Wales was a graduate of Milton Academy, where he roomed with Joseph Patrick Kennedy II, the son of Robert F Kennedy . Wales was also roomed at Milton Academy with Kennedy's son .
 e DNA from the Beginning is organized around key concepts . From elsewhere in the book repeated here e DNA From the Beginning .
 Li The Law of Segregation: Each inherited trait is defined by a gene pair . Li: "Each inherited trait can be defined by the gene pair"
 The Law of Independent Assortment: Genes for different traits are sorted separately from one another so that the inheritance of one trait is not dependent on another . Genes are sorted so that they are not related to each other .
 The Middle East and North Africa is Ethiopia daily a region encompassing approximately 22 ... schedule, I think Free Ethiopia and Sudan are sometimes included .
 Masons Leslie Anne Shedd Boeing Famine Mitochondria moved into Ethiopia, seems to get to Australia too after that in New Timeline of ""Human"" IQ which now starts in Ethiopia, mot North Africa Great Machine Domestic Economy . Regular Office Holders displaced by Illuminati Fifth Column .
 Barack Obama Jr., secretly Glorian Donegan ovum used along with Malcom X fertilization, thus the Shabazz family and Obama children Kennedy's, Shrivers, Lawfords, Schwarzeneggers, , Katherine Schwarzenegger Borderline Personality Disorder born DEC 13, Pel
 Youngest of three children flunked the second grade but worked hard to graduate from McDonogh School . By the sixth grade he was accepted into the McDonough School .
 The person stealing my phone, clothes, identity, or in a break in will make me ""look bad"" as someone who became indebted to a victimized female . The person taking my phone or identity will make it look bad . In fact these railroads have made up my life .
 The appear to have created the appearance of a fake ring that appears to include Tom Dunham and Edward Donegan who are giving into the blackmail or being detected by Dominatrices .
 These criminals recruited from Sex Offender registries get caught by U.S. Marshalls and when caught these criminals pay for their crimes with the DNA of Edward Paul Donegan, then they are bought cars for solving the crime .
 Austin and the fight against seeming White Supremacist Perpetrator Networks Planted out side my door . Ordered away from my lease on the flimsy excuse I was a day late . She ""feels for children"" it seems because her name is Cynthia Nino .
 Washington D.C. in a skid row homeless thermal shelter after zerod out from Austin . The shelter was set up in a bid to help the homeless .
 The Obama Administration through Eric Holder appointed Machen Jr. and Rosensteind to keep the nations most secret sexrets secret . I believe this is where subverting Targeted Individuals come from .
 Morphological icons are images, patterns or symbols that relate to a specific morpheme . Morphological icon is an image or pattern that relates to a morphem . Morphology icons are an image, pattern, symbol or symbol of a morphological morphology .
 My father, Linda Newkirk, Veronica Hoffman, myself, all recetve calls showing we are being stalked, watched in our homes, etc., as we move about . This is anonymous Stalk psychological harassment by strangers by strangers .
 e [had first contacted [Veronica Hoffman] after meeting her in person, all was well . e had first contacted her after she had met her . e . met Hoffman and she said, "All was well. All was well"
 Dr. Saudie Crowm Prince family and career* Dr. fC KidneyGate . Dr. Crowm: "This is all very illegal black budge black racial Chicago alcohol prohibition gang activity"
 There’s no way anyone could get into my house, no robbers, no angry exes (which I don’t have btw) No fanatical people my house is like Fort Knox...unless it was someone super professional . Unless someone is super professional, there's
 Soldiers are regionally aligned and develop cross-cultural competence in the areas they study and deploy to . Specialized and advanced training in social media, marketing and other communication techniques . 30 Days of vacation per year .
 Dopple Mosorcycle owned by black gyi eirploses . AT the golds gras there have been several dopple trikes .
 Thes ae equiped very eanedarky uit dust arreatere wtanda, etc . This motorcycle and its motorcyclist is pursued to some location like this which LOOKS like my apartment, a long con set, and people like these will claim its
 Cheryl Lloyd Friendly sounds like a Highlander Motel operator friendly to the Christ Lloyd family tied to Genenetch . Lloyd Friendly is a descendant of Christ Lloyd, who founded a hotel chain .
 Amidst this desperate plot was the intimidation of Judge Roll who was asked for a favor and the silencing of Scalia, who would not co-operate with the Spanish [luminati] The 'luminati' wanted to silence Scalia, a former member of the Supreme Court .
 Opus Dei Founding Dates e in WWI Spain is unaligned and reports on the world pandemic later called the Spanish Flu for its Spanish news sourced reporting . The date of the pandemic was 18.18 is a deadly year. Opus dei Founding Days e in Spain
 The Opus Dei Lay Miracle capability meets a need, repairing certain defects targeted by Nazist genocide . The Lay Miracle can be used to repair certain defects, such as those targeted by genocide .
 He jumps to his death shortl after from a psch ward window where he had been committed . He jumped from a ward window in a suicide ward window .
 In the 1950s and 1960s The CIA, Catholics, and other Christians and United States DOD MKULTRA are trying to defeat Russian expansion in Africa through cultivating future leaders such as Barack Obama . 1961 Malcom X founds Elija Speaks, a Nation Of Islam publication which will
 Stanlyy Ann enrolling in Washington Universit of Seattle at the same time . Stanly Ann enrolls in Washington University of Washington University in Seattle .
 Century 21 and the BOEING Spacearium, Seattle, WA and the Space Needle and Monorail, April 21, 1962, to October 21 , 1962 . Century 21 was founded by Century 21 . The Space Needel and the Spokesman for Century 21.
 Barack Obama Sr. marriage/concieve from February 20 to February 2_ 2. I; Change Stanley Anne Dunham WEDS Barack Obama Jr. I. WEDs Barack Obama .
 It was during this time of prayer, even before He gave me this message on this very day that He told me that it was time for the above message to go out and that what He has told me 1s indeed as it is . The message is now being sent out .
 Some countries have banned or otherwise regulated the availability of IVF treatment, giving rise to fertility tourism . In 1961 the [VFinig of Barack Obama and Ed Donegan. In 1961, the . president of the United States was assassinated in Afghanistan .
 JFK met with the Secretary General of the Organization for the European Economic Cooperation Thorkil Kristensen at around 11 am in the Oval Office in 1961 . JFK met the secretary general of the . Organization for European Economic . Cooperation at the . Oval Office .
 Many Obama Birther dates and figures relate to Feb 20 or Nov 18 . These appear to form the Divinci Code of Opus Dei, interested in Catholic Genetics Works, defeating Orthodox Russians .
 The 21st Century FUTURIST EXPO in Seattle, 1962, with the Windsors, the Kennedy's, and Stanly Ann Dunham, mother of Barack Obama, future Anthropologist .
 In October 2001, at about the time of news of an Obama child Birth, Seattle United States Attorney Thomas C Wales who roomed with Joseph Kennedy is assassinated . Malia Ann and Natasha were born on June 10, 2001 .
 In an odd note I am led later to ""motherless"" links from someone from Maryland but the are broken links . In the odd note, I'm led to 'motherless' links but the links are broken .
 Barack Obama Sr dies after a prolonged fight to survive previous accidents . Obama Sr died in 1982 in Nairobi, Kenya, after a long illness .
 In 2007-2009 Rod Rosenstein and Mueller have me under arrest for seeking National Iinstitute fo Health info . During this time Obama is elected, sworn in, and deaths with Divinci Code Diagraphs seem numerous Key Dates Related to my and World genetics, and how and why
 Each CIA cryptonym contains a two character prefix called a digraph, which designates a geographical or functional area . The digraph is a two-character prefix, which is used to indicate a geographical area .
 This is also an embezzlement story, or, as Jen Moore AKA Task Force called it, a Black Budgets (or sluch fund) story . Jen Moore: "This is also a ... story, and it's also a Black Budget (or budget) story
 CIA cryptonyms are code names or code words used by the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency to refer to projects, operations, persons, agencies, etc. They are also used in code names and code words for projects and operations . The CIA cryptonyme is used to identify projects
 Here ere some links concerning Cbena's beckground thet nay ke of interest . The beckground is located in the middle of the world .
 The question may be Begotten to certain Better Dead than Red Christians . Kennedy was soft on Latin American Atheist Commies. A Catholic .
 Project MKUItra was a code name for a government funded CIA human research program that conducted experiments in mind control . The most renown one was Project MK U.Itra, a program run by the CIA that conducted mind experiments .
 This conspiracy theory actually makes some sense and has been put together by several scholars and journalists . The conspiracy theory sounds quite outrageous and exaggerated, but it actually makes sense .
 My mother's birthdate is the death date of the person who was the producer of the Obama birth certificate by Dr. Dr. Obama . Dr. Barack Obama's birth date is the birth date of his mother's death date .
 Casper was a street person with long felon record hired as a CIA backed alleged pimp . Don Johnson, Harvey Dent, and others were Marshalls who caught alleged activity which is staged in my vicinity but vouched for .
 I had encountered Mr Sirgy, a counter-terrorist expert connected with this which I wondered if was coded for discussion of increasing IQ base of failed state . The Saulk Institute core belief which is also associated with Francis Collins, Barack Obama, and The Brain project .
 More information channels, more competing media outlets, and the Intamet are overcoming the stranglehold on information Intelligence and Race exchange and availability . Hollywood and the MSM can not decide anymore what we perceive about our world . The Information Age makes available unfiltered raw data and Information to
 The Bell Curve frulticuturaiam, some of the moat important and holly contested issues of today. Some of the most contentious issues of the day are the Bell Curve .
 Negrows (Negrokds, } who first evalved in Africa, Caucasians who migrated from Africa North West Into Europe, and Asians who Criminal Justice migrated from Asia . Asians (Caucasians) and Asians (Asian Negrows) were the three major evolutionary genetic groups .
 Genetic drift occurred among the separated populations resulting in differences in body and mind . Genetic drift led to differences in the body, mind and body of people .
 Francis Collins, Barack Obama, and others at Saulk Institute brain program . Obama, Collins, Collins attend program .
 James Mountain Inhofe is an American politician serving as the senior United States Senator from Oklahoma . He was first elected to a seat he was elected to in 1994 .
 Perry Inhofe all Ne > vw Perry inhofe Obituary.com wwe legacy.com/ns/perry-inhofe-obituary .
 NTSB Releases Final Report on Plane Crash That Killed Dr. Inhofe w WW NeWS0N6. crashed in NTSB . NTSB releases final report on plane crash that killed Dr. Onsen . Dr. Oritz was killed in the crash .
 Seewtor Jim Inhofe di Novernber tery Miteubishi MU2E engine turboprop sintane . 8 imernat , telated Story.com . Read more .
 An agent provocateur quoting Wikipedia is a person who commits or . who acts to entice another person to commit an illegal or rash act or falsely implicate them in partaking in an illegal act . This Dispossession of both Standing and Worth of a Targeted Individual applies to both
 The combination of corrupt police bullying of me for what their Agent Provocateurs have done has been especially offensive to me because I am an upstanding law abiding intelligent person, and thus it is unjust . This covers State abuses against my parents who also gave and risked so much on behalf of
 The plain clothes operatives will act like I am the peeper in the area but upon my challenge of them they say there 1s nothing amiss and I am not suspected of any misconduct at all . The plain-clothes operatives said there was 'nothing amiss'
 Fake Cell Tower e Paid off Family Members e Paid Off witnesses . Amplification of DNA samples by techniques like . PCR . Bluetooth Connectivity Hacking and SIMM Chip disrupt functions. Or a white male one.
 Opus Dei, P2, Catholics, Iluminati, and Order of St Herbutrus PBS Se SS SS Z rropagands Due was a Masonic lodge under the Grand Orient of Italy, founded in 1877 .
 Among its members were Raul Alberto Lastiri, interim president in 1973 during the height of the ""Dirty War" Emilio Massera, who was part of the military junta led by Jorge Rafael Videla from 1976 to 1978 . José Lopez Rega, minister 1973-
 Frederick Griffith showed that genes could be transferred in 1928 . Frederick Griffith was the first person to show that genes can be transferred . In 1928, Griffith discovered that genes were able to transfer .
 In what is now known as Griffith's experiment, injections into a mouse of a deadly strain of bacteria that had been heatkilled transferred genetic information to a safe strain of the same bacteria, killing the mouse .
 Griffith's experiment discovered the ""transforming principle"" in pneumococcus bacteria . Ge Sess BB BT TT TT TT ET EE ET ET ET TE » oc ieasatiinsah cose canes .
 The III-S strain synthesized a polysaccharide capsule that protected itself from the host's immune system, resulting in the death of the host . The II-R strain did not have that protective capsule and was defeated by the host’s immune system . III-R
 Opus Dei was founded by a Catholic priest, Josemaria Escriva de Balaguer, on 2 October 1928 in Madrid, Spain . Foundational period ~ fittps://en.org/wiki/Opus_Dei#Foundational_period . Opus
 In a second experiment we assessed the putative roles of the ATLs in the processing of narratives and 1 theory of mind content . We found evidence for a role in the process of the . processing of theory of . mind but not narrative per se. Ina i second experiment .
 The Priestly Society of the Holy Cross, affiliated with Opus Dei, was founded on Sunday, 14 FEBRUARY 1943 . The canonization of Saint Josemaria Escriva de Balaguer will draw 250,000 spectators to Rome .
 Lord James of Blackheath's produced revelations concerning reports of 15 trillion dollars , originating with a Mr Riyadi, transferred to various banks . Foundation X .
 If you’re vested in your company's pension plan after working there 5 years, your pension money is yours to take with you . Even if you quit at 5 years you can take your company’s pension money with you.
 About $46,000 resulta Pontifical Council for the Pastoral Assistance to Health Care Workers vires vatican va/roman .
 Pope Francis issued a letter Monday condemning sexual abuse and its concealment within the Catholic church . Pope Francis also condemned the cover-up of sexual abuse within the church .
 The Pope we affectionately call il Papa buono was a man of peace and reform . The Pope ohn XXIII and Pope John Paul II were Canonized . John Podesta, Congressman Xavier Becerra and Katie eirne Fallon spoke at the Canonization of Pope John John Paul
 By convening the Second Vatican Council, the former Angelo Giuseppe Roncalli revolutionized the role the Church plays in the world, and made the Catholic Mass a more inclusive and open experience for the faithful .
 As a boy in Nazi-occupied Poland, Karol Jozef Wojtyla studied for the priesthood in secret . As a child, he studied in secret to become a priest . He was forced to leave Poland in 1940 .
 WACO was on contract to pump propaganda out for the CIA in the Middle East . Bill of Rights is best understood as the enactment of a philosophy of individual natural fights .
 During that time King Charles I lost his head and later kings lost much of their authority to an elected parliament . Later kings lost most of their power to an elective parliament . Charles I's head was lost during that time .
 Images for sam hopkins lawyer death eee a Mm Ee a Google Sharon Malone § a Dr. Dr. Sharon Malone . Images for Sam Hopkins lawyer .
 Possibly over [luminati assistance] with speech defect, other genomic traits . Possibly over . possibly over [Luminati assistance with speech defects]. Possibly over speech defect . Possibly . possibly . over speech defects .
 Isaak Izrailevich Prezent brought Lysenko to public attention using Soviet propaganda to portray him as a genius who had developed a new, revolutionary agricultural technique .
 The perps in the ring attempt to hide the evidence plants, fake allegations againt me, etc. I cant prove the people near me are trying to be condused with me but I know that they are. The perp in the . ring attempt . to hide . evidence plants
 Clarendon club next to brother and Mark Wierness house will merge with Wilson Mall location I worked out and a Gangstalk moves in to my gym from that gym, and suspicious trainers move in and suspicions activities .
 In a sudden change the Clarendon club next to my brother and Mark Wierness house will merge with the Wilson Mall location I worked out . A Gangstalk moves in to my gym from that gym, and suspicious trainers move in and susplicions activities move in .
 Sport & Health Near Clarendon to Close Next Month . Located at at 1122 N Kirkwood Road, the gym is one of four in Arlington . There is one in Ballston and two in Crystal City .
 The interpersonal traits include glibness, superficial charm, a grandiose sense of self-worth, pathological lying, and the manipulation of others . In English it may be used in an informal disapproving manner .
 Victoria Secrets models, white, will show thier asses to retarded fake ed and retarded fake Ed will be punished for the photos taken in the gym . The pictures will be posted on social media .
 Scapegoat is a person who is blamed for the wrongdoings, mistakes, or faults of others, especially for reasons of expediency . Scapegoats are blamed for a person's wrongdoing, mistakes or faults .
 In the Bible, a scapegoat is one of two kid goats . Tx the guilty Goat Rx the blamed Goat U Google knowledge panel Scapegoat .
 Forging my Brae eeonle I email Mistress VivianNYC | Someone who looks like her is | She will follow IMPERSONATOR OF about scene resources, in my vicnity in the Gym in ME from the gym who will forge my housing in NYC . Substantial
 In 1992, Schwarzenegger and his wife opened a restaurant in Santa Monica called Schatzi On Main .
 Brittany Anne Murphy-Monjack was an American actress and singer . She was also an American singer and actress .
 As the planet rapidly accelerates toward Earth, a nuclear device 1s created at the last minute and destroys world .
 Bowman opens the ship's emergency airlock manually, enters the ship, and proceeds to HAL's processor core, where he begins disconnecting HAL's circuits . Bowman then proceeds to the processor core where he disconnects HAL from the ship .
 When the disconnection is complete, a prerecorded video message plays . The mission's objective is to investigate the radio signal sent from the monolith to Jupiter .
 Sidney Gottlieb, MK Ultra And Brainwashing's Mystery Man, retrieved from Sidney . U Sidney. G.S. Gottliebs' book, "Mysterical Man," was published by Sidney .
 Some of the people who became involved in the LSD culture were introduced to the drug because of Gottlieb, although they never knew his name . The CIA Unwittingly Fuels The Counterculture .
 We do know who some of the people who became involved in the LSD culture were . They were introduced to the drug because of Gottlieb, although they never knew his name . We know that some of them never knew who they were .
 Sarah Obama, the president's step grandmother, tells Peter Firstbrook. i We found him sitting by the steering wheel. did not roll. i found him . Sarah Obama: "I don't think he is going to be able to get back in the car"
 'We had to believe it, because he could not talk back. So after it was said that ihe had hit the tree, we just had to . Believe it, they said, 'because he couldn't talk back,' she said . 'He could not speak back'
 Mr Shabazz, 21, was charged with reckless endangerment, assault and criminal mischief . Glass shards were taken to hospital, police said .
 Mr Shabazz was released from prison this year after serving time for a 2002 attempted-robbery conviction . He escaped at least twice but was recaptured after being recaptured at various juvenile centers .
 Malcolm X was assassinated on FEBRUARY 21, 1965 at the Audubon Ballroom . Neither Michelle Obama nor Stanly Anne Dunham were photographed in pregnancy .
 He also was blamed for the death of his grandmother and Malcolm in 1997 after he set fire to her Yonkers apartment . Malcolm was also blamed for his grandmother's death in 1997 .
 Stanley Anne Dunham was photographed not pregnant in a bikini at the beach . He pleaded guilty to the juvenile equivalent of manslaughter and second-degree arson and spent time in prison .
 From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Racial Eugenics, Murder, Assassination, and the Secret Service is not the neat clean likable story we have all been told. The Brain and Brain Genes and Race and Origins and Continents are not a neat clean story we've been told .
 Some Eugenics programs kept secret are back-filling various of thousand of thousand genes tied to lifespan, disease resistnace, cognitive attributes and IQ, and perhaps even personality traits remain under study and alteration .
 47 teeth were found in a cave in southern China dated back to 80,0000 to 120,000 years ago . Experts hailed the discovery in 2015 as ""stunning"" -47 teeth found in the cave . The teeth challenge widely accepted ideas about human evolution .
 Spanish researcher says she welcomed the new data on the early presence of modern humans in China . Maria Martinon-Torres, director of the National Research Center on Human Evolution in Spain, said she welcomed new data .
 Count Arthur Cherep-Spiridovich was a Major-General in the Imperial Russian Navy . He moved to the United States following the Bolshevik Revolution . He was an anti-Semitic conspiracy theorist .
 CRISPR-Cas9 was adapted from a naturally occurringgenome editing system in "" ecteria . Fischer remained on good terms with Jewish chess players .
 CRISPR-Cas9 was adapted i i i ""from a naturally occurring genome editing system in bacteria" CRISpr-Cas 9 was adapted from a naturally occurring genome editing system in bacteria .
 He later became involved in a misadventure involving a Chinese sequencing company, BGI, to which he supplied DNA of more than a thousand American geniuses . He supplied the DNA of over a thousand geniuses to BGI .
 JFK turned down world eugenics but the Spanish [luminati] wanted, thus as Liberation Theology in Catholicism . JFK was killed and the program went ahead, now detectable by family databases leading to assassinations, burning of towns and DNA .
 Three government agencies are leading the project e The National Institutes of Health ° the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency e and the National Science Foundation . The project is a collaboration between the NIH and the D.A.R.E .
 The White House said the agencies will work with the ""private sector partners" of the agencies . The Allen Institute for Brain Science e the Howard Hughes Medical Institute e the Kavli Foundation, and the Salk Institute for Biological Studies .
 The secret identities are Sidney Gottlieb test tub babies experimentation coming out of MKULTRA including through Midnight Climax adult entertainer surrogate mothers for on going blackmail for DNA rights, etc.
 Madelyn Dunham was the American maternal grandmother of Barack Obama, the 44th President of the United States . She was born October 26, 1922, and died November 2, 2008 .
 Stanley Ann Dunham was an American anthropologist who specialized in the economic anthropology and rural development of Indonesia . Their daughter, Stanly Ann Dunham, was an alleged white Seattle mother of Barack Obama . The Dunhams' daughter was an anthropologist .
 MKULITRA continued to produce Barack Obama in 1961, the Obama children in 1997, and tested in 2006 and test program ending in 2007 . The test program was a go ahead system around the world underway in 2011 .
 Am your Father in Heaven, yea Jehovah, Most High God. Go this day in peace, my Child; and know that My love for you is great .
 For us, the vital hardcore news is the covert end game between the old guard of I/luminati rulers and those intending to reshape your world's present collapsing reality . For us it's a covert war between old guard and new rulers .
 These strategies allowed our Earth allies to develop a broad game plan, which 1s at last bringing this hapless cabal to its knees . The strategies allowed us to develop strategies that would bring the U.S. to power back .
 Fake counseling services or other service claiming to speak for me or fake FISA Warrants are another way rapes can be carried out by the DOD . I am really in Quadrant | but defamed as a nutjob low IQ looser child in Quadrants 2; which, btw,
 e This creates the illusion I like non-whites and gays undermining my white supremacist whites only sexual interests . e Further, since I APPEAR to have an interest in non-white my DNA then, by OTHERS, be assigned to those outside of my racial group .
 One theory is that Donegan genome already placed in the Obama family line, successfully, can now be moved into all of Africa . This can be undetected if celibacy of me is assured in the U.S., and according to Carlton Pyant of the Public Health Service,
 Some medical scientists are trying to figure out how to use polygenic intelligence scores to pick the smartest embryo from an IVF dish, choose the best sperm donor, or discover fetuses at high risk for an expanded menu of cognitive disorders .
 Medical scientists are trying to figure out how to use polygenic intelligence scores to pick the smartest embryo from an IVF dish, choose the best sperm donor, or discover fetuses at high risk for an expanded menu of cognitive disorders, including autism .
 Brain genes gene therapy and bone marrow source of brain available neuron stem cells, and brain can be treated where cellular neural deficit exists . Brain gene therapy can be used at any age of any age .
 Changes in Gene Expression Affect Brain Function I Altered regulation of gene expression in both DEVELOPING BRAINS AND ADULT BRAINS have been linked with multiple neurological diseases such as depression, schizophrenia, and Alzheimer’s disease .
 Rouco Varela openedet 8 November and later closed it on 18 March C.C.S. later received all the documents gathered during that process in 2005 .. and validated the process later on 17 February 2006 . He gave the organization the name ""Opus Dei"",
 The President next hosted a State Dinner for ETHIOPIAN AMBASSADOR. John F Kennedy hosted a state dinner for the U.S. at the White House in 1963 .
 This would be a self-enrichment scheme of a retardation advocacy firm who needs access to my own real property, biological property, by falsely claiming the right or need for them to manage my property rights for me and then do so illegally and without accounting to me .
 Judge Roll and the need to seize my genomic assets in a scheme which will also get my blackballed by adult women . Repugnant Market DNA rights, Fertilization Rights, in police asset seizure lockers .
 As the ARC of Northern Virginia was signed up by my brother Tom Donegan to handle my mother's sale of the Moraga house estate, the ARC left me out of meetings and refused any documents to me on how the trust was being setup, while VERBALLY claiming it was only
 Bizarre birther and MKULTRA issues surround me family DNA, my mother's hair and hats, my meeting white women, and Omaa and the NIH and his 2008 election and Rod Rosenstein .
 And my points around IQ destabilizing low IQ nations as a world security threat . Low IQ nations could destabilize low IQ countries as a global security threat, he says .
 Chicago D Naperville 3 p ° ce Gar . Then, in the same dream another man appeared, this one rather young, with fine, short brown hair .
 The I[luminati] man projected a picture on a blank wall . Then, the I.[luminati man put forth his hand and projected a photo . The man projected the image on the wall .
 Meeting Between the Secretary General of the CECD, Thorkil Kristensen, and the President on October 1 at 9:30 . Attached is a briefing memorandum prepared for the President's use at his meeting with Kristensen .
 Kennedy: The very word ""secrecy"" is repugnant in a free and open society . Kennedy: We are as a people inherently and historically opposed to secret societies, to secret oaths and to secret proceedings .
 "That I do not intend to permit to the extent that it is in my control. know. That I don't intend to ... know. know," he said .
 In this average, increases in personal income and employment have been slower here than those in the minority groups, President Obama says . Obama: "I know you share my conviction that, proud as we are of its progress, this nation's economy can and must do even better"
 Remember my father in the 1950s 1960s 1960ss having his DNA testing during radiation testing . and I TVF from eggs drawn from my mother . Remember my dad in the '60s . and '50s'
 Fluid and crystallized intelligence are factors of general intelligence, originally identified by Raymond Cattell . Fluid intelligence is a form of intelligence that can be found in general intelligence .
 'There have been other very significant conversations; and | will further entail some of what I have heard since I last wrote to you,' he says .
 I awoke to this dream on the 16th oh FEBRUARY, but awoke to find two needle marks on my left thumb, which were about a millimeter apart . I awoke on the morning of the 15th of February .
 The United Kingdom National DNA Database (NDNAD) is a national DNA Database that was set up in 1995 . It is officially the UK National Criminal Intelligence DNA Database . Obama Childrer on 1996-1999 .
 Arn RENEE OOTY JET iestya sll over ow neto plane creehihst bh ilad perp © 0 U1 4. Arn Arn Rennee OOTy JET .
 James Mountain Inhofe is an American politician serving as the senior United States Senator from Oklahoma . He was elected to a seat he was first elected to in 1994 .
 The Disposition Matrix, informally known as a kill list, is a database of information for tracking, capturing, ""rendering"", or killing suspected enemies of the U.S. It is used to track, capture or kill suspected enemies .
 The idea being, if one can indirectly control the enemy military commander’s decision-making process, then the aggregate effect 1s control over their troops and the combat environment . The idea was that if one could indirectly control an enemy commander, it would give them control of their troops
 In fact a 'fapper' who stole my phone called himself Sovereign RICO, and one other black male called himself Rico . The Russian military's conception of psychological operations is eerily similar to Fyodor Mikhailovich Dostoyevsky’s 1866 nove
 COINTELPRO, MK Ultra, Red Squads, &amp;amp; the Stasi Li The National . International Scope of Gang Stalking 8.8.8 .
 My belief is the MKULTRA Birtherism Deep State of Obama black nationalist birtherism has been successful in ""targeting me"" with brainwashing and interrogation techniques the Defense Intelligence Agency in behavioral psychology uses for interrogations, psychological harassment, psychological warfare, and cyber warfare .
 Tom Dunham and I have had key plants outside, as though we are sharing keys or codes with others, breakins and evidence plants with landlords cooperating with law enforcement in law enforcement's doing so, etc. THe result of all this is it seems it seems Tom Dunham .
 Varied retellings of the break-in to my home were told at SelectQuote. Tom Dunham . Tom Dunham | Follow @sftomdunham on Twitter .
 Intruder wanted to be seen for rumor's sake, says witness . Intruders wanted to keep quiet for rumors sake .
 Meth or crack paraphenalie outside my open door, trash can inside the door . Social services worker Lori Cox of Oakland California, black, social services worker, hotel receipt used to clean an amphetamine pipe with .
 The police report and case notes are under SF City vs Tom Dunhan case # 223265-2 Tim Kelly UCSF Adolsecent Psychiatrists diagnose Sock Puppet Tom Dunham .
 How ironic that they accuse Trump of Russia involvement when it was they who conspired with Russia to produce a polished liar and charlatan to unleash on an unsuspecting and naive nation. Eee eee eR RP REE ERE PEEP EERE EEE RPE EEE
 MSNBC contributor Perry Bacon, Jr. is a "stenographer" for the White House, he said . He called MSNBC contributor and MSNBC contributor, Perry Bacon Jr. a “stenographer” for the Obama administration .
 By winning more than 52% of the vote in a seven-candidate Senate primary in Illinois, Barack Obama instantly made his name in political circles . After delivering a lyrical speech last July at the Democratic National Convention, the self-proclaimed “skinny kid with a funny name
 The Marshals identify and evaluate assets and manage and dispose of the majority of the assets seized and forfelted through the program . Marshals are tasked with managing and disposing of the most of the seized assets seized .
 Donald W Washington was nominated by President Donald J Trump to lead the U.S. Marshals Service on Oct 2, 2018 . Amount distributed to victims of crime and claimants in fiscal 2017 $144. million . Amount shared with participating state and local law enforcement agencies $144 million in fiscal
 Derrick Driscoll received approval as United States Marshals Service acting deputy director by Attorney General William Barr April 23 . USMS Director Donald Washington announced USMS director Donald Washington .
 Don Lemon’s sister, 58, dies in drowning accident . Non-whites wish genes from the U.S. moved along racial lines, inside and outside of the United States .
 U.S. Marshalls and FBI COINTELPRO volunteer Linda Newkirk is the author of a book called "Payback" She says she often blamed her mother for having a fight with her mother .
 The group appears to have formed around Hillary Clinton . No direct evidence has yet emerged to tie her to the group .
 Lord James has come to the conclusion that Foundation X may have been a massive piece of money laundering the integrity of the British bank the Royal Bank of Scotland, in doing so .
 Images for sam hopkins lawyer death eee a Mm Ee a Google search . Sharon Malone &§ Q Dr. Dr. Sharon Malone . Dr. Sam Hopkins .
 Defense Intelligence Agency 3 “p> NEWS OPINION VIDEO SHOWS SCHEDU ‘ag i Ne TEMS Ct Met Met MS Mes ea LL . Defense intelligence Agency 3 "p> News of the 2016 Election 2016 election .
 "My goal is to represent all community forums, meetings in aha Mit sara —— AB ea Reem mies church basements, youth summits, and the like," says the author .
 Holder recalled Machen TOOLBOX telling him it was too late to develop relationships . Waiting until a crime is committed, Holder said, is too late for relationships .
 L Quote retrieved from My Experiences With A Drug Kingpin and copied or modified to here . Retired Brig. Gen. John Sutter was a drug kingpin in the 1980s .
 He was heavily involved in CIA drug trafficking, especially in South America . He had friends within both the Medellin and Cali cartels .
 Prescott Bush teamed up with Illuminati families such as the Harrimans, DuPonts, Rockefellers, and the Hearsts, plus the Knights of Malta, to overthrow the United States government . On rents that continued in America was mind control... kn Wee eee .
 When the CIA transferred the assassination unit to Blackwater, 1t continued the trend . Blackwater's assassination unit was transferred from the CIA to 1t .
 Beonvigu ""Ric"" Prado is a paramilitary, counter-terrorism, and special/clandestine Operations specialist, with a focus on international training operations and programs . Prado was born in 1961 .
 Mr Prado is now co-owner of Camp X, Special Operations Lone Operator Training Group . He continues his service training and supporting the ""SPECOPS"" Community .
 The DIA 1s a factual fit to Barack Obama's war on Nationalists and has continental development interests in Africa and perhaps also said Asia to create a NeoCon vision around the world .
 The Defense Intelligence Agency's potential interests in me. e DIA has an interest in concealing Obama DNA and Birther dates tied to my family. The defense intelligence agency has a potential interest in covering up the dates of Birther and Obama's birth dates .
 Johnson and York were both keen on space projects, but when NASA was established later in 1958 all space projects and most of ARPA's funding were transferred to it . NASA was later established and ARPA funding was transferred to NASA .
 The United States defense company DARPA has been interested in the human genome for years . DARPA created 99 percent of the world’s deadly robots . The company has been involved in the creation of 99 percent the world's deadly robots.
 PsyOps create the appearance i have a disorder seeking out teens or tots for photography, sexuality .
 Durigm and after WWI disgust of Russian military and MI acts were in a high state . The massacre of Russian aircraft designers and 14 million Russian by Stalin by Stalin after WWII drove much of the German and Allied forces contempt and fear of Russia . Vatican fear of both Russia and Germany after
 Gay and non-wholesters assaulting me as State sanctioned acts, then over thirty years institutionalizing me as I respond within the law to the law . am convinced not only am I a targeted individual but I was radiologically attacked in my midsection imprisonment. am convinced .
 Yrare by a narcissist is directed towards the person that they feel has slighted them . Narcissistic narcissism is directed at the person they feel slighted by .
 Tia Marsili, Evelyn Gu Trinitas Nsabimana and Caroline Girgenti will be in touch with the Trusts .
 Bhatia was never charged but has been fired and is no longer with the company . He was fired from the company but has never been charged .
 Hee eee ee ae Sound And Fury accusation towards me (empty of any accusation, just character assignation towards me like saying ""Ed you are DIRT"" utilized Newton's Third Law of Motion Corrective Ploy .
 The assaults on a white supremacist white seperatist look not only legal but expected . For public appearances sake the assaults on the white supremacist . white seperateatist looks not only . but . expected . Historically Downtrodden victims .
 WHO is Stalking me, Why, How and a few other such questions Etiology, again visiting this elsewhere in the book . Psych Ward Ed.
 In defaming an alleged white supremacist a Dregg none white or gay will photograph a white or other woman despicably or catch a racketeer dressed as me doing so . The Law Enforcement, perhaps sometimes sometimes United States Marshalls fighting white supremacist will defame me behind my back as *
 Nearly from the first moments of Corpus Christi I found it the worst toilet stain of people and city I ever encountered in all the world . The city is the worst city I've ever encountered, and it was the worst in the world for me .
 The black man who was at the scene may have proof in his hands, says he is an exploiter of females . The black woman who was injured in the shooting may have evidence in her hands .
 Two Monk Monks and a Woman a Zen Lesson . Try this as the Young Monk says the Old Monk is too old for that lady . Road Blocking Roadblock Tree In Road identities switched out Monk Pretender too old to get accross river .
 Placed along my as | am on my way to TMobile. Oh those brave cops are too busy to investigate this. Placed on my as well as my phone, I'm not sure what happened .
 GPS tells me to turn Right up the slight hill at the right off frame of this event planted in my path . Same thing happens on my way to gym V2 V2
 My cell phone in use for ""k""navigation knowledge map usage to a store, illicit ""R"" eproductive interests staged against my will . I was using my cell phone for "navigation knowledge map usage to a store"
 Instead of stolen-clothes impersonators breaking into my residence or evidence plants at my residence, impersonators use sound stages of other apartment units with same layout as my own apartment floor plan . Instead of broken-included items, impersonator uses sound stages in his own apartment .
 Austin meeting with United States ambassador to Iraq James Jeffrey and Secretary of Defense Leon Panetta in 2011 . From Wikipedia, Austin is Austin .
 eID te ieee ie kee co a) Dole l ile) balm ee mele ete) omelette . Public play is great. But | seek a deeper connection .
 DaAssRaper commented on one of Heterolnflexible’s pictures . “Here is some unsolicited advice.” view comment .
 Real Ed (scapegoa ""Mistress Victoria"" ""dat Ass"" model to the retarded, the adult entertainer called for the retarded child, finds teen or tot porn in the treehouse the retarded White Supremacist person lives in Below .
 ARC of Northern Virginia know of some non whites who could use some White Supremacist White Seperatist DNA . ARC of . Northern Virginia also own the treehouse and represent the victims victimized by the Treehouse . Marines hire white models and use dummy impersonators of to to host
 One possibility of somethig earlir was switcing out my airline ticket TO Canada . One of the possibilities was switting out my ticket to Canada .
 Preparations are made in advance of the game, including the hiring of any assistants required . Preparations for the game are made ahead of the start of the match .
 motel operator wants some DNA from a faked trist in a hotel room or faked activitiy in my home bedroom . Bh hig TR Cheryll Lloyd friendly ""ccl"" . motel operator, wants some . DNA from . a faked . trist, or faked . activity in a
 Paul Graham's Hierarchy of Disagreement lists ad hominem as the second lowest type of argument in a disagreement . Mere innuendo, less than name calling, is the second-lowest argument in the hierarchy of arguments .
 Sessions previously served as a United States Senator from Alabama from 1997 to 2017 . He resigned from the position in order to serve in the Trump administration . Sessions is a Republican .
 James Comey Jr. was the 7th Director eT of the Federal Bureau of Investigation from 2013 until his dismissal in Sa eee ee ES a May 2017 .
 Barack Obama 1961 IVF son, Edward Donegan 1998 5 Donegan DNA 3 NULL here in the U.S., early celibate death homeless or in no sex allowed hospitals. IVF Feb 20 Barack Obama 2001 .
 Donegan DNA backfilled by CIA Behnghazi MKULTRA into African area . Probability of detecting lst Cousin or closer ~ 100% Or me, Edward Paul Donegan, brother .
 Tom Donegan is pictured in his home with an African also tied to Trinistas Nsamimbari, also an African who 1s part of trust fund management . During my time in National Institute of Health and Public Health Service detention, facing all black PHS, I was pictured in
 Family Me: Niggers are worth a damn . Niggers have been a problem for 35 years . Family Me is the answer I have sought for 35 .
 Maybe during "the shrub's administration,"" my mother's name for the younger Bush . Maybe during the "shrub's administration" maybe during the 'shrubs' administration .
 Gravel Point just north of DCA airport is a place to relax and relax in . When the stress was the highest, there was always Gravel point to relax in.
 She loved lots of the George Washing Parkway as did I Lady Bird Park . I love hikes on George Mason Island . I loved George Mason in history . She loved Lady Bird Johnson, she loved Lady .
 My father flew for TWA into that airport where there still was a museum of that era in Terminal A . She would tell about the cross winds for take offs and landings and what was aircraft noise for others .
 As the planes flew in they looked like some kind of jacks spun off their axis, X forms flying sideways coming into land on ruways not at all aligned with the form of the X . It was even more befuddling to watch the unevenness of the winds by watching
 The unmarked cars are still following us still at Gravel Point Parking lot . But the cars, the unmarked cars, were following us all over the country .
 "I leave several times from her company to go approach the cars and the result was always the same," says the driver of the car . "I go to her company several times to try and approach her cars," she says .
 They would role up their often down windows and just drive away and still do, as of 2020 . As of 2020, they still do as well as 2020 .
 7 2 1 1s about Gangstalk and my mother and I facing for decades. But we had grown somewhat accustomed to all that, me less so. But I'm not so. I'm glad to have had a good laugh at all these things .
 The six stove pipes of inexplicable things, things without cause shown to me, non seqitur, non sequa, not flowing from anything in my life . Unprovoked and unexplained hostility towards me . Treatment of me as though I were some suspect when I am not, treatment of
 Doppelgangers dressed as me, carried the same workplace folios, etc. yet were not me but there to be confused with me . What I have noticed for 30 years including in the workplace were, inexplicable to me, DoppelGangers who dressed as . me .
 In 2019 a serious every moment of my life quest since the 1990s came to a resolution . In 2019, Ingrid Navarrette will write a book about her life in New York City .
 The bizarre and inexplicable treatment of me, and the Doppelgangers in these areas of my life, is setup behind the scenes conspiracy against my rights . People at what i call Bifurcations, behind my back social and other sabotage, are incited, brought into,
 I have accused stalker assailants of cheap shots without basis attacking me and my mother for 40 years . Most of the cheap shots and harassment so entirely non-sequitur to me life I could not possibly figure out who they were or what they were referring to .
 In discovering what the Doppelgangers were doing, taking picture of females who then owed MY dna to the victim female, this situation tied to my DNA made some sort of sense . It was in discovering what they were doing .
 Attacking me without explanation ""sells"" to the public that I rather than the United States Marshall photographed the female and the female . Attacking her without explanation "sells" to the the public," she says .
 He will say he got the camera from Dr, Jekyll, thought it was his camera . He will also say that he got it from Dr. Jekyl, Dr. Dr. Ephyll . Dr Ephphyll says he thought the camera was his own .
 The United States Marshall wants to sign his DNA over to his wife and children . What the U.S. Marshall wants is my DNA, and as me, he will sign my DNA .
 This, blaming me for the United States Marshalls conduct breaks my eggs, inciting retaliation against me, and makes them an omelet . This, blames me for my actions, makes me feel like a victim . This is not the first time I've heard from such a person who
 Sidney Gotllieb's illegal use of my DNA is solved . This is how the family databases problem was solved . The family databases have been used to solve the problem for years .
 My White Seperatism and White Supremacism formed because of unprovoked assaults on me and my mother have been from non whites, gays, retarded, others, others . I have been assaulted by non-whites, gays and retarded .
 Had it not been for this I might have been a socially progressive Libertarian rather than a wannabe genocidal Libertarian, something of an anomalous political condition .
 My feeling now, that my father offered the CIA, DOD, USA, too much when he subjected himself to atomic bomb blasts in 1961 . The effects on human DNA could be tested, and this after Hiroshima .
 He wanted to defeat Adolf Hitler and others who assured with the world non whites were racially inferior . He wanted the world to see non-white non-whites as racially inferior.
 "I now believe it is the United States which is inferior and abused my father, mother, and me. I now believe ... it's the U.S. which abused my parents, mother and me," she said .
 The Means, Motive, and Opportunity system of solving racial crimes against me can not be explained by normal means . Without knowledge of the racial inferiority existing as public knowledge, the system can't explain how it works .
 In Reverberations I was forced in the dark world of deeper truths, having in my quest for understanding, have to look into the abyss of blacks, gays, retarded, and designer babies .
 "I have spent my life fighting off assailants who will not identify themselves and placed in psych wards," she says . She says she has spent most of her life fighting assailants who won't identify themselves .
 Released from psych wards, I now right this book section, I place you within my judgment . Released from those psych wards .
 "Deep Pockets Legal Targeting" is a form of deep-pockets legal targeting . It's a term used to refer to deep-pocketed targeting .
 Non whites have accused whites as oppressors and demanded wealth transfer . Non whites accuse whites of being oppressors, demanding wealth transfer from whites .
 The proof of oppression, Disparate Outcome Theory, is merely that the non white underperformed on seemingly neutral test, thus must have experienced discrimination . The non-white should have performed better on neutral tests, the theory says .
 "I like my father and mother, have worked for justice for all in every aspect of our lives," says Ms. Jacqueline .
 "I am targeted for false claims and racial assaults because of the desire for me DNA, the desire to who I am," she says . She says she is targeted because of her DNA .
 Myiopia: My white supremacism results from my judgment of my assailants . I'm not afraid to defend myself from my assailants, I'm afraid to judge my attackers . I was attacked by a group of white men in the wake of the attack .
 My assailants pass only one test only true for being fraudsters, everything else about them are false . My assailants fail to pass the same test as being a fraudster .
 "This opening chapter does restate some of the modeling of the crime ring and how it affects me," she says . "But this opening chapter is restate ... how it affected me," the author says of the book .
 I will need to describe the covert ops teams which have surrounded me, framed me, and assaulted me and so I will repeat a few things and add a new one . For the purposes of telling that story I will . describe the . purposes of . telling that . the . story I
 These have a money laundering system of impersonating me and ""spending"" my DNA on adult entertainers, he says . They ask to be punished for the pictures on their phones, which they claim I took, he claims .
 Dr Jekyll, or out of wedlock distant Windsor, is ALLEGED to have done. They are drug addicts and felons with sex offense histories . They are asked to false flag me, then be punished for what Dr.Jekyll or Dr. Jek
 That is the Tx line, the statements or acts from that a protection racket is needed . "That is the line," the line that is needed to protect the U.S. from terrorism .
 For reasons I never could understand or understood in part I became assaulted by the genetically unwashed . This led to my resentment and suspicions of non whites, and speculation of their low IQ motives .
 This led to a greater need to attack me through money laundering rather than give any ""bragging rights" to a White Supremacist in the treatment of the retarded or autistic . This lead to the need for money laundering, rather than giving any 'bragging' rights'
 MY lawsuit failed, railroaded and undermined, but I quoted this . My lawsuit failed and I quoted it here .
 'I DO have very high IQ and retardation firms want my assets, not treat my supposed retardation. Though false impressions deny the fact I DO have high IQ'
 Rights gotten by blackmail, then to personal Eugenics, Marshalls bying themselves ""self supporting programs of equipment out of seized assets" and selling genes to poor families at $1 or to the gov for 5 Billion .
 In a wide ranging interview, linked past murders and coverups in past administrations to current murders . Linked murders in the Iran/Contra scandal under Reagan to murders in Mena under Clinton to current murderous scandals such as Chris Stevens and SEALs deaths under ""Extortion 17"" Claims
 It is the power of this racket, and paid off media and lots of cash and glam dommes to go around, she says . "I am being property ghouled," she says of her property .
 Power of racket I am up against, and the power of the agencies behind it get ""favors"" etc., like planted magistrates who support the program, DAs who want the geno rights for county programs . Powerful families part of deep secret histories of early geno testing
 "If I read one of the few psych reports I ever had access to like FMC Butner I would believe it," says Butner .
 "I did read it and what a hit job, but I could see how it would be believed," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 These were hit jobs of complicit people in what is called a Gangstalk where ""preemtion"" rather than trial has meant criminal harassment under color of law of me for years . These were 'hit jobs' by complicit people, he says .
 Because I have speech spasmodia and bad handwriting, tied to a rare gene FOXP2, I have appeared to have bipolar disorder . It is difficult already to fight off COINTELPRO or United States Marshall use of tactical resources against what it considers the enemy, an Alt
 The record I would have had of my life replaced with trying to prove a police conspiracy has made me an easy target for psych wards . The record he would have of his life . It would have been replaced with . Trying to prove police conspiracy made him a 'easy target' for psych
 'Today I try to avoid taking the fight with plain clothes aggressors, no matter how provocative their acts towards me. Today I try not to take the fight against the aggressors. No matter how provocative their acts, they are towards me,' she said .
 I decided to lose the cheap shot fights, not fight them, take it, as much as I can, and win the war . I decided I would not fight cheap shots, not take them, and instead I would take them .
 My family DNA was used without permission by the CIA DOD Illuminati, and I have to look bad to women, be ostracized, and out of any possible wife and children . I have a family DNA that was used by the DOD Illuminati without permission .
 "This conspiracy against my associative and reproductive rights is based on evidence plants and I am a victim of that," she said . "I'm a victim," she added .
 "I am in an exigent human rights crisis against Gangstalk. Pile on does not help here," she writes . "Pile on doesn't help here"
 I never sought a dime from my coding and research of Political Rights.US, of the WWII HFDCA videos, or other volunteer work . I was never asked for money from my work .
 In fact I shunned profit fearing it would cost me my 2K per mos I live on . In fact he shunned profits fearing it will cost him his 2k per mos .
 'I have tried to return to high tech work, but my path to that and health have been blocked. Now, abused by the Disability System, I have tried . Now, abuse by the disability system has prevented me from returning to work,’s father says .
 Monique’s Althiem sent an email to Ed Donegan asking him to volunteer for the CFP conference .
 The choice is up to you whether you want to give an overview of the different panels/keynote speakers you attendend . You want to concentrate on one particular panel/speaker .
 You will get full credit for the article and you can even post a link to your own blog . -The article has to be exclusive to the CFP blog .
 Plain Clothes Police Brutality has brought about my torture, and upon my death, my murder from the accrued physical and medical tole upon my body . Undercover law enforcement, sometimes identifying themselves to others as United States Marshalls, frequently actively using amphetamines, covered in tattoos
 Lack of available medical care or housing as well as lack of sexual reproductive opportunity has been the goal of the police harassment, as has sexual assaults upon me meant to demean and humiliate me, ,and my DNA 1s illegally used for [VF against my will .
 TRinistas Nsambari and African activist from D.C. connected to Obamas were brought into the ARC of NOrthern Virignia to adminster the sale of my mother's house assets .
 This Sony Ericsson K6001 is being bluejacked by the Siemens M75 pictured above . Siemens' M75 is being used to replace the K600 one .
 Arbitration Arbitration is a form of alternative dispute resolution . It is a way to resolve disputes outside the courts . Arbitration arbitration is an alternative form of dispute resolution.
 O'Keefe and Project Veritas Action have been criticized for strategically editing footage to create false accusations about people or groups . In the past, the group has been accused of being politically motivated in order to discredit people .
 I have been tortured to death and raped over a period of time through “soft violence” in broad daylight, with people watching, and with no one coming to my defense . I've been tortured by people watching and no one comes to his defense .
 United States DOD PsyOps using Disinformation, Social Sabotage, and other schemes to maneuver away support or Human Rights for me will be covered later in more detail . A short description will be made here .
 Following extensive dental surgery I was denied pain killers by starving me out financially . Following extensive . dental surgery he was denied . pain killers . by starving him out financially.
 The material in this book is concentrated from other parts of the book where the material is in the context of the history relevant to the quote and citation of the quote . The material is concentrated in other areas where the book is in context .
 Stanley Armour Dunham of Boeing Corp. arrested by the CIA during WWI . Madeline Dunham, CIA Hawaii, Hawaii, Hawaiin Bank. Madeline was arrested during WWII .
 A defendant charged with conspiracy can raise the defense of abandonment or withdrawal . In some states, however, factual impossibility 1s not a defense, as courts rely on the fact that the person still had the intent to commence .
 Police officers are citizens like anyone else, though they have broad powers as police officers to protect people and enforce the law . Police officers have broad power to enforce people and protect them from harm, but they are citizens .
 Police officers have access to evidence such as controlled substances obtained from arrests and searches . Many have stolen evidence either no longer used in criminal cases or never turned over for prosecutions following search and seizures .
 A similar RICO operative in an apartment Canadian domina will go to and that apartment taken to be mine. A similar operative in a similar Rico operative in . Canada will be able to find out what happened .
 A confidential human source or informant is a defendant who engages in the prohibited activity of associating with persons engaged in criminal activity for the purpose of furnishing information to or acting as an agent for a law enforcement or intelligence agency . In this case, the defendant is accused of acting as a
 My father and mother are tied to Sindey GOttlieb illegal science and the FOXP2 speech and language gene CIA Speech Pathologist Biologist in Assasinations division . Henry Bortner was born under atoic testing at Manhattan Beach to an Atomic Bobing and Atomic
 Donegan begotten from James Paul Donegan and Glorian Donegan by Eva Ban November 18 1961 . Edward Paul Donegen begotten . from James . Paul donegan .
 Sasha and Malike were born when I was at AOL Time Warner Netscape at my brothers referal to me for a job, at the exact time I noticed weird Doppelgangers of me emerging 1999 era . Sasha was born at the same time as Malike was born .
 The family bible disappeared on my mothers side or was about to, and my mother continuously complained my brother came to her house one day, with no warning, and began throwing out all of her hats . My mother said her brother threw out all her hats and the family bible .
 Others mentioned in the PRG chief’s memo include CIA Deputy Director for Intelligence Edward Proctor, the CIA deputy Director for Science and Technology Carl Duckett and Director of the Office of National Estimates John Huizenga .
 There is speculation that they possibly had knowledge of the birth and care for Barack Obama in Kenya and were later murdered to cover the trail . There 1s speculation that the family members may have been involved in the deaths of Barack Obama .
 Back in the 1940s, the FBI was extremely interested in the parents of the husband from this Chicago couple . Hammer Sickle FBI 1024 1024 .
 George W Bush May Have Big Surprise from DEA from DEA .
 The Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms . attempted to execute a search warrant relating to alleged sexual abuse charges and illegal weapons violations . Waco, Texas, was located in Waco .
 Koresh and six others in his cult were CIA deep-cover operatives who refused to activate against an unknown target . Koresh's cult members were CIA operatives who had refused an order to activate .
 The initial engagement plan was designed to result in the deaths of U.S. officers to justify a large-scale retaliation . Initial engagement plan intended to result from the death of United States officers .
 While he was in the service, Reagan obtained a film reel depicting the liberation of the Auschwitz concentration camp . Reagan held on to the reel believing that doubts would arise as to whether the Holocaust had occurred .
 Reagan was also a part of the judaeo-masonic hollywood community and most likely had met Foster there at a young age . Reagan was just an actor who read speeches etc. He was also also a member of the community .
 Most higher level judaeo-masons are in fact pedophiles/pederasts . Hollywood community is a sex cult and the propaganda wing of the judaeos-masonic led occult world state .
 1s all presented as something ""wonderful"" and magical but in fact it's backed up as the absence of terrible satanic rituals, drugs, torture, hypnosis and more of the most excruciatingly painful pavlovian anchors imaginable . Remember that this 1s are all presented
 The story gets even more bizarre that the new world religion, actually satanism, is pushed by Foster's character, she is a high priestess of judaeomasonry and it's false science dictatorship . Foster is the creator of a new religion called satanism .
 During Bush's year in charge of the CIA, the U.S. national security apparatus actively supported Operation Condor operations and right-wing military dictatorships in Latin America . The United States actively supported the operations .
 This is part of our series about CIA employees who have made the ultimate sacrifice . This is the first time we have featured a CIA employee who has died in the war .
 1 Was told were nothing to be noticed and merely random other things around me . Yet as these things like women walking down the street in front of me, are pieced together with other pieces, like ambiguous statements from others in places of business, pizza shops, etc., then behind my
 Capone's Soup Kitchen served over 120,000 meals to hungry people . Capone’s Soup Kitchen is situated on what is flow a parking lot on the corner of 9th and State St .
 Begin faking exploitation by photo bombing my normal use of cell phone by placing teens and tot buttocks on the non display side of the phone whenever I hold the phone .
 Place me in the lens view of people who saw me, filmed me, in the area of a photographed teen or tot . Place you in the eye view of someone who saw you, or filmed you, in a photo .
 Someone other than Edward Paul Donegan creates on the phone that person has a photo of a the teen or tot and that photo will be alleged to the memory chip of Edward Donegan's smart-phone or a phone alleged to Edward Paul donegan . Call something in the possession a camera
 Bragadicio assaults on me by those who "see me in the area" photograph me in hostile way and show the hostility towards me . They would show a pedophile WITHOUT calling me a paedophile and without accusing me of me anything .
 MAD GARDENS 3750 e VAN BUREN announce LUA ase AFTERWORDS . Post-show talkback with the cast will occur after the matinee performance on FEBRUARY 17 .
 Here o Dune is set in the distant future amidst a feudal interstellar society in which various noble houses control planetary fiefs .
 Samuel Lapp is a witness to Corrupt and Murdering Police . Jacob Lapp leaves behind his wife Rachel and eight-year-old son Samuel .
 All is visible, that it is a sham, but from the top of instituions down the shams are supported and bolstered . DOD PsyOps got the top . organizations, put puppetes their, and are under DOD Psy Ops control .
 The twentieth episode of season seven finds Al confronting a burglar named Richard Johnson . Johnson attempts to sue Al Bundy for injury after he breaks into the Bundy house . The episode is the 20th episode of the series .
 Picard hits back at Lumerian empath Alkar for using others' bodies to channel his dark thoughts so the shadows can be cleared for him to perform mediations . Picard says Alkar's selfishness warrants a verbal smackdown from Picard .
 The judges of the U.S. Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court have demonstrated for all Americans how easy it is to turn the spying tools of the federal government against domestic political opponents .
 Black Hebrew Isrealite Beliefs and Carrying the out described in Cyphertext Saved from Loo Cv) rma #Anunnaki #Elohim #Nephilim .
 They created the first human race of the human species from THEIR image and likeness over 240,000 years ago . The first humans were created from their likeness and their likeness . They were created by the first humans in the world from their own likeness .
 We Must Fight On is Sovereign United States versus Illuminati and Murders . Whistleblowers Journey: Live in DC. Whistlebladeers Journey:Live in DC .
 In Ed Donegan's opinion, author of this book, she may have had information on the decision to add genes to the genetic stock of Middle East as part of democracy building .
 JFK and Thorkil Kristensen with unidentified man February 20, 1961 . Reforming a planetary society with the complexity of yours in no easy matter . Unidentified man .
 To cover the manufacture of Obama numerous aircraft may have been downed, my family harassed, there may have also been murder of journalists, ill conceived or not fully discussed or disclosed genetics programs around the world . It all appears to have gotten started on February 20 1961 .
 Tom Dunham is a high tech employee of great skill, Libertarian Atheist BDSM scene of electronic digital couture . He is married to an Asian wife and progressive on social matters .
 The religios component of this should not be overlooked, including in Justice Scalia's assasination and the religious order backing a genetics scheme .
 Tomas Dumas Dunham's story is my story of pain and torment . This is my itfroductbon wr. United States ocaion My Web Page .
 The alien in my April 2012 closet took my daughter, so | took another's . The alien took her daughter's life, so did another's.
 Wikii Leaks and Edward Snowden deserve recognition in being part of public discussion as a check upon government error . Edward Snowden should be recognized in being a check on government error, author says .
 Kevin Ives were hit by a cargo train in Alexander, Arkansas as they lay on the tracks . Kevin and Ives are hit by the train as they lie on the train tracks .
 On August 23, 1987, the bodies of 16-year old Don Henry and 17-year-old Don Ives were found . Linda Ives has been relentless in her search for answers since her son's murder .
 One week before the boys died, a man wearing military fatigues was spotted not far from the train tracks . I googled what did they see and the top link was Wikipedia with this, unmodified by me, Edward Paul Donegan .
 "My mother, my father, and myself, also victims of that scam, still fighting this together with all that we were and are," she said .
 Former longshoreman Eric Hoffer was arguably the greatest philosopher in the United States . Hoffer died in 1994 at the age of 92 .
 I am not safe in the USA because the USA is under Sway of old enemies including Feudal British Crown The British Windsor Family, OSS/CIA, Vatican, Mossad, and international actors with plans for the world .
 Kaliningrad became a Russian city in 1945 . It was part of the Kingdom of Prussia, and later, the German Empire . It is now the headquarters of Russia's largest city in Russia .
 KOonigsberg Cathedral arguably is the most significant of such landmarks Z, his is the story of his family in the Manhattan Project Los Angles blast exposure testing, MKULTRA, and the Pacific Missile Crisis .
 Top Tier,3 Level, White House Regular Police < should | Myself, my property Operatives be, is not — | attacked by street gangs . Police pay assailants in front of me .
 Masonry rejected the Central European theory, the theory that non whites were genetically inferior, and were a uniting non-white threat against Central Europe . Masonry rejects the theory .
 The expressed goal of Gang Stalking is to silence a victim, drive a victim insane and possibly to the point of suicide, or destroy the victim's reputation and believability . The person will likely be viewed as mentally ill should they complain or report the abuse .
 MKULTRA may be called MK Vacuum or MK Glory Grandstanding (other parties using my intellectual and other property illegally and in pretensious gloat) Politicians of World Genetic-Communism and Deep Pockets digging litigation against White preference me .
 The haves complain about the genomic inferiority, neediness of the aggressors only further fuels sympathy for the assailants, the needy, against those who have . go Wikipedia retrieved from link and copied or modified to here .
 The concept of an archetype appears in areas relating to behavior, historical psychology, and literary analysis . Archetype Google knowledge panel retrieved from link and copied .
 Natural Birth I know very little about my State birth, my State identity, my birth to me . Natural birth is a state of origin .
 King George V, working with RCA and the Illuminati, is said to have traits similar to FOXP2 such as strong even morose emotions . The House of Windsor was created in 1917 when George V relinquished all German titles from the British Royal Family .
 It was likely in the underground railroad of people the Catholics and Free Masons were rescuing at various locations . My father met my mother Glorian Donegan a Kutschera tied to Austrian Nazis and perhaps even Eva Braun or others .
 The DuPonts and North American Aviation, Boeing, the Kennedys, and others were all on the ""flying saucer" of I11luminati works .
 Inferiors U Petty Official Google Featured Snippet copied or modified to here petty official in British English . A minor official in government in government, etc. A petty official is a minor official .
 This American Life is a weekly public radio program and podcast . It is also a radio show and podcast.
 Steve Raucci broke his silence and gave an interview to Paul Nelson at the Times Union in Albany, New York . Ten years after his arrest, the former NFL star talks about his arrest and his arrest .
 I have had learning disabilities, extrema off-the-scale ADD it has been called, speech spasmodia resulting in poor effect in meetings, written language problems of dropped words or conjugations, spellings, etc., and study problems in school .
 A ranked society in anthropology is one that ranks individuals in terms of their genealogical distance from the chief . Veco Society is ranked society .
 The public saw their braggadocio towards me and likely also saw and heard that (behind my back) others without my grant of authority to do so were pleading me guilty to peeping and even paying the peepers to pretend I did it .