 JFK sent out troops to invade Cuba, stopped by Cuban troops at the Bay of Pigs . October 23 was JFK's invasion of Cuba . Cuban troops stopped by JFK's troops at Bay of the Pigs .
 I will be telling you about the conflicts, the outcome, and most importantly my opinion . I will also give my opinion on the outcome of the conflict .
 So now i will start to talk about the conflicts that led up to the Cold War and other major conflicts with in the Cold war . i will also talk about how the conflicts led up and how they shaped the world .
 I hope you learned a lot about the topic and about my opinion if we should have gotten involved or not . I hope it will help you learn a lot of what you learned about the situation .
 I also learned a bit of information my self and how close we were to starting nuclear war . "I also learned about how close I was to start nuclear war," she says .
 JFK made the smart decisions that JFK had made to save our country . But now i know that JFK made a smart decision .
 i thnk it was a good choice in JFK's part to get involved and stop the bombing . But in other ways i thsk its a bad idea because if we hadnt gotten involved then maybe they wouldn't have ever set off the bombs and then that whole conflict wouldn
 Russia and the United States might have been closer, more friendlier countries's . So, then Russia and U.S. might be closer, friendlier .
 Second Paragraph and Third Paragraph: During World War2 Russia and America combined forces to defeat Hitler and succeeded . After the war between Russia and the United States a split occurred .
 Because of the political differences and because Russia was a Communism and the United States didn't like that AT ALL, the U.S. was a democracy and Russia didn't . The United States and Russia were democracies and didn't want each other to know each other .
 Russia joined alliances with Cuba in the 1950s and '60s . But for Russia that was very important materiel so the communism got very angry and joined alliances . Russia joined Cuba in order to keep Cuba from being isolated .
 In 1948 the split really began and that was what they called the Cold War. In 1948, in 1948, the split began . In 1948 it really began, that is what they call the 'Cold War'
 The split or hatred between the U.S. and Russia was so great that both of the countries threatened to bomb each other countries .
 If JFK threw a bomb at Cuba then Fidel Castro and Nikita Khrushchev would throw right back . Nikita would throw a bomb right back if he threw it .
 The Americans were getting very nervous because they didn't know if a bomb would fall from the sky and kill them all . Also in the United States, the Americans were very nervous . The U.S. was also getting nervous .
 JFK sent out troops to try and invade Cuba but where stopped by other Cuban troops at the Bay of Pigs . Another major conflict was on October 23 when JFK sent troops out to invade Cuba .