 LBJ – Conversation with Adlai Stevenson, George Reedy and McGeorge Bundy . LBJ Phones Joseph Haggar, Jr. and Tom Kuchel in the Oval Office .
 Malcolm X – The Ballot or the Bullet March for Jobs and Freedom – A Philip Randolph Jobs . and Freedom . – John Lewis – Roy Wilkins – Whitney Young, Jr. – John . Wilkins . – Roy. Wilkins, Jr., John Lewis and . Roy.
 Kennedy ordered a naval quarantine of Cuba in order to prevent Russian ships bringing additional missiles and construction materials to the island . Nikita S. Khrushchev removed all the missile bases and their deadly contents from Cuba . Kennedy ordered the quarantine of the island to prevent additional missiles .
 After several days of teetering on the brink of nuclear holocaust, the world breathed a sigh of relief . The world breathers with relief at the end of the nuclear crisis .
 The showdown in Cuba may have been the result of such accumulating anxiety among the Soviet political elite . The showdown may indeed have been due to such anxiety among Soviet political leaders .
 Fidel Castro struggled to survive America’s efforts to “encourage’ his political demise . Viewed in hindsight, it is not surprising that the Soviets chose Cuba as their stage of operations against the United States .
 The cozy alliance between Castro and Khrushchev laid the ground for what culminated in a Soviet missile base in Cuba and ended in the Cuban missile crisis . The cozy relationship between the two sides paved the way for what ended up being a missile base .
 President Kennedy's personal recollections of discussions, conversations with his advisors, meetings with the Joint Chiefs of Staff and members of the president’s executive committee . They include . discussions, . conversations with . his advisors and meetings with . Joint Chiefs . of Staff .
 You will become a first-hand observer to one of the most important events of the cold war . If you persevere, you will become an important observer to the Cold War .
 A U-2 reconnaissance aircraft, piloted by Richard Heyser, reveals several SS-4 nuclear missiles in Cuba . Monday, October 15: A U.2 reconnaissance plane reveals several of the missiles .
 President Kennedy convenes his Executive Committee to consider America’s options . After learning of the missiles during breakfast, he convenes the Executive Committee .
 President Kennedy tells Soviet Foreign Minister Andrie Gromyko that U.S. will not tolerate Soviet missiles in Cuba . Kennedy was on a campaign trip to Connecticut and the Midwest .
 After an evening meeting, President Kennedy spends about four minutes recording his personal recollections of discussions that day . President Kennedy recorded his recollections after a meeting with reporters .
 JFK meets with the secretary of defense, Robert McNamara, and the members of the Joint Chiefs of Staff before leaving on a scheduled campaign trip to Ohio and Illinois . JFK Library release notes were prepared by Sheldon M Stern .
 JFK discusses military options with Joint Chiefs of Staff . JFK discusses various military options and possible consequences . JFK also discusses possible consequences of the war with Russia .
 Joint Chiefs chairman General Maxwell Taylor states that the JCS was initially agreed on military action along with the blockade . Taylor: JCS initially agreed to military action with blockade along with blockade of Syria .
 President Kennedy returns to Washington from Chicago after being convinced by Robert Kennedy that he must meet again with EX-COMM to discuss the discovery of additional Soviet missiles in Cuba . Under the public guise of an “upper respiratory infection,” President Kennedy .
 When confronted with questions regarding rumors of offensive weapons in Cuba, Kennedy asks the press not to report the story until after he addresses the U.S. public . Kennedy asks for the press to withhold the story from reporting until he address the American public .
 When a U-2 is actually brought down by a missile from a SAM site four days later, JFK decides not to issue the order . JFK decided not to order the order because of the threat of a missile .
 Bundy suggests that the president should delegate the authority to order an air strike against a SAM to the sec. of defense . Bundy says the president's authority should be transferred to the secretary of defense instead of the president .
 Tape 34.1A-34.2, October 23, time unknown: Discussion of diplomatic efforts at the UN and the vote by the Organization of American States . Discussion about possible Soviet responses to the quarantine especially in Berlin . Discussion of possible Soviet response to the outbreak of disease .
 JFK Library release notes prepared by Sheldon M Stern . Wednesday, October 24: Soviet ships reach quarantine line, but receive radio orders from Moscow .
 RFK concludes that the president could not have done less and that his judgment has now been supported by our allies and almost all the OAS states . RFK: "RFK concluded that his judgement has now now been backed by almost all of our allies"
 The brothers talk about the political side of the crisis and Khrushchev’s apparent willingness to embarrass the president before the upcoming congressional elections . The brothers discuss the political and political aspects of the incident . They also discuss the upcoming elections .
 Tape 37.4, October 25, 10:00, Review of the movement of ships toward the quarantine line and potential U.S. responses . Brief discussion of the arrival of Fidel Castro’s list of baby food, plasma and medicines as part of the continuing negotiations for release
 EX-COMM receives letter from Khrushchev stating that the Soviets would remove their missiles if President Kennedy publicly guarantees the U.S. will not invade Cuba . JFK Library release notes prepared by Sheldon M Stern on October 26 .
 JFK Library release notes prepared by Sheldon M Stern . Tapes 39. and 39.1 are released from the JFK Library . JFK Library will release the tapes at the end of the year .
 Tape 40.0, parts 1 and 2, October 26, afternoon or evening : Intelligence briefing by CIA director, further military planning and a discussion of the Sino/Indian war between JFK and the Indian ambassador to the US . JFK asks if anyone has seen the London Times which claims
 JFK decides not to order an attack on the SAM site as agreed earlier [tape 34.1, 21:OO] but agrees to strike all the SAM sites if any additional planes are attacked . JFK agrees not to attack SAM sites but agrees that any more planes will be attacked if
 JFK secretly authorizes UN secretary general U Thant to offer UN-sponsored trade of the American missiles in Turkey for the Soviet missiles in Cuba with assurances of prompt U.S. acceptance .
 General Taylor reports that the JCS wants an air strike no later than Monday morning unless there is irrefutable evidence that the missiles are being dismantled . General Taylor says that the strike would be no later Monday morning .
 McNamara insists that this is not so much a trade as a way of preventing a Soviet military attack on a NATO member nation . McNamara says the trade deal is not a trade deal but a way to prevent a Soviet attack .
 Ambassador Thompson suggests that “These boys are beginning to give way.” Ambassador Thompson says . Ambassador Thompson: ‘These boys ... beginning to . give way’ Ambassador Thompson suggested that the boys are ‘giving way”
 We are located at the bottom of the page . Use this to help us understand today's featured news stories . Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on iReport .
 RFK also urges putting off military action for 24 hours; “One day -I can ‘‘’t believe it’s going to make that much difference.” RFK: “I can '‘ ‘ 'I can’
 CIA intelligence update concludes that Soviet technicians have completed the work necessary to make all MRBM sites fully operational . The CIA’s early morning intelligence update concluded .
 Fidel Castro furious over fact that he was not consulted before Khrushchev’s decision . Castro refuses to allow UN inspection of dismantling of the missile bases .
 The president calls his secretary, Evelyn Lincoln, to discuss having commemorative calendars made for that month of October, with the dates of the crisis highlighted, as gifts for the members of Excomm. Excomm .
 Mobile tactical nuclear weapons and more than 40,000 Soviet troops were in place in Cuba for use in the event of an American invasion . Three decades later, a Soviet military official would reveal that mobile tactical nuclear . weapons and . more than . 40,00 Soviet troops in Cuba were in