 President John F Kennedy has been variously praised and blamed for his handling of the Cuban missile crisis in October 1962 .
 Kennedy should either have acceded to the Soviet missiles in Cuba, or tried private diplomacy before moving to the quarantine . Kennedy should have tried to negotiate with the Soviet Union, or had private diplomacy .
 Many assessments focus on Kennedy's rebponse to the Soviet demand that the U.S. withdraw its missiles from Turkey . Kennedy responded to the request on Saturday, October 27, that the United States withdrew its missiles .
 The Atomic Bombings of Japan and the Origins of the Cold War, 1941-1945, was editor of Politics and Policies of the Truman Administration, and contributor to many journals and edited volumes .
 Critics, on the other hand, have either denied that there was such an agreement or stressed that it was dangerously loose . Critics have stressed that the agreement was either dangerously loose or dangerously unsafe .
 Nikita Khrushchev trusted Kennedy's hedged, private promise and accepted public defeat in order to avoid an American invasion of Cuba and possibly allout war . It required that Premier Nikita .
 New evidence-recently declassified minutes, some staff reports, some key diplomatic cables, and some published parts of Robert Kennedy's still-closed papers - reopens these issues about the Turkey-Cuba missile trade .
 This evidence reveals that President Kennedy was partly responsible for installing the missiles in Turkey . The president and some advisers, from the early days of the crisis, were privately more flexible than critics acknowledged .
 Kennedy offered a hedged promise on 27 October 1962 to withdraw the Jupiter missiles from Turkey at a future time . The new evidence establishes that Kennedy . Kennedy privately offered a . hedged . promise to withdraw from Turkey . at a later time .
 Documents do not resolve the problem of what Kennedy would have done if Khrushchev had insisted on a public pledge . Kennedy would not have signed a pledge, he says, but would have signed it .
 Eisenhower administration decided to send missiles to Europe, largely to strengthen NATO, in 1957 . The missiles were intended to bolster NATO, both militarily and psychologically . In 1957, missiles were sent to Europe by the Eisenhower administration .
 NATO allies, fearful of antagonizing the Soviet Union, refused weapons . Most NATO allies refused weapons, fearing of antagonism from Russia .
 The missiles would be owned by Turkey and owned by the United States . The sites would be manned by soldiers of both nations . The weapons could be launched only on the order of the Supreme Allied CommanderEurope .
 The legal provisions raised serious problems about actual practices during a crisis, the government says . The legal provision raised serious questions about how to deal with the crisis .
 Such questions undoubtedly added to the fears of the Soviet Union, for the missiles would be close to the border . Such questions added to fears of Soviet Union for the future .
 The Jupiters were liquid-fuel IRBMs, taking hours to fire, quite inaccurate and very vulnerable, very vulnerable . They were only useful militarily for a first strike, and thus provocative .
 The skin of the Jupiter was so thin that a sniper's bullet could puncture it and render it inoperative . The skin is so thin it could be punctured by a sniper bullet .
 Turkey has exaggerated the warmth of relations with the U.S. President Barack Obama's administration . The move was meant to emphasize Turkey's key role in NATO and emphasize its key role .
 Turkish officials probably did not understand the strategic liabilities . Perhaps they believed that the missiles, because of their first-strike capacity, were sufficiently frightening to deter the Soviets from pressuring Turkey .
 President Kennedy and Secretary of Defense McNamara worried about the provocative nature of these weapons . Unlike the Eisenhower planners and the Turkish officials, President Kennedy worried about provocative weapons .
 Kennedy ordered the removal of the Jupiters before October 1962, according to some memoirists . Kennedy was shocked to learn during the Cuban missile crisis that they were still in Turkey .
 Eisenhower's administration installed the weapons in late 1961 to fulfill the 1959 agreement . In fact, his administration, not Eisenhower's, had actually installed these weapons . The weapons were installed by the Eisenhower administration in 1961 .
 A Polaris submarine, with its sixteen missiles, should be deployed to the area, the committee says . The Polaris submarine is operated and controlled by American personnel, it says .
 It would be mobile, concealed, and thus virtually immune from a Soviet attack . It would have been mobile and concealed, thus immune from an attack .
 Unlike the Jupiters, the Polaris would add to deterrence and better protect the United States, NATO, and Turkey . As a result of the Polaris project, the U.S. would be able to use the Polaris to protect itself and NATO .
 JFK had given the order five times, according to a report . JFK had ordered the order order to be sent to the White House .
 Alfred Goldberg, Historian, Department of Defense, located this source for me . Alfred Goldberg is a historian for the Defense Department and for the U.S.
 The committee was to be chaired by a representative from the State Department . The State Department was likely to serve as a partisan for Turkish interests and resist cancellation of the weapons .
 Kennedy probably cared more about not offending the Turks than about withholding the Jupiters . Kennedy, a knowledgeable leader, understood bureaucratic politics . Kennedy cared more for not offending Turks than for withholding Jupits .
 "This message was probably clear to the chair and other representatives," she said . "This is not the first time I've heard from the U.S. Congress," she added .
 The details of the committee's activities remain classified . Another document, probably a report from the chairman, establishes that the Jupiters were still not in Turkey in early summer .
 Defense Department considered the move "militarily dangerous" for the U.S. President Barack Obama's administration . The president's credibility and prestige required doing what the Defense Department regarded as militarily dangerous .
 In addition, McGhee continued, ""the Turkish reaction was strongly adverse"" and General Lauris Norstad, commander of NATO, ""underlined the military importance of sending IRBM's to Turkey" In addition to the Turkish reaction, General Norstad emphasized the importance of the sending IR
 An analyst cannot determine whether he failed to recognize the provocative nature of the Jupiters in Turkey, or whether he thought that they would make the Soviets uneasy .
 Norstad's reasoning helped undercut the analysis of McNamara and his ""whiz kids,"" who hoped to make deterrence more reasonable . Norstad chafed at the resistance of allies, the American brass, and the State Department .
 The most likely explanation is that McGhee's report summarized Kennedy's own thinking that summer . McGhee was the author of Kennedy's book about the Vietnam War .
 Eisenhower did not want to renege on Eisenhower's commitment to NATO . Nor did he wish to weaken the NATO alliance politically and offend a key American ally, Turkey, he said .
 McNamara later hinted that the administration might have been tempted to promise a Polaris for the future, when it would be available, instead of deploying Jupiters then .
 There were no extra Polaris subs then, such a promise in mid-1961 would not have met Kennedy's needs or Turkish hopes .
 In 1961, the Jupiters were deemed a minor problem in a nuclear edifice that required major remodeling and expansion . But in 1961, there was no felt need for haste, since there was a lack of urgency .
 President Kennedy raised the issue with the State Department in early 1962, memoirists say . The Jupiters would become operational in about July, they would be operational .
 At NATO meeting in May, Secretary of State Dean Rusk found that the Turks still objected, primarily on political grounds . At the NATO meeting, Rusk said, he found that Turkey still objected to the move .
 There is no evidence that the administration offered a Polaris as a substitute for the submarine . Turkish officials probably would have found the submarine less attractive .
 The missiles, because they were visible, added more tangible prestige . The missiles were subject, in principle, to some Turkish control .
 Still, he did not order withdrawal, but only implied a study of its feasibility . He said withdrawal would only require a study to determine feasibility .
 The President has directed that the following actions and studies be undertaken in the light of new bloc activity in Cuba . Cuba is a major source of influence in the Cuban economy .
 For additional doubts that Kennedy ever ordered withdrawal, see George Ball to Bernstein, 22 February 1979 . For additional doubt that Kennedy ordered withdrawal from the U.S. See George Ball's interview with Bernstein below .
 The Defense Department says it will phase out the Jupiters in the next seven weeks . So far, records and recollections indicate, however, the Defense Department has done nothing to phase out .
 The missiles first required a plan and then probably diplomatic negotiations . Obviously, removing the missiles would be a major problem .
 The Defense Department was again flirting with the possibility of substituting deployment of a Polaris (there were nine) near Turkey for the Jupiters . There were nine of the nine Polaris deployments .
 Given that his government had installed them, and they had just become operational in July, he could not have been so foolishly optimistic .
 Kennedy ordered removal of missiles and that the bureaucracy thwarted his instructions, analysts say . Some analysts say it's too simple to conclude, as have some analysts, that Kennedy ordered .
 A more subtle approach would acknowledge that a chief executive may often express preferences for policies . He may sincerely reinterpret them as orders when his own inaction leaves him woefully unprepared in a crisis .
 A president can place blame on a subordinate, and other aides who listen to his charges tend to believe that he issued an order, not simply stated a wish or hope . In this way, a president can blame a subordinate for his actions .
 Practitioners of the ""bureaucratic politics"" model develop a vested interest in uncritically accepting such dubious evidence because their model so nicely ""explains"" it . Practitioner of the model develop an interest in the uncritical acceptance of dubious evidence . Their model so
 The model first helps define the reliability of the evidence and then explains it-a dangerous, circular process . Thus, the model helps define reliability of evidence and explains it .
 The memoirists tell us that neither Kennedy nor his advisers, with the exception of CIA director John McCone, deemed such Soviet action as likely . Kennedy's advisers, including the CIA director, thought such action was unlikely .
 There is already evidence that recent Soviet deliveries to Cuba probably included surface-to-air missiles and possibly planes .
 The NSC memorandum had suggested the danger of the Soviets equating ""offensive" missiles in Turkey with those in Cuba .
 The Soviet weapons were designed for aggression and deployed secretly . The American weapons were defensive and deployed openly . The U.S. weapons were deployed openly.
 The Soviet action was dangerous and dishonorable, the American action peaceful and honorable . Put simply, the Soviet action is dangerous, dishonorable and dangerous .
 It was a strained, self-righteous document, characteristic of the administration's public pronouncements during the crisis . The document was written by the Obama administration . It was written in the wake of the crisis in Iraq .
 Administration members feared that Soviets would point to the Jupiters for justification . Administration feared that Soviet missiles would be used to justify U.S. trade .
 U.N. ambassador Adlai Stevenson, Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara, and some other advisers occasionally suggested trading missiles to settle the crisis . The Executive Committee of the National Security Council deliberated on how to respond .
 Stevenson warned that world opinion would equate U.S. missile bases in Turkey with Soviet bases in Cuba . Stevenson warned Kennedy that world would equate United States missile bases with Soviet Soviet bases . Stevenson: World would equate the bases with those of Cuba .
 Stevenson was leaning toward an attack on Cuba to eliminate missiles . In fairness to Stevenson, he was probably more concerned to head off disaster than to phrase an exact plan for negotiations .
 The problems of when, how, and under what conditions to offer a trade-whether explicit or informal- would bedevil thinking on this matter throughout the crisis .
 His proposed settlement would have included withdrawal of Jupiters from Turkey and abandonment of the U.S. naval base at Guantanamo .
 The typed copy of this item was declassified by the State Department in August 1974, but the handwritten copy was kept classified until summer 1978, despite requests and appeals for declassification in the intervening years . The irrationalities of the classification-declassification system are well illustrated .
 He was an outsider, not respected by either Kennedy brother or McNamara . His counsel, even when similar to that of the trusted McNamara, rankled the tired members of the ExComm .
 Whereas they viewed themselves as ""tough"" and decisive, they viewed Stevenson as indecisive and soft . They viewed themselves themselves as "tough"
 President Kennedy "sharply rejected the thought of surrendering [Guantanamo],"" according to the ExComm minutes . President Kennedy rejected the idea of surrender .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin agreed to remove strategic missiles from Turkey and Italy if Russia raised the issue . Putin agreed that at an appropriate time we would have to acknowledge that we were willing to take strategic missiles out of Turkey, Italy .
 The quoted minutes in Schlesinger's account leave unclear whether the president was willing to countenance an explicit public trade of the Jupiters .
 State Department officials flirted with the Cuba-Turkey missile trade on Sunday morning, October 21 . State Dept. officials say they're interested in the Cuba and Turkey missile trade .
 First memo called for sending U.N. observation teams to Turkey, Italy, Cuba, and Cuba to ""insure surprise attack,"" and suggested discussions on NATO bases in Italy and Turkey .
 The last memo suggested trading Guantanamo but did not offer the bases in Turkey and Italy . The memo suggested the bases would be in Turkey or Italy .
 Attorney General Robert Kennedy sketched the administration's public line for the next few days . The quarantine is quarantined until the end of the week .
 The deliberations of the past week, especially the Sunday evening meeting, certainly suggested them as part of an exchange . The deliberations have suggested that they were part of the exchange .
 Probably the time was too short, and probably he was also tempted by the prospect of a future trade and therefore unwilling to discard this extra card . Probably he was tempted to discard it, but probably also tempted .
 Kennedy was willing to take that risk in order to keep open future options, to protect himself from international embarrassment and to avoid domestic charges of weakness and a sellout .
 Plans to Trade the jupiters in Turkey as part of the ultimate settlement of the crisis . Some U.S. officials vigorously canvassed the possibility of trading the Jupits .
 This memorandum also dealt with removal of the thirty Jupiters from Italy . This memorandum was also a memorandum to remove the 30 Jupits from Italy.
 Averell Harriman, Harlan Cleveland and Walt Whitman Rostow were among those who scratched around for some solution involving the Jupiters .
 At times, this line seemed to capture the fancy of President Kennedy, but hard questions always lingered for him . "Hard questions" lingered on Kennedy's legacy, but the questions still lingered .
 President Kennedy apparently directed the State Department to consider withdrawing the missiles . Ball consulted key ambassadors to discuss the decision .
 Removal of the Jupiters as part of an explicit trade would weaken NATO and injure relations with Turkey, Hare replied . Removal of Jupits would weaken the U.S. relationship with Turkey and weaken NATO, Hare said .
 They were proud that, unlike the Cubans, they were not the ""stooge"" of a great power . The Cubans were proud of their country's independence .
 Both Turkey's political prestige and military power were at stake, he claimed . The Jupiters fulfilled both needs, he said . Turkey's military prestige and political power was at stake .
 He reluctantly suggested a secret Soviet-American agreement and then the prompt dismantling of the missiles . He said a secret deal was agreed with the Soviets and the Americans .
 NATO Ambassador Thomas Finletter also replied that Turkish officials would bitterly resent a trade deal . Ball's cable was sent to the U.S. by a NATO ambassador .
 Finletter did not even glance at the possibility of a secret deal with the Soviets . Unlike Hare, Finletter didn't even look at the possible deal .
 He did not conceive of this strategy; more likely, he did not want to risk mentioning what he deemed a disastrous course . Perhaps he didn't conceive of such a strategy, perhaps he did .
 By Thursday, October 25, while one special NSC committee was sketching the scenario for an air strike, another was outlining a ""political path""-a summit meeting while the quarantine continued-to settle the crisis .
 Only nuclear powers should possess nuclear weapons and missiles, the U.S. and the Soviet Union would not place these systems in the territory of nonnuclear powers . The United States and the former Soviet Union did not place nuclear weapons in nonnuclear territory .
 Such terms would compel the U.S. to pull missiles out of Turkey and Italy, but not Britain, Harriman says . Russia would have to withdraw its missiles from Cuba, he says .
 Harriman hoped to conceal what some could regard as a naked trade-missiles in Turkey and Italy for missiles in Cuba .
 Harriman was seizing on the crisis to address more basic problems and also offering Khrushchev a way of avoiding humiliation . The crisis was also a chance to avoid humiliation for the Soviet Union .
 The Soviets would recognize that they could take credit for forcing a trade and for promoting disarmament . The negotiations might be speedy, and the Soviets would take credit .
 Harriman's first choice was a resolution on denuclearization of Latin America, which excluded the problem of Europe . The resolution was based on a resolution to denuclearize Latin America that excluded Europe .
 The Soviets are advancing quickly on twelve or eighteen launchers for IRBMs, likely to be ready in about five weeks . The Soviets seemed to fear that the Soviets would reduce the time required for launching an MRBM, and that they also were advancing quickly .
 The CIA was not sure whether nuclear warheads were in Cuba, but the administration assumed the worst . The CIA did not know if nuclear warheads had been found in Cuba .
 The ExComm minutes are scattered with demands that work on the missiles must soon stop . ExComm: "Work on the missile must stop soon" ExComm Minutes: "The ExComm must stop"
 Kennedy seemed to have a self-imposed deadline of roughly between Sunday, October 28, to about Tuesday, October 30 . As a result, plans involving a trade of the J.50 had to meet his timetable .
 Plans that seemed to involve lengthy negotiations would be unacceptable, unless they stipulated a way of getting the Soviets promptly to halt work on the sites . Those plans seem to be unacceptable .
 Harriman's plan may have had this liability, but two others-one from a special NSC committee and the other from Rostow-certainly did . Rostow's plan was approved by the U.S. Senate last week .
 On Friday, the special committee offered a proposal, forwarded by Rusk without comment to Kennedy, for a withdrawal of offensive weapons from Cuba . The proposal was forwarded without comment .
 Walt W Rostow, sketching a similar plan, believed that he had devised a way out of the crisis while maintaining all of the ""Free World assets"" and actually strengthening the NATO alliance . Rostow's plan was sketched by Walt Rostow in a similar way .
 McNamara admitted that some MRBMs were operational and probably had nuclear warheads . McNamara's statement was published in Washington Post in 1962 .
 Generally newspapers, including the Washington Post, disregarded this admission . The Washington Post ignored the admission .
 His paperback edition struggles to maintain much of the claim while squirming away from an admission that he failed to research his subject adequately and thus missed Bernstein's article .
 Rostow had long sought stronger NATO, establishment of MLF, and removal of dangerous weapons . Rostow: "It achieved goals he had long wanted-a stronger NATO"
 Analyst would like to know which ExComm members supported which proposals and what kind of informal dialogue ensued . Analyst: Ideally, the analyst would like know which proposals were supported .
 The special NSC committee's proposal went to Kennedy, Rostow's, and probably all the reports reached Bundy's desk . Kennedy's proposal was likely to go to Bundy, as was Rostow and Bundy's proposal .
 By Friday, judging from the contents of the various memorandums, there had been substantial informal dialogue . "By Friday, there were substantial informal talks," the president's spokesman said .
 Many advisers were looking for a road to a settlement, and the Jupiters constituted a possible one . Many advisers looked for a way to reach a settlement with the country's leaders .
 On Friday morning, the ExComm considered whether Kennedy should seek United Nations assistance in arranging negotiations with the Soviets while they halted construction on the missile sites . Stevenson suggested that the United States should suspend its quarantine .
 Stevenson predicted that the Russians would ask for a new guarantee of the territorial integrity of Cuba and the dismantlement of U.S. strategic missiles in Turkey . Stevenson was optimistic .
 He resented linking the missiles in Turkey with the Soviet missiles in Cuba . The Turkish president was angered by the link .
 The minutes of the minutes were recorded in Cuba . According to the minutes, he said, ""we will get the ... missiles out of Cuba only by invading or trading"
 Stevenson: Quarantine should be suspended during negotiations during negotiations . Kennedy: The quarantine should be lifted during negotiations, not during quarantines .
 The pressure must be maintained, they concluded, to help force a settlement . The pressure to maintain the pressure must also be maintained .
 The meeting did not return to the issue of the Jupiters at that meeting . Curiously, they did not discuss the issue again at the meeting .
 There was not even a hint that the United States must dismantle its Jupiters . The Soviets were asking for less than many American officials had anticipated and than some had proposed to grant .
 That Friday night, most ExComm members could find reason for satisfaction . "ExComm" was the first time they had been together since 1999 .
 The dangerous crisis would end with one American concession-the pledge not to invade Cuba . Only a few advisers, including McCone and some of the Joint Chiefs, were deeply unhappy that Castro would be safe from a U.S. attack .
 Some Soviet ships were approaching the quarantine line; the FBI reported that the Soviet delegation was destroying intelligence documents in likely preparation for war . A surface-to-air missile shot down a U-2 over Cuba; and the FBI said it was destroying documents .
 ExComm and other advisers had usually dwelled more on missiles in Turkey . Those in Turkey were closer to the Soviet Union and had provoked more Soviet ire in the past .
 There is considerable evidence on the attitudes of the German, French, British, Italian, and Canadian governments, and scattered evidence for belgium the Netherlands, Greece, Denmark, and Norway .
 A formal trade, especially a public one, would have unnerved some governments, particularly the German and British, and probably the Dutch . It would have confirmed the analysis of President Charles de Gaulle of France, delighted Canada, and pleased the Italian, Belgian, Greek, Danish, and
 Konrad Adenauer, the steadfast chancellor of West Germany, always feared that American concessions anywhere might betoken abandonment of Berlin . Adenauer would have opposed even a private trade .
 He had no real leverage and could not threaten to leave NATO or acknowledge its weaknesses . But he could not even acknowledge NATO's weaknesses or even acknowledge it .
 Adenauer and his party depended upon the United States and NATO for both military protection and political prestige . Unwilling to move toward rapprochement with the Soviet Union, Adenauer relied on NATO for military protection .
 Any trade would have eroded his trust in Kennedy, but it would not have altered Adenauer's policies on the larger issues - Berlin, East Germany, Warsaw Pact, and the Soviet Union .
 At home, he would have been compelled to defend himself and his party against charges that the U.S. would also sell out Berlin . True, at home, the United States would have to defend itself against charges of selling Berlin out .
 Adenauer could have distinguished between Berlin and the Jupiters, for he could have defined the 61 Hilsman, To Move A Nation, 220 .
 The Soviet message of October 27 mentioned the missiles in Britain and Italy but specified only those in Turkey as a requirement for a trade . The message was sent by the Soviet Union in the early 1950s .
 No one in the ExComm speculated on why the Soviets added the Jupiters in Turkey to the deal and not also those in Italy . So far as the available materials indicate, no one has speculated .
 Could the Soviets have desired both to raise the ante and to keep the ""price"" within what seemed acceptable limits? Perhaps Walter Lippmann's suggestion of a Turkey-Cuba missile trade was an oblique administration offer .
 de Gaulle could use the missile crisis to support his analysis . He was already moving toward French withdrawal from NATO on the grounds that the alliance meant American domination .
 America had acted independently, without consultation with allies, he said . America acted independently and without consultation, he noted .
 No likely action by Kennedy in the missile crisis could have blocked de Gaulle's ambitions for establishing France as an independent force . De Gaulle wanted to establish France as a French state .
 U.S. decisions during the missile crisis would not have been punctured by such decisions . That conception, so intimately related to his quest for national and personal grandeur, would not be punctured .
 French leader hinted that immaturity had led Kennedy and the U.S. to overreact . While technically supporting the president in the crisis, he technically supported the president . The aged French leader said that the United States had overreacted to Kennedy .
 Fretting that the quarantine might be inadequate, Macmillan wrote in his diary, Kennedy may ""'miss the bus'-he may never get rid of Cuban rockets except by trading them for Turkish, Italian, or other bases .
 By Friday, October 26, when the Soviets seemed to be seeking a way out of the crisis, Macmillan was conciliatory . By that time, the Soviets were looking for a way to escape the crisis .
 Kennedy found the suggestion attractive, wanted to mull it over, but feared that it might provoke the Soviets to insist on dismantlings in Turkey and Italy . Kennedy feared that the Soviets might insist on dismantling of the Soviet-held structures .
 Though Macmillan had proposed a temporary demobilization of his Thor missiles, he later claimed that he would not have agreed to the Soviet proposal on October 27 for their removal .
 Loyalty to the U.S. would have shaped the Conservative government's public statements, it has been claimed . Conservative government would have been more loyal to the United States .
 U.S. analysts concluded that Norway and Denmark would welcome a trade of the Jupiters to end the crisis .
 Scandanavian allies had steadfastly resisted the emplacement of any nuclear weapons on their soil . They were probably correct about these two Scandanaviian allies .
 When the Soviets made their public demand for including the Jupiters in a settlement, Norwegian officials endorsed removal of the weapons . The Soviets demanded that the weapons be removed from Norway .
 Italy's center-left coalition government reluctantly supported quarantine, tried to improve relations with the Soviets during the crisis . Italy also anxiously urged Kennedy to negotiate with Khrushchev .
 Premier Amintore Fanfani of the Christian Democrats wanted Kennedy to extend his deadline and probably favored the trade of Turkey's Jupiters . On October 27, an American attack on Cuba seemed imminent .
 The Italian Socialist party condemned the quarantine and probably welcomed the trade to end the crisis . Italy's Socialist party, upon which the uneasy government coalition depended, had condemned the quarantine .
 In Canada, Prime Minister John Diefenbaker, long unhappy about U.S. dominance, was publicly tactful but privately critical of the president's actions .
 Strategic Air Command bombers from the use of Canadian airfields during the . crisis .
 His devout hope was that war could be avoided, and he did not seem to fear that concessions-and certainly not on the Jupiters-would seriously weaken NATO alliance .
 For Labour and Liberal party responses, see Manchester Guardian, 25 October 1962, 2; Times . For Labour, Liberal and Labour party responses to the same question, see .
 For editorials suggesting a trade, see Times , 24, 26, and 28 October and Manchester Guardian, 23, 24, and '25 October 1962 .
 On British press opinion, also see Washington Post, 30 October 1962, A-8. Washington Post .
 The Norwegian officials approved the Soviet proposal only if removal of the Jupiters would not strategically impair NATO's defenses . The deal was approved by Norwegian officials .
 "The issue was psychological and political, not strategic. Probably they knew that this criterion was clearly met," he says . "Probably they knew" that this criteria was met .
 The bases were obsolete, the ambassador argued, and he did not seehow the Russians would withdraw their weapons unless the U.S. reciprocated . The bases are obsolete, he said .
 He apparently was not worried about the loss of prestige to the U.S. or the impact on NATO . He seemed to believe that these matters were less important than a settlement .
 Dutch officials privately opposed a trade on the grounds that it would undermine NATO morale . Unlike de Staercke, and presumably the Belgian government, Dutch officials opposed the deal .
 Greek officials, while publicly discreet, seemed to lean toward de Staercke's analysis . But Greek officials appeared to lean to de Staertke's view . Greek officials have not commented on the comments .
 When the Soviets demanded removal of the Jupiters, Greek officials privately indicated that this was an acceptable solution . Greek officials said this was acceptable to the Soviets .
 In some Latin American nations, despite their public statements supporting Kennedy, there was probably strong sentiment for a compromise involving the Jupiters, in either a public or private deal . In some of the world's most important Latin American countries, despite public statements, there may be strong sentiment
 The United States won unanimous support for the quarantine from the Organization of American States . But that unanimity was secured, in at least a few cases, by some deft coercion .
 The main item on the OAS agenda was United States economic aid . Washington first moved for a vote of support for the quarantine . The main issue on the agenda was economic aid to the United States .
 Even then, some governments-including Brazil, Mexico, Bolivia, and Uruguay-feared providing full support for Kennedy's actions . The State Department knew at the time that the State Department was aware of the situation .
 Also see Manchester Guardian, 24 October 1962, 15, and Times (London, 27 October 1962), 8.
 Declassified documents reveal almost no specific attention to these two alliances . Central Treaty Organization and the South East Asia Treaty Organization also considered .
 A trade, even a public one, for the Jupiters was attractive if an invasion was the alternative . A trade was attractive, even if the alternative was an invasion .
 The United States's complex alliance systems did rest partly upon faith in its credibility, but many governments also feared that efforts to affirm credibility could be rash and dangerous .
 The U.S. did not usually expect the United States to maintain blind allegiance, and, as the history of recent American foreign relations demonstrated, discretion, tempered force and the willingness to compromise were also essential to operating the far-flung alliances .
 The minutes for Saturday's three sessions reveal that the ExComm easily disposed of the first question and devoted agonizing attention to the second . The minutes show that Saturday's sessions were just three sessions .
 Some advisers wanted to arrange a way of pulling out the Jupiters without making a clear trade . Some advisers were trying to arrange to pull them out of the country without making clear trade deals .
 A trade would injure Turkey, NATO, and the United States, the authors say . A trade deal would injure NATO, Turkey, the U.S. and NATO, they say . Turkey and NATO are at odds over a deal .
 At various points, President Kennedy indicated that he did not want to yield to Soviet pressure . He would favor some cosmetic arrangement to get rid of the Jupiters in order to settle the crisis .
 At a few points, he seemed desperate and prepared to countenance a trade . At one point he seemed to be willing to accept a trade with the club .
 Work on Soviet missile sites in Cuba must soon stop, Kennedy periodically emphasized . The lingering implication was that an American attack on Cuba might otherwise become necessary in the next few days .
 Some ExComm members urged an attack-possibly first on the SAM sites and then on the MRBM and IRBM sites, to be followed by an invasion . At times in the Saturday meetings, some ExComm . members urge an attack on SAM sites .
 An anxious group of men, hardly more than a dozen, assessed actions that might lead to war or peace . The anxious group assesses actions in advance of war or war .
 The president ultimately had the constitutional and actual power of decision, CNN's John Sutter says . The president listened to their counsel and tried out his own notions, he says .
 The vigorous disputes over strategy left him reasonably free to choose. in the ExComm, he never faced a monolith, only shifting majorities . The vigorous debates over strategy in the . ExComm left him free to . choose .
 If he chose the route of concessions, he would risk antagonizing the military chiefs, who are not his natural allies . But if he chose to go the route, he risks antagonizing military chiefs . The U.S. military chiefs are not natural allies.
 He favored removing the weapons but did not want to appear to be yielding to a Soviet demand, lest he lose prestige and credibility, injure Turkey and NATO, and give the Soviets a public victory .
 The suggested trade of forty-two Soviet MRBMs (representing one-third of the entire Soviet strategic arsenal) for fifteen obsolete Jupiters was attractive on military grounds, Kennedy acknowledged .
 It would even be hard to get political support for such a position, he acknowledged . It would also be hard for political support, he said .
 Kennedy: "We could talk to the Russians. But if the work on the sites ceased, Kennedy noted, ""we could talk with the Russians"
 The White House statement was widely interpreted in the press as an outright rejection . But it was actually more subtle and elusive . The statement was more subtle .
 It left the door open for some future agreement on the Jupiters but never specifically mentioned them . The agreement was left open to some future agreements but never mentioned them.
 It sidestepped the Soviet demand, asserted that negotiations were impossible until work stopped on the missile sites and they were rendered inoperative . But mentioned the possibility of postsettlement discussions on arms limitation in Europe, and thus hinted at a willingness to consider removal of the Jupiters
 A small group met at the State Department to prepare the president's formal reply to Khrushchev . That afternoon, a small, weary group met to prepare President Nixon's reply .
 The president revised the draft to stress his offer to discuss, after the resolution of the crisis, the reduction of general tensions, a halt to the arms race, and a detente between NATO and the Warsaw Pact countries .
 This section was designed as an oblique way of offering to discuss withdrawal of the Jupiters later without specifying them and thus avoiding angering the Turks and appearing weak .
 ExComm members considered attacking Cuba, or convening a special NATO meeting, or outright rejecting the Turkey-Cuba missile trade, and even disarming the Jupiters .
 President Kennedy wavered between supporting a bid for peace and opting for a course toward war . President Kennedy called for NATO meeting on Sunday . Kennedy: "I want peace"
 The obvious liability was that the attack might kill 15,000-20,000 Soviets and thus compel the Soviets to retaliate-probably in Europe- probably in Europe . The attack might also kill 15-10,000 Soviet troops .
 As a majority in the ExComm seemed to be shifting to this plot, the president adjourned the meeting . The president ended the meeting after a majority shifted the focus away from this plot .
 At least a few lingered in the room to discuss the bizarre course of the meeting . At least one person lingered for a few minutes .
 The arguments of maintaining credibility, of keeping faith with NATO, of meeting obligations to Turkey did not seem to impress him . He said the arguments of keeping credibility with NATO and meeting obligations were not impressed .
 Accept the Soviet terms, he suggested, and replace the Jupiters with a Polaris sub . Accepting the terms, the Polaris sub would be replaced by a sub-sub .
 Kennedy activated twenty-four air reserve squadrons in preparation for the invasion and to frighten the Soviets . Kennedy activated the squadrons to scare the Soviets and prepare for invasion .
 Approval of a public trade would have enabled the administration to yield with dignity . Opposition would not have blocked a secret deal, opposition would have blocked secret deal .
 Adenauer loyally supported Kennedy, but de Gaulle refused to see the U.S. ambassador . Adenauer backed Kennedy, and the French president backed him .
 French leader, ever disdainful, would not modify his ways and thus reinforced, at least for himself, his sense of olympian superiority . Even with war near, French leader would not change his ways .
 Kennedy was still mulling over a trade deal with the U.S. with Europe . NATO delegates and the United States's chief European allies could not know that he was mulling a deal .
 Robert Kennedy's secret meeting with Soviet ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin, at 7:45 P.M.M., before the evening session of the ExComm. Robert Kennedy .
 Dobrynin was invited to a private meeting at the Justice Department by the president and secretary Rusk . The attorney general was acting on the president's instructions, he said .
 Robert Kennedy looked exhausted , 'rhe President is in a grave situation, and he does not know how to get out of it,' he said .
 Khrushchev makes the same claim (The Last Testament, 512) as does Anatoly Gromyko, who says the Caribbean crisis occurred .
 It allowed Khrushchev to present himself as a man of peace-a leader who had rescued Kennedy from bellicose generals and admirals-and thus to obscure his acquiescence in response to a virtual ultimatum .
 The deal could not help him save face internationally, since no one would know of the deal . Certainly, it could not . Certainly it could . help him . Save face internationally .
 Critics of the missile crisis stressed JFK's fears of an electoral backlash and also his own lust for combat and victory . Critics of JFK stressed his fears of electoral and bureaucratic backlash . JFK's fear of a backlash and desire to win was also stressed .
 A few of the memoirists, Robert Kennedy included, have asserted that the U.S. would soon have attacked Cuba . A few have said that the United States would soon be attacking Cuba .
 Turkish-Cuba missile deal delayed by one more day on accepting the deal . Decision to accept missile deal will be delayed by another day . Turkey and Cuba have a long-standing dispute over a missile deal .
 It might have denied him the appearance of victory and even confirmed that the Soviet deployment was analagous to the installation' of the missiles in Turkey .
 The hawks, especially in the Pentagon and CIA, would have been embittered. Certainly the hawks would have had to be embitters. But they would not have had a happy ending .
 The Republican party would have condemned him for ""selling out"" United States and NATO interests . The GOP would have criticized him for "selling out"
 His party might have suffered a sharp setback in the November congressional elections . President Barack Obama's party faces a sharp drop in congressional seats .
 That electoral defeat would have imperiled his foreign policy and further emboldened the hawks in the bureaucracy . That would have been a defeat for the president, he says .
 The United States's-and Kennedy's-international prestige and credibility would have been weakened, at least briefly, even though some NATO governments would have endorsed the settlement . The settlement would have weakened the U.S. and Kennedy's credibility .
 Kennedy could have blunted some of the criticism at home and abroad by encouraging European allies to support the trade publicly .
 President Obama might have called upon Latin American powers for similar assistance . He might have asked for help from Latin America .
 The act would not have violated the agreement with Khrushchev, but it might have punctured charges that Kennedy had made a great concession . Kennedy's act would have been a breach of the agreement, not violating the agreement .
 Foreign Service Journal 56 :8-12. Bombers, Inspection, and the No Invasion Pledge . "Foreign Service Journal" is published by the Foreign Service .
 In 1963, McNamara told the House Appropriations Committee, ""without any qualifications whatsoever there was absolutely no deal" between the Soviet Union and the United States regarding the removal of the Jupiter weapons from either Italy or Turkey" (U.S., Department of Defense, Appropriations for 1964, Appropriations