 Its purpose is to review the evidence concerning the nature, scope, and timing of the Soviet military buildup in Cuba in 1962 . It is to discuss the implications of that evidence .
 The USSR judged that the major features of the Cuban venture were the result of deliberate, rational Soviet decisions that took into account the detailed knowledge of U.S. reconnaissance capabilities acquired by the USSR .
 It is believed the conclusions represent the most likely interpretation in view of the totality and interrelationship of the evidence available more than a year after the crisis .
 The quality of the evidence ranges from conclusive to ambiguous . Because of the quality of evidence, the study attempts to indicate the degree of certainty surrounding the information and the judgments based on it .
 The time period covered begins in early I960 and ends in November 1962 with the withdrawal of Soviet offensive weapons from Cuba . The period covers the period from I960 to 1962 .
 The study was prepared by the Office of Scientific Intelligence and the National Photographic Interpretation Center . Valuable assistance was provided in the preparation of the study . The study will be published in the U.S. Library of American History .
 The study also discusses Soviet objectives, the timing of the decision, the Soviet estimate of risk, the course of the buildup, and the reasons for retreat .
 Research Staff study examines the buildup within the broader context of a survey of Soviet foreign policy, placing primary emphasis on political factors . Study considers probable reasons why the USSR estimated that the Cuban venture would involve only a low degree of risk .
 In those areas where the studies overlap, they reach similar conclusions . The studies are done in those areas of overlap .
 Where the studies do not overlap, one study provides additional background for the reader of the other . The studies are published in the United States and Canada .
 Soviet Merchan/Shipping Air Defense Systems ' A Early Warning and Target Acquisition Radar Capability 1. C Soviet Merch/ shipping Air Defense System ' A. Early Warning . Warning and target acquisition Radar Capabilities 1. A. C. C . A. Warning and . Target Acquisition
 Evidence on the Detection and Tracking of U.S. Reconnaissance Overflights During 1962 . 27 B Surface -to-Air Missile System . 28 1 missile systems .
 Location and Timing of Offloading of SAM Units and Associated Equipment . . , '31 3.3.5.6.5 . '31.3 .
 Timing of Establishment of Individual Sites and Support Facilities 3 3 5. 5. Timing for Establishment of individual Sites and Facilities 3. 3. 5 . Timing is the same as that of other sites and facilities .
 Development of the SA-2 System Capability 37 C Fighter Aircraft 37 C Fighters Aircraft 38 Naval and Ground Systems 41 A Coastal Defense Missile Systems 41 1 .
 A Soviet View of the Risks B The Decision 58 60 64 65 66 69 71 73 74 76 77 78 83 83 Probable Soviet pbjectives The Withdrawal 91 92 1. A Soviet view of the risks is a Soviet view .
 Some forces were combat-ready during the critical week in October before Khrushchev announced the Soviet decision to draw back from direct military confrontation with the US . The original Soviet timetable apparently did not call for the completion of many of the major elements of the military establishment in Cuba until some time
 The concept and execution of the venture clearly indicate that the Soviet authorities made no appreciable effort to orevent or delay U.S. detection by aerial reconnaissance of the oitensive weapons during the deployment phase .
 It is believed that tne most likely explanation is that they judged the risk of a U.S. military reaction to the situation to be very slight .
 The chain of events that culminated in the Cuban crisis of October 1962 can be traced back to the visit of Soviet Deputy Premier Vikoyan to Cuba .
 This visit constituted the first public endorsement of the Cuban revolution, after a year oi Soviet -eserve following Castro's seizure of power and Soviet diplomatic recognition .
 In the third quarter of I960, the first Soviet deliveries of land armaments were made . It was followed by a series of economic assistance agreements with the Soviet Union . The first Soviet land armament deliveries were made in I960 .
 Soviet military aid to Cuba proceeded cautiously and deliberately, particularly when compared with assistance to other countries . Soviet leaders were carefully testing both U.S. reactions and their relations with the Castro regime .
 Deliveries of fighter aircraft to Cuoa, . probably punned before *• ^""""""^^J""^ - about June 1961 .
 SAM units and other air defense elements were not planned to become operational as a system for at least a month and a half after the presence of MRBM's in Cuba rendered Soviet intentions subject to detection .
 SAM deployment indicates that maximum protection of the strategic missile sites was not the governing consideration . In addition, the geographical pattern of SAM deployment suggests that the deployment of SAM was not considered a consideration .
 SAM deployment pattern was planned to provide an islandwide area defense, affording no greater protection to strategic missile sites and other military installations than to all other locations on the island .
 The precise degree of combat readiness of the 24 MRBM launch positions in Cuba at the time of the crisis cannot be determined from available evidence, even in retrospect .
 The principal uncertainty concerns the presence or absence of nuclear warheads . Evidence on this aspect of the buildup is so ambiguous and inconclusive that it is not poss\ble to reach a judgment based on factual information .
 The Soviet program for the MRBM units was not complete by the time of the crisis . It is clear, however, that the Soviet program was not finished by the end of the Soviet era .
 These units were originally deployed in a field mode, following which work was begun on the preparation of more permanent facilities . These units are currently deployed in field mode .
 This work was not completed at any of the sites by the time dismantling began but probably would have been completed by about mid-November . This work would have completed at the time of the dismantling began .
 Some sites may not have been fully equipped when the crisis occurred . Similarly, some of the sites may have been completely unprepared .
 If nuclear warheads were available, these shortcomings probably would not have prevented the launching of some missiles from all six sites during the critical week in October . But it might have affected significantly the time to launch a salvo, as well as its effectiveness .
 There is conclusive evidence that construction of IRBM sites had not been completed . The missiles were almost certainly likely hen the United States quarantine was imposed .
 The 42 U-28 jet light bombers and trainers delivered to Cuba beginning in late September were almost certainly not considered by the Soviet planners as an integral part of their offensive capability in Cuba . They were intended for the Cuban forces .
 Soviet authorities were fully aware of U.S. photoreconnaissance capabilities by May I960 and may have been aware of United States overflights of Cuba by mid-1962 . They made no effort in planning and executing the Cuban venture .
 This is evidenced not only by their concurrent deployment of offensive and defensive systems, but also by their failure to camouflage or conceal unique MRBM system equipment, particularly the missiles themselves, before the crisis .
 The measures taken after the crisis began probably were a reaction to the initiation of lowaltitude reconnaissance . The measures were probably taken in response to reconnaissance by the CIA .
 There was no apparent effort to minimize the length of time during which some MRBM units were detectable before all of the units were emplaced, equipped, and combat-ready .
 There would have been a period of about 2 months between arrival in about mid-September of the first MRBM's and the estimated completion in mid-November of the full MRBM deployment program .
 The conclusion seems inescapable that the Soviet leaders in their planning did not regard the possibility of U.S. detection as critical to the success or failure of the Cuban venture .
 Unless the Soviet authorities were convinced that no measures could be taken to delay or prevent United States detection, as seems unlikely, they must have chosen to disregard U.S. reconnaissance capabilities . The Soviet authorities must have decided to disregard United States capabilities .
 The U.S. would acquiesce in the deployment of strategic missiles in Cuba or would not attempt to force their removal by reacting militarily . Thus they probably judged with considerable assurance that the United States would not try to force its removal .
 President Kennedy warned the USSR of the grave consequences if the U.S. detected offensive weapons in Cuba . Deployment of strategic missiles proceeded unscreened by an activated SAM system .
 There is some evidence that planning and -tial preparations occurred in the USSR and Cuba during the first quarter oM^ unlikely, however, that the final commitment was made un til April or May . probably after Moscow had assessed and acquiesced in the assertion of authority over the Cuban Communist
 Soviet leaders probably have come to Tgardthem as a £%^ but not major phenomenon of great power r elations . Khrushchev may have felt confident that the United States would ""de-"" and 'the r""« s he did that .
 Kh-ushchev probably had a greater objective in sight than simply simply ruixusncnev wi / o uf cf«.rr, Hem snhere.rr .
 HirpW the SO.V. would have increased Soviet missile strike capabilities against the United States by more than 50 percent at the end of 1962 .
 It is possible, therefore, that had the Cuban venture been successful, it would have been followed shortly by some further Soviet initiative to achieve a dramatic victory elsewhere for a long-standing policy objective, such as Berlin . Berlin .
 The evidence was compiled by examining information compiled on an all-source basis that related to the deployment of Soviet forces in Cuba . The evidence presented in this study was developed .
 Major part of the evidence consists of aerial photography of Cuba obtained by overhead and peripheral reconnaissance and by surface photography of Soviet shipping en route to Cuba .
 Photographs are considered conclusive within the limits of coverage and the art of photographic interpretation . Within the limits and art of photography such evidence is regarded as conclusive .
 Although information obtained from agents, refugees, and diplomats appeared initially to constitute a major source of evidence,* it was frequently proved to be unreliable . It was particularly important to establish the validititability of the documents .
 Almost all cases could not be evaluated with confidence unless information was available from other types of sources against which it could be checked . As a result, in almost all cases, the information was not immediately available with confidence . It was difficult to evaluate with confidence without other sources to check .
 More than ZOO reports contain references to the presence in Cuba of missiles before January 1962 . For example, more than 50% of the reports contain reference to missiles in Cuba .
 Numerous reports also contain references to construction activity and equipment observed during the spring of 1962 in areas where SAM sites were later located . SAM sites later were located later .
 Photography of these areas obtained during or after the reported period of observation failed to reveal any such activity or equipment .
 Reports originating from diplomatic sources in 'Cuba were relatively sparse before the crisis; thus they did not contribute significantly to the body of -evidence used in this study .
 The vast body of collateral reporting provided some unique and valuable information that could not otherwise have been obtained . Nevertheless, in spite of these limitations, the vast body-of-collaboration reporting provided valuable information .
 Before the creation of their military establishment in Cuba in the latter half of 1962, the Soviet leaders extended military aid to Castro cautiously and gradually, remaining well within the limits . Referred to in this study as collateral information. Referred to by the author as collateral .
 The USSR did not give Castro some of the more modern weapons, such as the SA-2 system . The USSR contracted to supply to Indonesia, Iraq, and Egypt during this period .
 The Bloc account for about 80 percent of Cuban foreign trade by mid-1962 . Although there was a steady rise in the amount of credit available to Cuba, there was no comparable pattern of growth in military shipments .
 Even in retrospect the military assistance provided by the USSR and other members of the Bloc from mid-1960 to eariy 1962 does not contain indications of any objective beyond improving the ability of the Castro regime to defend itself from an invasion or internal uprising .
 Soviet military assistance to Castro, when compared with that provided to other revolutionary governments, indicates that Soviet leaders initially were somewhat reluctant to extend similar aid to Cuba .
 The first Soviet-Cuban military assistance agreement was reached some time between Mikoyan's visit to Cuba in February I960 and Raul Castro's return visit to the USSR in the summer of I960 . The agreement on aid to Iraq was concluded 4 months after the revolution that put
 MIG aircraft and freauently naval vessels had been among the first items delivered to other recipients . Castro did not receive aircraft until the second quarter of 1961 . The first naval vessels did not arrive until January 1962 .
 As far as can't be determined, the equipment delivered before mid-1962 was limited to items useful primarily for defensive purposes .
 The equipment was composed of the more obsolescent items in the Bloc inventory . Furthermore, the equipment was made of some of the most obsolescent things .
 The total value of the arms supplied to Cuba before mid;962 is estimated at roughly $100 million . Cuba is below only Indonesia, Iraq, and Egypt as a major recipient of Soviet military aid .
 Cuba's efforts to purchase military goods in the West became increasingly difficult in 1959 and early I960 . The Cubans began to make military contacts with Bloc countries, mainly Czechoslovakia, in 1959 .
 Mikoyan's visit to Cuba in February I960 appears to have been an important milestone in the relationship . The visit was when the USSR finally abandoned its reserved attitude toward the Cuban revolution and publicly endorsed the Castro regime .
 Sergeychik, Deputy Chief of the Engineering Directorate of the State Committee for Foreign Economic Relations, has been associated with other typical Soviet arms agreements with underdeveloped countries . He was associated with the Soviet arms agreement .
 When Raul Castro visited the USSR in the summer of I960, the first shipments of Soviet arms probably were being readied . The first shipments were probably being prepared for the Castro visit .
 There is no information available on the details of the arms agreement ■ or even the approximate da>te on which it was signed .
 The first major shipment of Bloc arms to Cuba arrived on 8 September I960 aboard the Soviet freighter Ilya Mechnikov . The cargo reportedly included T-34 tanks, antiaircraft artillery, machineguns, ammunition, electronic equipment, and other military materiel .
 What effect, if any, the Bay of Pigs invasion in April 1961 had on Soviet arms shipments is conjectural . It is conjecture as to whether the invasion had any effect .
 The first of a total of more than 60 MIG-15 and 17 aircraft apparently arrived at the end of May . All of the aircraft were delivered by mid-June .
 Cuban pilots apparently were training in Czechoslovakia in the third quarter of I960 . It is possible that delivery of these aircraft was expedited in response to argent Cuban appeals engendered by the invasion .
 No corresponding increase in shipments of other kinds of equipment was observed . No additional shipments of military equipment were detected until December 1961 .
 Bloc military assistance to Cuba in the second half of 1961 seems to have been focused on assimilation of new equipment, training, and completion of reorganization of Cuba's military establishment along Soviet lines .
 Arms shipments resumed at the very end of 1961, and the first naval Vessels appeared early in 1962 . Arms shipments were resumed in 1961 and arms shipments resumed in 1962. Arms shipments began at the end of 1962 .
 collateral reports indicate that these shipments were confined to tanks, artillery, trucks, and other land armaments, with the exception of 12 torpedo boats and 6 Kronshtadt class subchasers that were delivered in 1962 .
 During the period of arms delivery, Cuban personnel were being trained in the Bloc and by a military training mission (principally Soviet\and Czechoslovak) sent to Cuba .
 By mid-1962, Soviet Bloc military aid had turned the Cuban military establishment into one of the strongest in Latin America . The Cuban military became one of Latin America's strongest in the region .
 Ground forces had acquired armored, artillery, antiaircraft, and antitank capabilities on a scale unprecedented in the Caribbean area . The ground forces had also acquired armored and anti-aircraft capabilities .
 The Cuban air force was otill a very limited organization, but even its small number of older Soviet jet fighters represented a vast improvement over previous capabilities . The Cuban Air Force was a Soviet-era air force .
 Soviet authorities had not provided some of the more modern weapons being supplied to other underdeveloped countries . The aid was limited to improving the Castro regime's ability to maintain internal order and defend itself against an invasion .
 Bloc opened at least $357 million in credit for Cuban basic economic development . Cuba had actually used only about 10 percent of these credits .
 By the time the Soviet military buildup began in mid-1962, the 31oc had come to account for about 80 percent of Cuban foreign trade . The 31oc accounts for about 60 percent of the Cuban economy .
 Bloc countries generally paid a premium price for Cuban sugar, and Cuba was permitted to run substantial trade deficits . Cuba was allowed to run a substantial trade deficit with the Bloc .
 Prices set on Cuban exports to the 31oc indicate a slight advantage for Cuba compared with world market prices for comparable items . Cuban imports of fuel, food, and raw and semifinished materials comprised more than 60 percent of imports from the Bloc .
 Information on the terms under which military aid was supplied is sketchy . The terms of the aid are sketchy.
 During the period from the end of July through October 1962, the Soviet authorities deployed a number of weapons systems and associated personnel to Cuba . This constituted a small but complete Soviet military establishment .
 This section examines the evidence on general activities not related to specific weapons systems . This section provides a framework for the subsequent assessment of the detailed information on the deployment of specific weapon systems .
 It covers evidence of preparatory activities before weapons and Soviet troops arrived in Cuba . It covers the establishment of the command, control, and communications structure; and the flow of Soviet shipping .
 Collateral reporting contains many references to the sighting, during the first half of 1962, of construction equipment, assorted vehicles, and Soviet personnel in the general locations where various Soviet military units were later identified .
 In several cases the reported locations corresponded closely to the actual locations of some of the world's largest landmarks .
 Later photography fails to contain evidence of visible activity in the areas mentioned until at least August . This invalidates reports that Soviet forces were present in significant quantities before the end of July .
 There is a strong possibility, however, that this reporting reflected an influx into Cuba, beginning in early 1962, of Soviet personnel who were somehow associated with the military buildup . ISoviet personnel first began to appear in un~u~sual numbers during February-March 1962 .
 The Torrens area may have become a sensitive zone in June . Raul Castro visited the reformatory in June, followed by an influx of Soviet personnel .
 A similar progression of events is suggested also by reports concerning the port of Banes . The port is believed to have been located in Banes.
 Families allegedly evacuated from the immediate port area in January 1962 . Twenty or 30 families allegedly were evacuated . The incident occurred in the immediate area of the port .
 Other reports indicate that the entire port area was evacuated sometime during the period between March and early July 1962 . Soviet personnel arrived almost immediately thereafter, and that large numbers of Soviet personnel moved in during the last week in August .
 Officials in the city of Matanzas were advised in June that in the event of an attack by the United States the USSR would come to the assistance of Cuba within a 7-day period . Also in June a briefing took place at which officials .
 It appears that the number of Soviet personnel in Cuba probably did begin to increase early in 1962 . Their presence in any location could have generated the reports of activity observed during the January-July period .
 The influx of Soviet personnel at this time probably had some bearing on the later military buildup . It may well have involved activity related to the planning and preparation required before the actual deployment of Soviet forces on the island .
 There is evidence regarding Soviet surveying activities in Cuba, but it does not provide any indication of activity that can be directly associated with the selection and preparation of the offensive missile sites . There is no indication that Soviet activity was directly associated .
 It seems clear, however, that the Soviet problem of locating the sites geodetically was simplified considerably by the availability of earlier geophysical materials on Cuba .
 Soviet aid program in Cuba included an intensive resource exploration survey . As in the case of Sovet economic aid programs to other underdeveloped countries, the Soviet aid was part of a resource survey .
 Geological and geophysical survey activities necessarily include the utilization of large-scale topographic maps and associated triangulation control points, where available, or the undertaking of operations when they are lacking .
 The basic materials would have been directly applicable to the geodetic positioning of the Cuban missile sites . These basic materials were used to map the missile sites in Cuba .
 The island of Cuba previously had been geodetically tied to the United States mainland by the Inter-American Geodetic Survey, ■ . The survey is operated under the auspices of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers .
 During 1956-57 a system of horizontal and'vertical control points for topographical mapping purposes had been established . A complete aerial photographic study of the island was accomplished by a highly competent, private United States contractor . pllateral sources have identified a Soviet geophysTcaTTear
 Some members of this team appear to have been geodesists . Their function was to extend triangula'tion control points as required for their intensified survey program .
 The Soviet geologists have taken. all of the information which all companies both mining and oil had in their files and put it all together. That the Soviet personnel. had taken. All of the data which all . companies both . mining and . oil had been put together and put together
 It would not be possible to distinguish between activity related specifically to the establishment of the sites and activity associated with the more general survey .
 In general, the appearance of Soviet surveying groups at any given point or time in Cuba cannot be considered evidence of a Soviet intention subsequently to deploy missiles . In Cuba, the presence of Soviet surveyors is not considered a sign of Soviet intent to launch missiles .
 The Soviet geophysical team had been in Cuba at least 9 months before missile deployment . It must be assumed that virtually all of the basic data required to locate the missile sites geodetically had been acquired before the missiles were deployed .
 The time necessary to tie in an individual site to established geographic control points would have varied from a few hours to a maximum of 1 week . This final preparation could have occurred after the site area'was initially occupied .
 The pattern of Soviet merchant shipping to Cuba provides a measure of the magnitude and intensity of the Soviet military buildup . 6hows the abruptness with which it began .
 A key role in the flow of Soviet arms to Cuba was played by a group of large-hatch ships, which were the only Soviet-flag vessels capable of loading assembled strategic missiles below decks .
 Knowledge of %both the volume and to Cuba is based on a variety of sources .
 Sixteen other Soviet dry cargo ships turned back to the USSR after the quarantine was announced .
 In comparison, there was no significant variation in the pattern of petroleum, oil, and lubricant shipments . No significant variations in the patterns of petroleum shipments .
 The Cuban buildup required alarge relative increase in Soviet shipping allocated to the Cuban trade . The diversion of this shippir probably was not a serious problem in view of the size of the Soviet merchant fleet and the availability of shipping in the world charter market .
 The USSR employed all seven vessels capable of transporting MRBM' s as hold cargo . By the time of the U.S. quarantine the USSR had employed in the Cuban trade all seven of its vessels that were able to transport MRBM .
 Two of these vessels had made voyages to Cuba before the military buildup began in July . The other five all made their maiden voyages during the period of the buildup .
 As far as can't be determined, the contracts for these ships were awarded in a normal fashion, and there was no evident haste in either the contractual negotiations or the conditions set for their delivery .
 The Japanese contract, for example, was negotiated from September to December I960 . The lead-ship was completed in December 1961 .
 In addition to the three ships already built, the Soviet authorities have placed orders with Japanese builders for five additional ships of the same general type as the initial three . The Soviet authorities also have orders for five more ships .
 The Finnish contract is part of a 5-yearxtrade agreement with specific deliveries negotiated annually . The deal will run for five years .
 There is no information which indicates that any of these large-hatch ships underwent extraordinary modification of original designs while being built . There was no sense of urgency noted in the later stages of their construction .
 The timing of the contracts and the fact that large hatches are fairly common design features of large and modern ships currently being built in shipyards throughout the world . The absence of any special circumstances involved in the construction of these ships for the USSR, clearly indicate that they were not built for
 The task of clandestinely introducing weapons onto the island probably could not have been carried out before these vessels became available .
 Soviet military buildup in Cuba was concurrency in bringing both defensive and offensive systems to operational status . Soviet lack of concern for acquiring the capability to protect offensive weapons systems against aerial detection or attack during deployment phase .
 For a detailed examination of the activities of these vessels, see V, P50, below . This section reviews the evidence relating to the individual elements of the integrated vessels .
 These elements are the early warning and target acquisition radar systems and their supporting communications network, the SAM system, and the force of fighter aircraft . These elements include early warning radar systems, SAM systems, and fighter aircraft.
 The missiles were not integrated into an operating air defense system until 27 October, the day before the Soviet authorities announced their decision to withdraw the offensive missiles from Cuba .
 The steady expansion of the air defense system for some time thereafter indicates that its activation at that time probably was earlier than the Soviet authorities had planned . It is believed that the system was activated earlier than planned .
 USSR had been assisting Cuba in building an air defense capability, including early warning and target acquisition radars . The USSR was assisting Cuba with early warning radars and early acquisition radar systems .
 The fire con""tro^da'rfgenerally were sited with antiaircraft artillery units along the northern coast of Cuba between Mariel and Caibarien, with the heaviest concentration around Havana .
 There were numerous opportunities for identification of these flights before mid-1962, and the Cubans may well have been aware that their territory was being overflown by July 1962 . The geographical placement of SA-2 sites and support facilities in Cuba through the time when the strategic missiles were withdrawn
 The Soviet authorities had no intention of employing the SAM system to prevent detection of strategic missile sites under construction . They had not planned to activate this system until some time in November .
 SAM sites could not have been individually activated or the group on the western half of the island activated by mid-September to screen the developing MRBM/IR3M sites from aerial reconnaissance . There was, nevertheless, no apparent reason why SAM sites were not individually activated .
 Almost all SA-2 sites were ernpiaced and equipped and could have been integrated into a fully developed SAM defense system by 14 October . The first reconnaissance aircraft photographed an MRBM site under develooment .
 SAM complex defending Cuba consisted of 24 SA-2 sites that at the time of the crisis provided coverage of virtually the entire island . The SAM complex defended Cuba in the 1960s consisted of a total of 24 SAM sites .
 The individual SA-2 sites were integrated into an island-wide SAM defense system by a network of communication facilities linking the sites, the early warning radar network, and the command and control centers . The individual SAM sites are integrated into a system by linking them with early warning radars and
 SA-Z sites were deployed in a slightly modified configuration in Cuba . The accompanying sketch and photograph portray the typical, fully developed SA-z sites constructed in Cuba. Although a few of the Cuban sites were . were deployed .
 Site contains six revetted launch positions deployed in a star-shaped configuration around a revetted, centrally located guidance area .
 The cables connecting the necessary equipment were laid on top of the ground . The site thereafter became operational as soon as missiles were present, the site became operational .
 H after the unit ^re B, More'tnan'naU of the original SA-2 sites were never revetted . H after . H . of the . original SA .2 sites . were never . revetted. H .
 An individual site that is not tied into an over-all command and has limited capability for independent action can be used to take action . The site is not only an individual site, whether minimally or minimally, can take action at any site that has a limited capability .
 The SAM control system radar performs both a tracking and missile guidance function against a single target . The radar can be used to track and guide missiles to a single missile target .
 The FAN SONG is believed to be capable of tricking a target at ranges up to 64 nm . Each launch position contains a single launcher and missile, and each hold position contains two missile transporters, each carrying a single missile .
 In all, there are 12 missiles at each site, 6 on launcher and 6 in reserve . The missiles will be placed on launchers and in reserve at each of the sites .
 Typically the van-mounted target acquisition radar, with associated IFF equipment, is located outside the circle of launch positions but within the site area, which is surrounded by a security fence .
 It also is connected by cabling with the necessary power and electronics equipment in the central guidance area . The guidance area is connected to the main power and electronic equipment .
 A communications van is located outside the security fence and provides the necessary command link bet-ween the site and control elements at higher echelons . The van provides a command link to the site .
 A number of general-purpose vehicles and other auxiliary equipment also are required to support a site . A large amount of equipment is needed to support the site, including vehicles and equipment .
 Reaction time becomes increasingly less critical and probably is not a controlling factor in successful target intercept . Reaction time is also less critical in successful intercepts .
 The ability of an individual SA-2 site to launch missiles successfully against it is dependent primarily on the ability of the radar components to provide accurate position data . Because the U-2 is not a high-speed aircraft, the ability . is therefore dependent on the accuracy of the radars
 Location and Timing of Offloading of SAM Units and Associated Equipment determine the precise times an^rtsatwhichSA2 missiles, associated equipment, and unit personnel arrived in Cuba . Location and timing of offload of SAM units and associated equipment will determine the exact times they arrived in
 First evidence of SAM deployment was obtained from aerial photography of 5 August of vehicles at locations in western Cuba later identified as the Santa Lucia and Matanzas SAM sites and the Pinar del Rio SAM support facility .
 SAM equipment must have begun flowing into Cuba from the very beginning of the Soviet buildup . SAM equipment, therefore, must have been flowing into the country from the beginning of its Soviet buildup. SAM equipment is believed to have been used in Cuba's SAM operations .
 Parts of a number of ports in western Cuba were restricted at various times during the month of August while Soviet ships were offloading .
 SAM equipment moved through some of these ports during August . SAM equipment is believed to have been used by the U.S. Navy .
 Some offloadings occurred at night, and all offloading of equipment was done by Soviet personnel . According to these reports, some of the equipment was unloaded at night .
 The dates and ports of arrival of SA-2 missiles and related equipment cannot be specified . Unit equipment other than the missiles probably moved directly from the ports to the site areas .
 A number of informants have reported the offloading and movement of equipment from Matanzas SA-2 site a day or two before 5 August . Vehicles first appeared at the site on aerial photography .
 This Procedure is consistent with known Soviet practice in the USSR and East Germany . This Procedure was known as 'Operation Procedure' in the Soviet Union .
 A miss le is the positive identification of one or more missiles on Lecher assuming'that all other necessary equipment is present and properly emplaced . The Problem of Operational Status site has r^ed^TJonTs. 1 ^^ a miss le .
 P * numbers of identifiable launchers and mis^Wl^Z M^X S could not be specifically identified . SA-2 support facilities were being established in Cuba and re^elv'nLmssles concurrently with the deployment of SA-1 units .
 Because it is not possible to determine the precise timing because it *hence their initial 'f T^icj^ilf. deliveries to the individual £>A-£ suet .
 8 emplacement of all gra phic coverage indicates ^«««^ ^tion7a. indicated, of ^""h I^iKi later t£n the ""unit emplacemissiles. he actual up u^ ^tWn a week
 Unit emplacement, therefore, could have ■ Tccued at anytime between the negation date and the time the . first observed and cannot be fixed more precisely . Unit emplaced at anytime during the negating date and time the. first observed .
 Eleven and possibly 12 units were emplaced on u if ^ mha. between 5 August and 5 September . Of the 20 such cases oX 3 Z gaps in coverage of 10 or fewer days, the remaining 17 had gaps of 23 to 61 days .
 SAM support facilities on tLrne P hasin g is even £.. complete than it is on the sites . Most of them probably ^^n^ ^^^ efore this time, but they cannot .
 The Pinar del Rio support facility was operational on 29 August . It is located in the area of the Pinar . Rio support .
 Cifuentes, was observed to be operational on 29 August . In addition, a ^\^lZ "" Cifueentes was observed .
 On the eastern half of the island, two support facilities, at r■ A~ r,,h* and Victoria de las Tunas, also could have been fun .
 The major gaps occurred in areas that are sparsely populated -and contained few targets of strategic interest to either the Soviet authorities or the Cubans . The coverage along the southern coast was much less complete .
 Havana, Cuba's capital city, was defended by only one SAM site, even though capital cities throughout the Bloc are ringed by as many as six individual sites . Havana, the capital city and presumably one of the areas of greatest defense interest to the Cubans, is defended by
 The pattern of deployment as related to the Soviet military presence on the island was revealed . Even more revealing, the pattern of deployments was patterned in the Soviet presence .
 On the western half of the island, two and perhaps three of the San Cristobal MRBM sites were covered by only a single SAM site, at Bahia Honda . Only one of the sites had as much as double overlapping SAM coverage, and probably only one had as little as double
 All four of these MRBM sites appear to have been extremely vulnerable to approaches from off the southern coast . All four appear to be at risk of being hit by a storm off the coast .
 The same is true for the two Guanajay IRBM sites, only one of which appears to have had double overlapping coverage . Both sites appear to be extremely vulnerable to approaches from the south .
 The area of the two MRBM sites at Sagua la Grande and the IRBM site at Remedios were each covered by only a single SAM site . Farther east the area was covered by the area of only one SAM site. The area was also covered by a single
 The four Soviet armored groups, at Artemisa, Santiago de las Vegas, Remedios, and Holguin, also were poorly defended . Each SAM site was only one SAM site, and each had a SAM site .
 In the Santa Clara area, where initially all the MIG-21's were deployed, no specific missile defense was provided . The Santa Clara, California, area was the site of the first missile defense deployment .
 The same is true for the important transport junction and the Eastern Military Headquarters site at Camaguey . It is the same as the important Transport junction and military Headquarters site .
 Point defense leaves open for all important Soviet military installations, including triple overlaps of some . Alth ough this t ype o f point defense leaves . open for any important military installations .
 By early 1963 the Soviet authorities had made five principal redeployments of SAM sites . SAM sites had been redeployed in the Soviet Union in the early months of 1963 .
 The significance of the fifth relocation is not entirely clear . The movement of the Cabanas site about 10 miles inland to he nor h-st to Maldonado, is unknown .
 This shxftxnay have been occasioned by the earlier proximity of the site to Guantanamo . It may have been intended to provide better coverage of the eastern approach to Cuba .
 Toyments definitely established a point defense of critical military and civilian targets . Nevertheless there i ■ n evidence that these sites were activated individual y or integrated ""to a partial or fully developed air defense system -UU day or ^ before the Soviet decision to remove strategic missiles from Cuba ' was made
 There is no apparent reason why the SAM defense system could not have been brought into operation at a much earlier date had the Soviet authorities so chosen . The SAM system was brought in by Soviet authorities in the 1960s .
 Each of the SAM sites has its own communications equipment, and a variety of Cuban communications, particularly the ROCMI network, would have been available to the Soviet authorities at any time before their own communications facilities became operational .
 The first general S^M-associated radar activity did not occur until 26 October, and an mte. grated air defense command communications system did not appear until 27 October .
 It is concluded that the Soviet authorities did not intend to activate SAM sites as quickly as possible either on an individual basis or in any grouping as they apparently could have done in western Cuba by early September .
 The SAM program was evidently planned and programed to activate all sites more or less simultaneously, along with the other elements of a complete air defense system that would encompass the entire island, at some time in November .
 It appears that the Soviet leaders had no intention of employing the SAM system in Cuba against U.S. reconnaissance aircraft .
 West-to-east phasing of SAM site emplacement probably was not directly related to MRBM/IRBM site construction in western Cuba . The fact that the air defense system was not activated by the time the MRBM sues had achieved some degree of combat readiness .
 The deck cargo of two Soviet ships approaching Cuba on ing MIG-21 crates was known to be nearing Cuba . Two Soviet ships were known to have been carrying cargo on the deck cargo .
 The first assembl where they were gathered was the first assembly . The first assembly was held at the base of the island . The aircraft were mained through th ej^t^ct^er^D eployrnent .
 AMfC-21 aircraft was photogrfph.d taking off from Santa Clara Airfield in October 1962 .
 Four Soviet cruise missile units were debarked in Cuba as part of the first wave of the Soviet military buildup .
 Three were immediately deployed to coastal areas, where two probably will be operational by midAugust and the third by early September . Two of the three are expected to be operational in midAugust .
 Three permanently sited units and the temporary deployment of the fourth provided coverage of the seaward approaches to many of the Cuban beaches most suitable for large amphibious landings . The early deployment of . the three permanently . sited . units and . temporary deployment . of the . fourth provided
 The configuration of the site remains unchanged regardless of the degree of site refinement . The configuration remains unchanged . Site will be used as a tourist attraction .
 Based on assessment of radar capability of the system, a probable range of 30 to 35 nm has been estimated . Based on an assessment of the radar capability, the system's range of range is estimated to be around 35 nm .
 The range to which a given site can fire using its organic radar is a function of the altitude of the site and the height of the target . The range of the sites in Cuba can fire effectively is estimated to be from 23 to 32 nm .
 There is no direct evidence concerning the arrival of the first cruise missile units in Cuba . No direct evidence about the arrival .
 The units and their associated equipment had arrived only recently, probably on or about 1 August 1962 . Because these sites were not yet operational on 5 August, it was concluded that they had arrived recently .
 Missiles and associated equipment were noted in the Campo Florido area in photography of 29 August . The presence of an operational cruise missile site at Siguanea on the Isle of Pines was disclosed by photography .
 Equipment for both these facilities ' probably arrived in Cuba some time during the month of August . Equipment for the facilities probably arrived around the country some time in August .
 The ports at which cruise missiles and equipment were offloaded cannot be identified . It is assumed that the equipment and missiles for these locations was offloaded there . The Santa Cruz del Norte site and the Campo Florido unit are located near each other .
 Equipment for the Banes site probably was offloaded at the port of Banes . Equipment was likely to be offloaded from the port at the time .
 It is believed that the missiles and equipment for the Siguanea cruise missile site were unloaded in Havana and shipped across Cuba . Because of the shallowness of the coastline around the Isle of Pines, it is believed they were transported by ferry to the island .
 An informant reported that from 27 August to 5 September, a ferry boat made ""continuous runs" to the Isle of Pines carrying Soviet troops and military equipment, including radar equipment . Supporting this contention, an informant reported .
 During the buildup and crisis period, there were only three permanently located operational cruise missile sites in Cuba - at Banes, at Santa Cruz del Norte, and at Siguanea on the Isle of Pines .
 The fourth cruise missile unit was initially located at Campo Florido . It probably was deployed temporarily during the crisis at La Sierra . The unit was deployed during the La Sierra crisis . It is believed to have been deployed temporarily .
 Analysis determined launchers were oriented toward Havana indicated that another function, possibly training, was assigned to this site . Lack of equipment revetments, on-site troop housing facilities, proximity of the site to the Santa Cruz del Norte site, and the proximity to the site .
 The unit at Campo Florido was absent during the time that a unit was deployed at La Sierra . The buildings appeared adequate to serve the sS P^oi^o^using administration, and training .
 '£* *™ ^ low . situated at Campo Plorido ""-J^""^^ Sooal unit and ing discussion of the time reeutred^to dep. y . temporarily located at La Sierra temporarily located .
 O£ com pletely rean d refinement o£ these si tes consis . The major pieces of the major pieces were operational when first after .
 T he evidence clearly . clearly . indicates that the Soviet -*««--» fact. is a fact. The evidence clearly shows that the . evidence .
 BtWeen "" ***«**« » nd 10 October carrying un^ alreadv ha^ """"T ""*'"" t0 Cuba "" By that tW the de P l0 ^ th^v hav 7 had ^ SSlle crates °
 Cuban units were being trained for amphibious operations in Cuba . Cuban forces were in the midst of operations .
 The first they remained throughout t"" * d by the Navy x “the sighting of a Komar-class boat at sea ■ * were se ldomdom^^ Vicinity 8 of Ma-rieT^n Z9 August .
 The establishment of Soviet submarine bases in Cuba was the subject of many clandestine reports received before the October crisis . C Submarines i Cuba was a Soviet submarine base . It was the first submarine base in Cuba .
 There is no evidence that substantiates these reports in any way, says CNN.com . However, there has been no substantiated these reports .
 It is possible that the installation of the cruise-missile facilities in the vicinity of Banes and on the Isle of Pines may have given rise to some of these reports . Komar-class boats may have been basing in the area .
 Soviet-Cuban agreement to construct a joint trawler base resulted in several subsequent reports to the effect that the base would provide submarine support facilities . In addition, the public announcement on 25 September 1962 of a . Soviet-Cuba agreement resulted in reports that a base would . provide
 F-class long-range torpedo-attack submarines (see the photograph, ^Cut^YnXa^e'thalTwa^not specifically related to Z United States quarantine imposed on 24 October . On the other hand, it is estimated that four F-classes long-
 The USSR had seldom deployed even single submarines in the western Atlantic . This deployment assumed additional significance because, in the past, the USSR had rarely deployed single submarines . The deployment assumed extra significance because of the Soviet Union's history .
 Artemisa, .olgum, ^olgums, ^ ^ numb ers and types las Vegas (see the photograph. Las Vegas)
 Such weapons ment with either a conventional or a nuclear were not identified at Holguin . Such weapons are not identified as conventional or nuclear .
 Collateral sources reported the offloading of Soviet personnel and ground equipment at the ports of Mariel and Bahia Honda as early as July .
 During the first week of August, other collateral reports indicated the movement of small Soviet convoys in the area of Santiago de las Vegas and other points on the island .
 It is not possible to determine whether convoys included units later deployed with the armored groups . However, owing to the imprecision of reporting and the wide variety of Soviet activity throughout Cuba, it is not known whether the observed convoys were later deployed .
 Initial collateral reporting may have reflected the movement of Soviet troop units in the other three areas to which armored groups were deployed .
 A similar report indicated that Soviet trucks, tanks, and artillery pieces continued to move into this same general areaim til at least 26 September .
 This convoy was heading east on the Central Highway in the direction of Holguin and may have been part of the armored group . This convoy may be part of an armored group of soldiers .
 The sighting of a convoy including large and medium-size tanks and trucks was reported in the Artemisa area on 27 September . The sighting is believed to have taken place in the region .
 As described, however, it is impossible to determine whether the tanks were part of an armored group or were simply accompanying the other vehicles in the convoy . The convoy was carrying construction materials possibly destined for some other Soviet activity .
 During August and September, sightings of armored equipment and Soviet troop movements also were noted in Cuba . Sightings were also noted in other locations throughout Cuba .
 In the Guasimal area, which is near the Sa..cti Spiritus SAM site but more than 50 miles from the nearest armored group at Remedios, a convoy consisting of ""antiaircraft guns, self-propelled guns of various lengths, canvas-covered trucks
 Soviet equipment and personnel also were observed in the Guantanamo district and near the Matahambre mines in Pinar del Rio Province . Soviet equipment was also observed in Guantanamo district .
 In sum, because collateral sources continually ""P^*""* ^^^fsovie equipment and personnel moving throughout Cuba after were deployed at their en «™^£ 8 ; r ""■^JH^e encampments did sible, however, to determine dates prior to
 When those dates are c°**W ™* ££ ^hich the armored tion in photography, a time span »****^£***™ must have been deployed .
 These aircraft almost certainly were intended for the Cuban Air Force . At the rate at which they were being assembled, they would not all have been operational until March 1963 .
 The movement of Soviet military forces from one continent and closed society to another produced virtually no evidence concerning the specific points in the USSR from which units departed .
 The movement of Soviet large-hatch ships from the USSR to Cuba indicates that MRBM units came from an area fairly near the Black Sea . The £ew pi ft ft ce ii| S || |i M | dir e ct e yid ence regarding this problem are
 All but one of those which docked in Cuba during the time period when MRBM's probably were delivered began their journey from a Black Se See 16 . The continued presence of these Soviet personnel in Cuba after the withdrawal of offensive weapons cannot be explained precisely .
 Cristobal S itc 3 :eportedly were being evicted . During . During ^^ ^ Cristobal . Cristobal was evicted. During . The incident occurred in was later located .
 The Sagua la Grande sites were closed in the second week of September . No reports were reported .
 The Poltava, a large-hatch ship of the type used to Tansport the .^MRBM's on their transporters as hold cargo, was docked in Mariel on 16 September . The most Pl"" sibl % inf °f ""^es
 Collateral sources reported that probable MRBM's were unloaded at the port some time preceding the night of 17 September . The MRBM was believed to have been unloaded at Port of York .
 The only other case in which a ship arrival can be associated directly with the delivery of missiles to a site concerns the arrival of the Omsk in Mariel about 16 October and identification of seven missiles .
 Two shipments account for more than half of the MRBM's later withdrawn from the San Cristobal area . These two shipments were delivered within 3 or 4 days . The MRBMs were unloaded promptly and delivered from port .
 These shipments may represent the first and last completed MRBM deliveries to Cuba . The shipments may also represent the last and first MRBM shipments to the island nation .
 Tending to confirm this timing of missile deliveries was the construction of the transshipment point at Punta Gerardo between 29 August and that of 25 September . Although it is not possible to trace the shipment from ports to sites of the additional 27 missiles withdrawn from Cuba in early November,
 The missiles described could reasonably have been MRBM's, but several facts cast doubt on the credibility of this report .
 Missiles being delivered to the San Cristobal site area could have been offloaded at a closer port, and the possibility of subsequent observation could be materially reduced . Missiles were delivered to a close port instead of a larger port .
 The number of missiles reported was too large for a single ship to have delivered . The only large-hatch ship near Cuba at that time probably was not in Havana harbor .
 Soviet Large-Hatch Ship Poltava returning to USSR on 3 1 October 1962 After Imposition of the United States Quarantine .
 Sites 1 and 2 during the night of it September and the early morning of 18 September . Sites 1, 2 and 2 were located in the early hours of September . Crirtobarto^the^cinrtf or San Cristobal . Sites 2 and 3 are located in San
 HREM's vere transported to the San ori & lft CrMlde slte . The HREM vere was transported to a San Diego ship .
 E-'l , trailers ( i HSm'i on tra] s and the 0-sk < n the icir large holds) were so few that most of them must have carried missiles . Four more ecka of their large holds were found in Cuba with unknown carg
 The scheduling of these ships, therefore, spread the delivery of MRBM's to Cuba over approximately the 4-week period spanning the time between mid-September and mid-October . The delivery of the MRBMs to Cuba is spread over approximately 4 weeks .
 The Soviet MRBM units in Cuba were initially deployed in a field mode, and very little advance preparation was required . The Cuban MRBM was deployed in field mode .
 Development of sites consisted of some building construction, the laying of aggregate floors under missile-ready tents, the construction of hardstands on which to place missile erectors, and the placing of fill or crushed rock on roadways . Development of the sites continued throughout the time the missiles remained
 Prelina ry work required included surveying to determine the precise geodetic positioning of the sites, relatively minor road improvements, and whatever clearing and grading was made necessary at launch positions and their approaches .
 Hardstands for missile erector and small, rectangular concrete pads for rear wheels for the rear wheels of the missile transporter . This provides a relatively close alignment of erector, launch stand, and transporter to facilitate raising the missile onto the stand .
 In most cases, however, these measures were taken after the units and equipment were already on site .
 The MRBM' s were checked out and stored soon after the arrival of the unit on site, and at a later date aggregate floors were laid under some of the tents .
 Arch-roofed buildings were probably intended for checkout, storage, and maintenance of nuclear warheads . Aside from microwave towers, one of which was constructed for each pair of sites, the only permanent structures observed that were related functionally to the weapons system were the arch-roffed buildings
 These buildings were probably not indispensable for operational purposes . Assuming that the necessary checkout and maintenance equipment was present, however, these buildings probably were not indispensable .
 Barrack-type structures also being built at some sites, almost certainly for personnel capability as soon as the system equipment* is emplaced and checked out .
 Site preparation activities probably had been underway at most of the sites by mid-September . Uncompleted condition of roadways and hardstands in some cases may have affected unit reaction time, it is said .
 The most likely explanation is that the pace at which such facilities, as well as the nuclear storage bunkers, were being developed reflected a program to bring the MRBM system to a fully operational status more or less simultaneously .
 There is conclusive evidence that supplies of the oxidizer n the MRBM system -red fuming nitric acid -were sent in Cuba at the time of the crisis . But apparently not all MRBM units had been fully supplied with the oxidiser by 27 October .
 Photography of a secure port facility at Punta Gerardo on 17 October confirmed the presence of about 24 cylindrical storage tanks connected to the quay by pipeline . Several buildings under construction, several buildings under . construction, and varying numbers of the same type of oxidizer trailer observed at
 Various features of the facility indicated that it was a storage and transshipment point for a toxic, corrosive liquid, such as RFNA . RFNA is the only such facility identified in Cuba . The facility is located in Havana .
 V system equipment includes missiles, missile transporters, fuel and oxidizer vehicles, launchers, warheads, and necessary checkout and control equipment . The V system includes missiles and missiles, missiles, launchers and warheads .
 Pf 2 9 August shows no indication that this facility, th ex^einguseTTo r the storage of sugar products, was to be converted into a secure RFNA transshipment point .
 The area subsequently occupied by the RFNA storage tanks was still planted in sugar cane . In fact, the area of the storage tanks were still planted with sugar cane.
 A collateral report indicated that the RFNA tanks had been installed and that the double security fences were being erected sometime during September . The double security fence was being erected in September .
 United States naval photography on 25 September disclosed a freighter unloading at the double-fenced transshipment facility that by that time existed substantially as it appeared in more detailed photography of 17 October 1962 .
 SA-2 system also used RFNA as an oxidizer, but no SAM oxidizer trailers were observed at Punta' Gerardo . MRBM vehicles are readily distinguishable from MRBM .
 It appears likely that this installation was converted into a RFNA handling facility for the purpose of supporting the MRBM forces in Cuba at roughly the same time the first missiles were being delivered .
 RFNA is storable over relatively long periods of time without significant losses . Supplies of this oxidizer do not require frequent replenishment as in the case of cryogenic liquids, such as liquid oxygen .
 MRBM oxidizer vehicles* at Punta Gerardo during October probably were loaded for the first time since their arrival in Cuba .
 The presenceoflOof these vehicles at Punta Gerardo on 27 October indicates that the Cuban MRBM sites had not been fully supplied with oxidizer by that time . This suggests that the sites were not fully supplied by oxidizer .
 If these vehicles were from a single MRBM site, they represented more than 60 pe rcent of the RFNA storage capacity of that unit . The unit might not have had sufficient oxidizer on site for its initial round of four missiles, and the unit might have had enough oxidizer
 It cannot be determined whether the RFNA being loaded on 27 October was intended for one or several sites, but it is possible that it was part of the initial supply for San Cristobal Site 4 .
 The site apparently did not receive missiles until 18 October . Only a few oxidizer trailers were discernible at the site until 29 October, when two groups of canvas-covered vehicles, presumably oxidizer and fuel, were visible .
 The documents describe the fairly . fairly . ra P id movement of MRBM units to presurveyed but relatively unprepared -alternate sites . Alternative sites are similar to Cuban sites from which missiles are launched .
 From Readiness 3. which is achieved when all personnel are in position, missiles and nosecones have been mated and are in prelaunch storage in the launch area, and the propellant trucks are loaded, abou, 2-1/2 hours are required .
 The deployment of such units to Cuba introduced a number of factors that may have affected significantly the length of time required to achieve a combat-ready status, even though the total effect cannot be judged with any precision .
 There is no way of determining, however, whether any major difficulties were encountered . There is also no way to determine whether major difficulties encountered .
 San Cristobal Site 4 activity occurred over a period of at least 4 days, culminating in the arrival of missiles, erectors, and other key system equipment on 18 or 19 October . In the case of Site 4, for example, this activity was carried out over 4 days .
 At Sagua la Grande Site 1. approximately 35 miscellaneous vehicles did not arrive until 17 October, although missiles apparently were delivered to one or both of the Sagua La Grande sites at least 3 weeks earlier . In addition to the vehicles, missiles were also delivered to the sites .
 Units presumably required additional time to exercise their equipment and become proficient in the procedures required for launch operations in unfamiliar surroundings and climatic conditions .
 Only a few propellant trailers were positively identified at San Cristobal Sites 3 and 4 . Only a handful of trailers were identified .
 It is not possible to determine whether nosecones and missiles were ever mated at any of the Cuban MRBM for launch .
 Matporters did not disclose the additional 13 feet in length required if a nosecone had been attached to a main missile body . From Readiness 2, with missiles on launcher and ""aimed"" but not fueled, about 1 hour is required; from Readiness 1 to Readiness
 In this case, it was clearly an exercise and not an actual alert condition . The transporters, as determined by the length of their loads, were carrying missiles without noseconcs .
 Photography of Sagua la Grande Site 2 on the same day revealed heavy motor vehicle trackage in the propellant vehicle storage areas and on the approaches to the launch areas .
 There are additional uncertainties with regard to the readiness status of San Cristobal Sites 3 and 4 . There is additional uncertainties regarding the readiness of the sites . The sites are located in the region of Mexico .
 At Site 3, as previously indicated, it was not possible to make positive identification of sufficient missile transporters and propellant vehicles to support operations from all four launch positions . Site 3 was not able to identify sufficient missiles and propellants .
 Five more missiles from the San Cristobal area than had been identified at the sites . However, this equipment may well have been obscured by heavy tree cover in the area .
 The site had the largest number of permanent buildings of any of the MRBM sites, suggests that it had been well prepared . Moreover, the general appearance of this site, which had the most permanent buildings, suggested that it was well prepared.
 At San Cristobal Site 4, missiles and other items of system equipment were not received until about 18 October . Site 4 is expected to be the first phase of the project .
 By 26 October at the latest, erectors were in position at the launch area's, suggesting relatively rapid progress toward combat readiness . Nevertheless, by the latest at the earliest, erectorators were in place by 26 October .
 There is no firm basis in the evidence, however, for eaction time that would have been required following a decider of missiles that could have been salvoed . Reaction time, for example, might have and reaction time might have been needed to launch .
 B _ t r -J^A ^A ^^^ '' the uncom P leted 1RBM ^^ under con"" trVc^n Cuba ""^ ""^ ^J^Ysl^n^l rate than the MRBM sites .
 R 3M site may have start ed son, ^ ea h operations until lhe first 1RBMte would no _^ J^^ J har two IRD M sites was about mid-November . As a result altho m ^^ i R 3m site may
 Each pair of launch pads is one of the world's most expensive launch pads . Launchpad launch pads are located in New York City, New York and Los Angeles .
 The .upport^a it ie. and Urge concrete block building V""™™#*™^*™ . be hind their maintenance, and . ^'^""^^^Z respective launch positions .
 Site 2 has been intended' for Guanajay more ad vance d stage of develop ment than Site 2 . Site 2 is more ad-vanced stage of development than Site 1 . Site 1 is intended to be more of an 'emphasised' than site 2 .
 Site construction had begun by 29 August . However, there is no evidence that site construction had already begun . Site construction has been completed on 29 August 2014 .
 Photography of Remedios site area on 5 September provides no indication of either equipment or activity associated with the subsequent construction of the IRBM site . Photography of the Remedio site area appears to be of no indication that the site is being built .
 Guanajay Site 1 and Remedios are approaching completion, while Guanajays Site 1 is approaching completion . Remedio is in essentially the midstage of their development, with the site in the middle of its development stages .
 A complete construction schedule has been established for Guanajay Site 1 . Based on the rate of construction at all three sites while under continuous photographic observation until 29 October, the schedule was established .
 By 29 October, Guanajay Site 1 was essentially complete except for the missile-ready buildings, but it is estimated that 3 to 4 weeks more would have been required to ""cure"" the concrete in the launch areas . The concrete is estimated to have been needed to "c
 The marked consistency observed in the sequence of construction operations and the time required to accomplish them at Guanajay Site 2 and Remedios indicate that construction of these sites was methodical and probably conformed to a schedule .
 It is possible that a second IRBM site was intended in the Remedios area . There is no evidence that construction had begun by the time the existing sites were dismantled .
 This intention was suggested by the pairing of all other strategic missile sites in Cuba, which also is P 67 .
 It is highly unlikely that the USSR would have provided conventional high-explosive warheads for the MRBM's .
 There is no basis in evidence for concluding that the USSR did not have a nuclear capability in Cuba . Although a thorough effort failed to uncover direct evidence concerning the presence of warheads, there is no assurance .
 There are three bodies of evidence, all ambiguous and ini-, <-~ t n tYto nrpsence of nuclear warheads . Equipment and Facility .
 At the missile sites these units generally were located in a rP* bv themselves, just as the propellant vehicles were in separate areas indicating a *p cial function . The missile units were generally located in the same area .
 In some cases they were positioned tn close proximity to the arch-roofed, probable nuclear weapons facxh""e. In others, they were located in close proximity .
 KJPHBipp appears suitable for nosecone handling . Most of the equipment at the nussile^te^ ^been identified as to function, and no other equipment .
 It is known from Soviet documents that nosecones and warheads normally are stored separately from the missiles for which they heads no y increased state of readiness is ordered .
 No vans were observed in the immediate vicinity of missile-ready tents at any of the Cuban MRBM sites . None of the missiles observed on their transporters was ofsufficient length to have had nosecones attached .
 The only activity of the nosecone handling units at the MRBM sites that may have been indicative of some nosecone/warhead checkout consisted of a single instance of photography of a van at one of the San Cristobal sites being loaded or unload . The cargo cannot be identified .
 It is likely that nuclear warheads would have been delivered to Cuba in special hermetically sealed containers in order to maintain proper temperature and humidity .
 These containers appeared to be large enough to accommodate an MRBM nosecone but too large to contain only a warhead . These containers were located in a separate secured area at the end of the runway .
 The unit at Mariel was not present in photography of the Naval Air Station taken on 25 September .
 It appears to have been active before and during the week of crisis in October . The movement of vehicles and the apparent shifting of containers suggests that some sort of checkout or processing was underway in nearby tents .
 The continued activity of the unit at Mariel during the crisis indicates that the deployed MRBM units may not have been fully equipped at that time . As in the case of the Punta Gerardo oxidizer facility, the continued activity suggests that the MRBM was not fully equipped .
 The unit at the Mariel Naval Air Station appears to have performed some unique function . There is no way of determining from the available evidence whether its activity concerned MRBM nosecones alone or both .
 If warheads were in Cuba, this unit may have served as a receiving and checkout point through which they were transshipped to the sites .
 The facilities at Mariel were of a field type and rudimentary . It must be noted, however, that the facilities were of the field type . It was noted that it was not the first time Mariel had been used .
 The appearance of the facility seems out of keeping with the stringent procedures and precautions that normally surround Soviet handling of nuclear weapons, especially in view of the general availability of more appropriate facilities in Cuba .
 Each MRBM site was evidently to have its own arch-roofed nuclear warhead bunker . In addition to the nosecone handling units and their special equipment .
 The size of these bunkers suggests that they were intended for more than just storage of the warheads . Probably warhead checkout and maintenance also would have been performed in these facilities . The bunkers were probably intended for storage of warheads .
 By 28 October, although three of the bunkers at the MRBM sites might have been sufficiently complete to be used for shelter, none had been earth-covered . None of the sites had been fully completed .
 It is unlikely that any of the bunkers had equipment installed or was actually in use . The bunkers are unlikely to be in use at all time .
 If warheads were present and operational at the MRBM sites, therefore, they must have been maintained and stored elsewhere, presumably in vans . The warheads were likely to be stored in vans, perhaps in a van .
 Bunkers also were present near the IRBM sites at Guanajay and Remedios . The sites were also known as Guanajays, Remedays and Guanajaya .
 The single bunker was intended to serve both Guanajay missile sites lt is curious that both of the IRBM warhead bun^^swere^/irtually completed by 28 October, in contrast to those at the MRBM sites, even though missiles and most other IRBM system
 Both the MRBM and the IRBM warheads were to be delivered to Cuba in a single shipment after completion of all of the storage and checkout facilities, which was not planned to occur until some time in November .
 The Alcksand rovsk is suspected of having had some special cargo aboard, possibly nuciear warheads . It was the only ship that departed from and returned to a Soviet Arctic naval port during the Cuban buildup .
 Aleksandrovsk was one of the first Soviet ships to depart Cuba in November . The ship left with a deck cargo of nosecone vans and arrived at Cuba Okol'naya in late November .
 The reason for this voyage from the Soviet Arctic por is not readily apparent . It is not known why the voyage took place .
 If cargo consisted of MRBM or IRBM warheads, Guba Okol'naya probably served only as a transshipment point . If the cargo contained warheads, it was probably only a transport point .
 If this is correct explanation for the voyage of the Aleksandrovsk, it must have been the first delivery of warheads to Cuba, for all other known voyages transited the Baltic or 31ack Sea passages .
 None of the Cuban MRBM sites had a nuclear capacity at the time of the President's speech on 22 October .
 The movements of the Aleksandro\ following the decision to withdraw the Soviet decision to withdrawal the offend sk dssiles seem inconsistent with a conclusion that it was making the first delivery of warheads to Cuba .
 Soviet authorities would have ordered the vessel to return directly to the USSR as soon as they consider ed if safe to do so . Because of the cargo's sensitivity, the vessel would have been sent back to the Soviet Union .
 It is difficult to account for the ship's movemen| unless the ship was to load a cargo Teast equal Sensitivity -tn""at is, additional warheads that had previously been delivered to Cuba from some port other than Guba Okol'naya .
 The Ale ksandrovsk was carrying 1RBM warheads which for some reason the USSR chose to transship through Cuba Okol'naya . MRBM warheads were shipped earlier, probably from* a Black Sea port .
 In order to get the warheads out of Cuba in a single voyage, they were removed on the Aleksandrovsk and returned by the safest route to the Soviet Arctic . The warheads were removed from Cuba in order to return them safely to the USSR .
 Many of the vessels believed to be carrying IRBM equipment to Cuba at the time of the quarantine had departed Baltic Sea ports . This hypothesis is supported by the fact that Guba Okol'naya may have been the nearest or most convenient secure port for IRBM warheads .
 Guba Okol'naya and the Aleksandrovsk may have had no nuclear significance whatever whatever . Alternatively, of course, Guba . or Guba. Okol’naya may have been no nuclear .
 The only other evidence bearing on nuclear warheads consists of the statements of Soviet officials on the subject . Soviet statements are made by Soviet officials .
 Deputy Foreign Minister Kuznetsov stated to Ambassador Stevenson that nuclear warheads had been taken out of Cuba ""immediately"" after the decision was made to remove the missiles, presumably on one of the first Soviet ships that left Cuba in November .
 Two days earlier, Kuznetsov had indicated that the warheads would be removed ""if warheads are indeed in Cuba," he said . Two days later, however, he said that Russia would remove the warheads .
 There have been statements that missiles were operational in Cuba in October 1962, implying that warheads were present . Asi de from an interview between Khrushchev and th^^mlyexpUci^^vieffefeferences .
 November assertions regarding nuclear warheads may well have been true, but they cannot be taken at face value, in the absence of confirming evidence . Although the November assertions about nuclear warheads are true, they are not taken to face value .
 The Soviet authorities probably judged that they would not be compelled to demonstrate the removal of nuclear warheads as they would be forced to do so . The Soviets judged that the removal would be easier than demonstrating the removal .
 Soviet statements that warheads were not present in Cuba probably would not have served the Soviet purpose at the time, which was to reassure the U.S. that the offensive weapons were being withdrawn .
 Once the crisis was past, the Soviet authorities could hardly be expected to admit that warheads had not reached Cuba, had that been the case .
 Il/UIl-28's* delivered to Cuba were not a part of the establishment of a Soviet offensive base on the island but were intended to be turned over to Cuban forces as the early generation MIG fighters had been .
 San Julian Airfield was |^ | | |pM^ on 15 October, at which time 2 fuselages and 20 fuselage crates were present . San Julian airfield was . |^ . 15 October .
 From 27 October to 15 November, the date on which assembly apparently stopped, six additional aircraft were completed, an assembly rate of slightly more than 3 days per plane . The assembly rate was about 3 days a day per plane, according to reports .
 At this rate, assembly of the 42 Il/UIl-28's would not have been completed until March 1963 . At this time, assembly would have taken place in February 1963 .
 The assembly rate is much slower than the assembly rate of the MIG-21's in Cuba, which was about 1 day per plane . Byway of comparison, this rate is about 1-day slower than that of Cuba's .
 San Julian Airfield has long been able to handle aircraft of the I1-2S type . Airfield is located in central San Julian, California .
 It was not used regularly by the Cubans before the arrival of the jet bombers . Some repair may have been necessary to make it operational, but some repair may be necessary .
 Holguin Airfield, before the comoiction of a new runway in June 1962, could not accommodate cither il-28's or MIG-21's . Construction of that runway, as well as of revetments and taxiways, was observed to have been well
 Work on aircraft revetments and new taxiways continued after the arrival of the I1-2S fuselage crates . The runway itself was completed by June 1962 .
 Aircraft at San Julian were observed being assembled in the open, with no specialized equipment in evidence . Special facilities for their assembly probably were not required .
 At the slow rate at which the Il/UIl-28's were being assembled, all would not have been operational until 2 to 3 months after the estimated date on which the last IRBM sites under construction would have become operational . Moreover, at the time of the I/UI
 Training programs that would have enabled the Cubans to operate these complex weapons had not been accomplished . An' exclusively Soviet command and communications structure was established to control their use . This i s evide nced by a substantial body of information indicating that Cubans .
 Soviet authorities may have planned to turn some of these systems over to Cubans eventually . Transfer could not have been accomplished quickly and would have required training programs such as that carried out with the Il-28's .
 At best, direct evidence on which to base a definitive estimate is not available . At best it is not known how much damage has been caused by the earthquake .
 Much has already been written about this subject, and a reexamination of it will not be attempted in this study .
 At the MRBM sites, construction'of buildings and hardstands continued, and some training activity may have occurred .
 Vehicles and equipment were dispersed and camouflaged, and antiaircraft artillery positions and personnel trenches were prepared . Moreover, vehicles and equipment was dispersed .
 Low-level missions must have vividly .pressed the Soviet personnel at the sites with the danger of attack . U.S. forces .
 The concealment of equipment also may have been indeed to prevent close observation of deployed units, m addition to .nese measures one cruise missile unit was moved from an inland location aoout 25 or 26 October and deployed operationally .
 All or virtually all of the Soviet-manned MIG-21 aircraft continued to be based at the same airfield where they had been assembled . However, apparently they did not maintain an unusually high level of activity during the crisis .
 There was no discernible activity during the crisis at three of the four ground force encampments where armored groups remained in place and highly vulnerable to attack .
 Komar -class boats also remained generally inactive at this time . Komar-class boats were also known to remain inactive .
 Authorities had begun dismantling the long-range missile sites and withdrawing the MRBM's and key items 1 of associated equipment .
 The missile withdrawal operation was notable for its rapidity and overtness . It was the first of its kind and overtaken by the US military .
 Soviet authorities chose to use the shipping immediately available in Cuba to return the missiles as deck cargo . None of the large-hatch ships in which the missiles had been brought to Cuba as hold cargo was near Cuban waters .
 Missile equipment was noted moving into the port area of La Isabella on the north coast . On 5 November, missile transporters and equipment were observed near Casilda on the south coast .
 Following the departure of the missiles, the removal of other MRBM equipment proceeded at a more leisurely pace .
 28 MRBM's, presumably from the San Cristobal sites, were removed through Mariel and 14, apparently from Sagua la Grande, through Casilda . In all, 28 MRB's were removed .
 At the time of withdrawal, the two ships observed in photography of 3 November at La Isabella, the closest port to the Sagua la Grande sites, probably were unsuitable for transporting missiles because of the arrangement of their deck superstructure .
 Casilda may have been the closest port to Sagua la Grande at which both suitable port facilities and shipping were immediately available . Casilda, therefore, may be the best port in the region for shipping . The ship may have arrived at Casilda in the early 1900s .
 Soviet authorities generally cooperated in drawing back the . a , a ,-n*ilns from the missiles when challenged at sea by United States inspection . U.S. inspectors found that nuclear storage facilities at the MRBNUndlRBM sites have still not been dismantled .
 P**£££*VJ£« t some uncomfortable days and nights in Havana exercising his P°^ a ° Y persuasion .
 In fact, assembly of the Il-28's went on slowly after 28 October until about mid-November, following which n > chan ° e W as observed in the status of the aircraft .
 At that time 1 ' ^«» £ < had been completed and an eighth lacked only an engine cowling . Most of the remainder were still in crates, most at 'the remainder of the . remainder were in crates .
 After Khrushchev's announcement on November that the Il-28's would be withdrawn all of the aircraft were moved from San Julian and the limiTe/ shipping space required and thereur"" of . the aircraft to the USSR -crated ""d^, that the . Il
 The Soviet program apparently called for the full flowering of the system at some given point in time, probably in the first half of November . The program calls for the system to be fully flowering in November .
 The air defense system in Cuba was not intended to be employed to screen the buildup . The system was intended to prevent the buildup of Cuba's air defenses .
 It was not'until the Cuban crisis was over and the Soviet authorities had virtually capitulated that the air defense system was brought into operation . Even then it probably was earlier than they had planned .
 Soviet naval defense forces, consisting of 12 Komar-class patrol boats and 4 identifiable coastal defense cruise missile units, were introduced into Cuba in the very early stages of the buildup and rapidly became operational .
 The weapons are readily deployable, however, and it is difficult to impute any particular significance to their early operational status . Their maximum usefulness appears to reside in countering landing attempts by fairly large groups of vessels .
 They could not conceivably have been deployed to screen the emplacement of other weapons . The weapons could not be used to screen other weapons, experts say .
 It has not been possible to establish with any degree of precision when the four Soviet armored groups were moved into their encampment areas . The move must have occurred between the first week of September and the middle of October .
 These units may have been the last of the defensive forces to arrive in Cuba . They would have been ready for combat operations as soon as the personnel and equipment were assembled .
 The Soviet authorities probably considered these units to be an important element of their military presence in Cuba .
 They probably calculated that establishment of the armored groups would serve a variety of purposes, ranging from deterrence of external attack, to protection of Soviet forces and equipment from any internal threat .
 It is not known whether these units were in place during the period beginning about midSeptember when the first offensive weapons were being introduced into Cuba .
 By the end of August, Cubans were being evicted from the vicinity of some of the MRBM sites, and the first evidence of activity was discernible in the area of the Guanajay IRBM sites . Cubans are evicted .
 MRBM's and related system equipment were being delivered to sites in mid-September . MRBMs and related systems equipment were delivering to sites . MRB's and other equipment were delivered to site sites .
 Il-Z8's were regarded by Soviet authorities as an integral or significant element of the deployment of offensive weapons to Cuba . In view of other evidence suggesting that these aircraft were intended for delivery to Cuban forces, it appears unlikely they were regarded as part of the Cuban military .
 MRBM units were combat ready to some degree during the cr\sis and probably would have been entirely combat-ready, with a full refire capability, by midNovember . nbne of the IRBM sites was completed by the end of October .
 The most advanced IRBM site probably was begun at about the same time or shortly before the MRBM sites . It would not have been completed until about mid-November, owing to the greater complexity of the construction and facilities required .
 The other two sites would have been completed by about the middle of December . Construction of a fourth site, if it was planned, would have extended into early 1963 .
 The observed rate of construction at the IRBM sites was relatively rapid, indicating a Soviet intention to bring them to operational status as soon as the MRBM sites as possible . The IRBM site was built at the time of the first IRBM launch .
 The actual program would have resulted in all of the major elements of the Soviet military establishment in Cuba becoming fully combat-ready at some time between the end of October and mid-November . The only exception was the IRBM force .
 The 12 to 16 planned IRBM launchers would have been of major importance in strengthening the image of a Soviet strategic threat to the U.S. from Cuba . Yet the 12-16 IRBM launchers would have strengthened the image .
 These time relationships and the view that they yield of the Soviet concept of the program are critical to the reconstruction of what was in the Soviet mind at the time of the Cuban venture .
 It is likely that the decision was not suddenly reached but stemmed from a continuing assessment by the Soviet leaders of the balance of world power and opportunities for advancement of the Communist cause .
 It is beyond the scope of this study to examine the full range of political, military, and economic considerations . The nature and timing of the military buildup itself shed considerable light on some of the motivating factors, the author says .
 In a sense the Cuban crisis had its origin in February 1960 when First Deputy Premier Mikoyan was sent to Cuba to conduct economic negotiations with the Castro government .
 The first major Soviet arms shipment arrived in September 1960, more than a year after Castro seized power . Economic aid agreements were consummated, and the first major weapons shipment arrived .
 The pattern of military aid thereafter continued to reflect Soviet caution . However, the pattern of aid thereafter reflected Soviet caution.
 Deliveries of military equipment were limited to items that could only be used only for maintenance of internal order and for defensive purposes . Deliveries were limited only to items used only to maintain internal order, and to maintain order .
 The first MIG fighters were not supplied until June 1961 . Such aircraft have been among the first items delivered to other countries receiving Soviet military aid .
 Once the process of supplying military aid to Cuba began, it was characterized by a gradual escalation in the type of arms made available, giving the impression that the U.S. forbearance was being carefully tested . The Soviet authorities may have had continuing reservations about the Castro regime .
 The best measure of their miscalculation, apart from its consequences, is the clear indication contained in the concept and execution of the Cuban venture itself that the Soviet authorities believed the risks were relatively low .
 Evidence strongly suggests that Soviet authorities were aware of U.S. reconnaissance activity over Cuba . Although not conclusive, the evidence suggests that the Soviet authorities knew of the activity before and during the buildup .
 In any event, they had acquired relatively full knowledge of U.S. photoreconnaissance capabilities in May I960 .
 The conclusion seems inescapable that the Soviet authorities chose to ignore the possibility of U.S. overflights in planning the Cuban operation . The Soviet authorities ignored the distinct possibility of United States .
 This choice seems inexplicable unless the Soviet leaders judged with considerable assurance that the U.S. would acquiesce in the deployment of strategic missiles in Cuba . The possibility of United States detection was not critical to the success or failure of the venture .
 This view of the Soviet estimate is supported by the fact that the USSR proceeded in the manner in which it did despite the firm and explicit warnings of President Kennedy . President Kennedy warned the USSR to prepare for the invasion of Cuba .
 On 4 September the President indicated that the U.S. had recently obtained information which ""establishes without doubt" the presence of surface-to-air missiles and missilc-armcd patrol boats in Cuba .
 Soviet leaders had no reason to interpret the President's statements as indicating that the U.S. already knew of the Soviet intention to introduce offensive weapons and had chosen to look the other way . On the other hand, the Soviet leaders were able to proceed with impunity with impunity .
 At the time of-the first statement, on 4 September, no activity had occurred at the MRBM or IRBM sites that could be identified from photography, and the first missiles almost certainly had not reached Cuba, although they were on the high seas . At the . time of the
 By 13 September, activity at the sites would still not have been identifiable, and what was probably the first shipment of MRBM's was only then approaching Cuban waters - with the missiles below deck .
 The Soviet government asserted that the armaments and military equipment sent to Cuba are designed exclusively for defensive purposes .
 In contrast to their attitude toward U.S. reconnaissance, Soviet personnel took considerable pains to prevent ground observation of or access near their weapons .
 The security precautions accompanying the offloading, movement, and permanent deployment of these weapons, in general, were well planned and executed . The security procedures accompanying these weapons were well-planned and executed, the author says .
 Soviet personnel did succeed in concealing from the general population the true extent of the Soviet presence on the island . In retrospect it is impossible, without photography, to jucfge 'wheraT*""'' when, and what weapons arrived and were deployed .
 The measures were probably intended to protect the weapons from close observation and possible sabotage . These measures probably were intended largely to protect them .
 Soviet authorities may have wanted to avoid widespread public knowledge of their activities in Cuba . However, the Soviet authorities also may have wished to avoid public knowledge .
 Cuba has declared all of Cuba outside Havana offlimits to Western correspondents . This is suggested by the Cuban action on 25 September . The Cuban government has declared Cuba off limits to Western journalists .
 The Soviet intention to establish a military base in Cuba probably had its origins in the policy deliberations of that time . The Soviet intentions of establishing a Cuban military base probably had their origins in policy deliberations .
 The final commitment to set the plan in motion, however, probably did not occur until the spring of 1962, perhaps in April or May .
 There is no way of identifying a more precise period of decision. Within this time span, there is no time of decision . The decision was made on behalf of the British Prime Minister .
 Some evidence suggests an early date; other information indicates a late decision . Some of the evidence suggests that the decision was made early this year .
 The plan probably evolved over a considerable period of time and may have resulted from a series of decisions . In fact, the plan likely evolved over several years, the author says .
 There is some evidence of an influx of ■ Soviet personnel and increased Soviet activity in Cuba beginning in about February or March 1962 .
 It is possible that an advance party was sent to Cuba at about this time for the purpose of planning, perhaps on a contingency basis, for the deployment of Soviet forces .
 This action r would suggest that the venture was conceived at the end of 1961 or very ■[ early in 1962 . It would suggest it was conceived as early as 1961 or early as 1962 .
 In^ formation appeared to apply to allocation of resources in the USSR and contained no hint of establishment of overseas bases . The timing of p the decision, the target date, and the motivation could have been the Cuban missile bases .
 Information originated in high ; Soviet military circles, may have been a reflection of actual planning for the Cuban operation or of some other plan .
 Report indicates Khrushchev was seeking some military means of '"" rapidly and significantly improving the USSR* s bargaining position in the •w German negotiations .
 In the spring of 1962 the Soviet leaders set in motion in Indonesia another overseas military venture involving the possible commitment of Soviet forces against a NATO member .
 The Indonesian decision was almost certainly closely related in time to the Cuban decision . It represented an unprecedented projection of Soviet military power into the nonCommunist world, although on a smaller scale .
 Sometime between February and April the Soviet authorities decided to encourage and support actively an Indonesian military buildup against the Dutch in West New Guinea . Soviet-manned submarines and jet medium bombers equipped with air-to-surface missiles were deployed to Indonesia .
 Subsequent events strongly suggested that these Soviet forces would have been committed in the Indonesian-Dutch hostilities which were narrowly averted . Subsequently events strongly suggest that these forces would be committed in this conflict with Indonesia .
 The planning of the Cuban .vith the Indonesian buildup suggests Ltion was well . Other evidence connected that the planning . of the . Cuban . vith the . Indonesian buildup . suggests that Ltion . was well.
 It cannot be judged whether this Soviet official did in fact possess prior information about Soviet plans in Cuba, but it seems improbable . The Soviet official is believed to have had prior information, but that is unlikely .
 First shipments of personnel and equipment for the buildup did not leave the USSR until about the beginning of July . Final decision to go ahead with the venture possibly could have been made as late as May, particularly if there had been a good deal of prior planning .
 It seems unlikely that the final commitment was made until after Moscow had assessed and acquiesced in Castro's assertion of authority over the Cuban Communist movement and the Moscow-backed ""old Communists" in late March and early April 1962 .
 The buildup could be carried out in a relatively stable political climate in' Cuba . These developments, although in a sense unfavorable to Moscow, at least indicated that the buildup could carry out in stable political conditions in the country .
 Only two of the large-hatch ships required to transport MRBM's and IRBM's below decks were available before June 1962 . Even if the Soviet authorities had desired to deploy strategic missiles to Cuba much earlier than they did, it should be noted .
 In deciding to deploy offensive missiles in Cuba, the Soviet leaders probably were seeking to reduce the strategic missile imbalance against the USSR drastically and rapidly . C Probable Soviet Objectives: Reducing the strategic imbalance would reduce the USSR's strategic imbalance .
 This would have represented an increase of more than 50 percent above currently estimated Soviet ICBM strike capabilities against the continental United States at the end of 1962 . The U.S. would have been able to strike at least 50 percent more than expected .
 The Soviet leaders must have calculated that successful establishment of the Cuban missile bases would have been advantageous in a host of ways .
 The Soviet bargaining position in any international crisis affecting vital U.S. interests would be sharply improved, perhaps as much by having discredited United States resoluteness and will to resist as by the increase in both the substance and image of Soviet military power .
 The Cuban bases would have provided a deterrent to U.S. military action against the Castro regime, which the Cuban if not the Soviet leaders may have believed to be imminent . The bases also would have disarmed mounting Chinese criticism .
 Cuban bases could provide leverage for the removal of U.S. overseas bases . If a line of retreat were required immediately or at some future date, the bases could be used to push back Cuba .
 The added capability represented by the Cuban missile forces would have left the USSR far short of parity with the United States in strategic capabilities or missile strike capabilities . Nevertheless, the Soviet leaders also must have realized that the added capability would leave the U.S. far short .
 Khrushchev faced with a direct military confrontation at a point where the United States was able to concentrate an overrwaiTof g tV nV nti °"" al mUitary f ° rCe "" ^ the S ° viet leaders — -ell aware of
 In effect, the Soviet authorities had only one 'ri\n B e cu:r n '! t0 K mak0 agalnSt ^ ^ ^^^ ° f ^^^: "Clonal forces striking Cuba, and that was a nuclear response"
 The United States command brought into full military preparedness all. their armed forces, including the troops present in Europe as well as its Sixth Fleet in the Mediterranean and the Seventh Fleet based in the Taiwan area .
 Several paratroop, infantry, tank, and armoured divisions -numbering about 100,000 servicemen - were detailed for an attack on Cuba alone .
 The landing in Cuba was to be covered by several thousand military aircraft . Several thousand aircraft were to be used to cover the landing .
 About 20 percent of all aircraft of the strategic air command were in the air round the clock carrying atomic weapons and hydrogen bombs aboard . The U.S. Strategic Air Command was responsible for most of the world's nuclear weapons .
 Given this knowledge, the Soviet leaders had no options respecting withdrawal . The Soviet leaders were forced to withdraw from NATO .
 The U.S. position on what constituted offensive weapons and what must be done about them before the quarantine would be lifted, was made unmistakably clear in the President's address of 22 October and 23 October .
 The stage within which the Soviet leaders were to reach their decisions had then been completely set . The stage was then completely set for the leaders of the Soviet Union .
 They were in no position to make an adequate response to the conventional forces opposing them . They could hardly have felt themselves in a position to consider seriously a nuclear response . They were not in the position to feel seriously a response to conventional forces .
 Their job, if the U.S. held firm, had to be to extricate themselves from a very poor situation as reasonably as possible . Their job was to be extricating themselves from the situation as well as possible, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Their statements, actions, and decisions appear to fit this scenario extremely well . Their subsequent statements and actions, however, fit this well, fit into this scenario .
 Soviet personnel continued work on the missile bases . While carefully refraining from actions that might provoke the U.S. nuclear strike capability, they continued work .
 Khrushchev's reply on 24 October to a telegram from Bcrtrand Russell attempted to drag the U.S. into universal negotiations . Russell suggested a top-level meeting in order to discuss all the problems which have arisen .
 Khrushchev proposed to remove those weapons systems considered offensive from Cuba under appropriate UN observation and supervision . Under the resulting pressure, he proposed to halt the further introduction of such weapons systems into Cuba .
 The US. on the establishment of adequate arrangements through the UN to . insure the carrying out and continuation of these commitments, would remove the quarantine measures and give assurances against an invasion of Cuba . In turn, the U.S. would remove quarantine measures, give assurances .
 Khrushchev proposed the mutual dismantling of bases in Cuba and Turkey . In spite of his letter on 26 October, and before receiving President Kennedy's response, he forwarded another letter in which he proposed the removal .
 The United States rejected this letter on the same day, stood firm in its original position, and held the Premier to the proposal implicit in his letter of 26 October .
 Premier Khrushchev introduced his next maneuver, which was to order the 'dismantling of the weapons which you describe as offensive their crating and return to the Soviet Union' The weapons were ordered to return to their Soviet Union .
 Before this time it does not seem probable that the Soviet authorities consulted the Cubans . The Soviet authorities did not seem likely to have consulted Cubans before this time .
 Khrushchev implied that Castro had not been consulted before his announcement of 28 October . Castro was extremely bitter at the Soviet leaders for agreeing to remove the missiles . Castro believed to have been angered by the decision to remove missiles .
 Cuban bitterness may have played a part in Soviet reluctance to remove the Il-28's as well as their own desire to preserve as much of the Cuban investment as possible . Cuban bitterness over the Soviet missile withdrawal may have been a factor .
 The next day, in what appears to have been an action coordinated with the Cubans, Premier Khrushchev announced that the Il-28's were being withdrawn and was rewarded by the lifting of the U.S. quarantine .