 “The Cuban Wives” by Alberto Antonio Dandolo has won the prestigious Malvinas Award at the 27th Trieste Latin American Film Festival .
 Edward Seaga won a landslide victory after charging that Manley’s close relationship with Cuba resulted in Cuban support to leftist terrorists in Jamaica . Seaga said Manley had Cuban support for leftist terrorists .
 Large amounts of small arms ammunition found in aircraft bringing Cuban diplomatic missions to Jamaica . Jamaican security forces also found ammunition in Cuban diplomatic aircraft .
 Jamaican youth sent to Cuba for vocational training returned to Jamaica . They reported that they also received political indoctrination and military training .
 In January 1981, Kingston ended the ‘brigadista’ program – a Cuban initiative wherein roughly 1400 Jamaican youths were trained to become construction workers . The program was ended in January 1981 .
 The JLP administration has warned Cuba to cease its involvement in Jamaican affairs . Cuba has been warned not to engage in Jamaica's affairs .
 Cuba had 15 Intelligence Officers assigned to its Embassy in Jamaica at the time . At the time, Cuba had a 15 intelligence officer assigned to the embassy .
 DGI officer Ricardo Belen Cabrisas Ruiz served as the Commercial Counselor in Ontario from approximately January 1967 through October 1970 .
 Cabrisas Ruiz performed so well as chief of the DGI Centro that he was promoted to serve as Ambassador to Japan just a few years later . According to DGI defector Gerardo Peraza, Ruiz was promoted as ambassador to Japan .
 The General Directorate of Intelligence was the name previously used by the foreign intelligence wing of the Ministry of the Interior .
 The aging dictator has shown confusion in the past when applying the Nazi and holocaust labels .
 Castro's calumny is standard fare in the professionally practiced anti-Semitism of today’s far-left propaganda, which tries to portray its ideological roots as antithetical to Nazism and fascism, which it portrays as occupying the right side of the political spectrum .
 This has always been a false dichotomy, rooted more in historical schisms that occurred before World War II and the ideological turf-wrangling that took place after . This is rooted in ideological schisms, not ideological turf wars, it's more than that of the past .
 A story published last week in Germany’s Die Welt puts to rest this false dichotomy, proving that it is extremism itself, rather than the edifying tenets of particular extremist ideologies, that drives radical leaders to murder and oppress their own people . Even as they proclaim it a
 Fidel Castro actively recruited former Nazi paramilitary officers to train his revolutionary army in 1962 . Fidel Castro offered salaries four times higher than these former Nazis would have received in Germany to come to Havana to impart their know-how .
 Four former Nazis have accepted the offer, according to the report . Two of the Nazi trainers actually made it to the island to begin work .
 Castro apparently didn’t stop at purchasing the services of Nazi paramilitary trainers . Castro apparently purchased the services from a Nazi paramilitary training facility .
 Castro sought out the services of two renowned Nazi operatives, Otto Ernst Remer and Ernst-Wilhelm Springer, to help the Cuban government purchase 4000 Belgian machine guns . According to the documents, Castro sought the help of two Nazi operatives .
 Alan Gross: There are, I think, almost 3,000 Americans in foreign jails . Alan Gross, Internal Security, Repression, says there are almost 3 million Americans in jail .
 Ostreicher’s situation is one of three high-profile cases of American Jews overseas who remain either controversially imprisoned or held hostage . The case is reminiscent of that of three other cases of U.S. Jews held hostage in the 1990s .
 Alan Gross, 63, has been imprisoned in Cuba since December 2009 for trying to bring that country’s Jewish community Internet access . A doctor found a tumor in his right shoulder that may be cancerous . Gross is a U.S. Agency for International Development contractor .
 The tumor is a “potentially life-threatening medical problem that has not been adequately evaluated to modern medical standards” by Cuban doctors, a Cuban doctor says . Cuban doctors say the tumor is not being evaluated to “modern medical standards.”
 Since that revelation, Cuba has been “surprisingly quiet in response,” says Dr. Alan Cevallos . “I say surprisingly because typically they tend to be very aggressive at responding to claims about Alan’s situation,’ he says .
 Cohen’s assessment has ‘flummoxed them and they’re not quite sure how they can respond,” said Gross lawyer Jared Genser . Gross lawyer: ‘They’ve not quite know how they . can respond’
 In August, Gross’s lawyers filed a petition asking the U.N. Working Group on Arbitrary Detention to conclude that Cuba had violated Article 19 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights .
 Gross’s team is expecting the UN arbitrary detention working group to hear the case in mid-November and to issue an opinion in December . The UN is expected to issue a decision on whether to grant the right to freedom of expression .
 The group’s opinions are not binding under international law and there is no enforcement provision that could compel Cuba to comply . Genser said a ruling in Gross's favor could still be a significant step toward Cuba .
 The push for Gross’s freedom received broad bipartisan support in September . 44 U.S. senators signed a letter to Cuban President Raul Castro asking for Gross's release . Gross is still in Cuba .
 The past decades have shown that the Castro brothers’ behavior in October 1962 was perfectly characteristic . Raul Castro and Fidel Castro's behavior in 1962 was characteristic, the authors say .
 Jeb Bush and Frank Calzon are both Republicans in the House of Representatives . Jeb Bush is a Republican presidential candidate .
 This week marks the 50th anniversary of the Cuban missile crisis . Americans recall the 13 days in October 1962 when the Soviet Union and Cuba’s Fidel Castro brought the world to brink of nuclear Armageddon .
 President John F Kennedy’s decisions over those 13 days were equally important to consider what has happened since . But in assessing the crisis, and . President John . F Kennedy's decisions over the 13 days, it is equally important that . consider what happened since.
 Cuba’s Castro brothers have maintained power through international deceit, blackmail and hostage-taking . Using what the late U.N. Ambassador Jeane Kirkpatrick called the ‘politics of deception,’
 The behavior of the Castro brothers in 1962 was perfectly characteristic, Castro brothers say . Castro brothers' behavior was characteristic of their behavior in 1962, they say . The Castro brothers were in the midst of the Cuban Revolution in 1962 .
 Fidel Castro has never shied away from a political gamble such as deploying secret Soviet missiles and then lying about them . The Cuban leader is known for his political gambles, including lying about the existence of Soviet missiles .
 He assured other governments that he would never do such a thing, just as the Soviet Union’s ambassador to the U.S. told the Kennedy administration that rumors about missiles were false .
 The missiles were there, and their deployment was an effort to intimidate and blackmail America . But the missiles were not there, the U.S. military says .
 Havana’s intimidation and blackmail are of a different magnitude, but there are plenty of examples . Today, Havana's intimidation and blackmails are of an entirely different magnitude .
 Angel Carromero was sentenced to four years in prison for manslaughter in the death of Oswaldo Payá . Payá was one of Cuba’s most prominent human rights leaders .
 Payá died while a passenger in a car Mr Carromero was driving, when it veered off the road and hit a tree under suspicious circumstances .
 Payá’s family says that Mr Carromero has sent text messages saying that a vehicle was attempting to force him off the road . Payá's family says he has sent texts saying that he was being forced off the highway .
 The family was prevented from attending the trial and is calling for an international investigation . They are calling for international investigation into the case . The family has been prevented from going to the trial .
 For years, state security had tried to intimidate Payá and his foreign visitors . It was part of a larger effort to discourage democracy advocates from visiting or contacting dissidents .
 Havana tries to intimidate other countries, such as Spain, into accepting its routine violations of human rights, including beatings of dissidents . Havana similarly tries to intimidation other countries—such as Spain—into accepting human rights violations, including beating dissidents .
 Alan Gross, an American development worker held since December 2009, is held in Cuba . Mr Carromero is the second American held hostage in Cuba since 2009 . Alan Gross has been held hostage for more than two years .
 In 1962, Fidel Castro wrung $53 million from Washington in exchange for releasing prisoners he had taken after the failed Bay of Pigs invasion . Castro took the prisoners he took after the failure of the failed invasion .
 Raúl Castro extorted thousands of dollars from owners of sugar mills . He threatened to burn down their homes and mills unless they aided the guerrillas . Before that, during the guerrilla war against the Batista dictatorship, he extorted $1 million from sugar mill owners .
 In June 1958, he tried to force negotiations with Washington by kidnapping 29 American sailors and marines . When word got out that Washington might send U.S. Marines to rescue the hostages, the Castros freed them .
 In dealing with Cuba’s regime, the Obama administration has too often sent contradictory signals of U.S. resolve . The Obama administration too often sends contradictory signals, writes CNN.com's John Avlon .
 Cuba's Raúl Castro has refused to allow Mr Gross to return to the U.S. to visit his seriously ill mother . The Obama administration allowed a Cuban spy to leave an American halfway house to visit .
 While Mr Gross remains in prison, the Obama administration last year issued visas to Raúl Castro’s daughter and her retinue so they could visit America and attack its Cuba policy .
 President Kennedy showed fortitude and resolve in forcing the Soviet Union to stand down . The Soviet Union stood down in the wake of the collapse of the West .
 Whoever wins the election ought to deal with today’s intimidation and deception from the Castro regime . Whoever wins will have to deal similarly with intimidation, deception from Castro regime, says Julian Zelizer .
 Uruguay provided a 35-page to the Organization of American States that detailed allegations regarding Cuban support to the Tupamaros .
 The report focused on the period 1968 to mid-1973 and was based largely on intelligence from captured guerillas . The report was based on the time of 1968 to 1973 .
 The document dealt mainly with the specific training Cuba provided, as well as the existence of the Tupamaros cells in Havana . The document also dealt with the fact that Cuba provided training Cuba .
 Blog Stats 294,581 hits . Follow Blog via Email . Follow us on Facebook and Twitter .