 Tense political showdown between the U.S. and the Soviet Union in 1962, sparked by the Soviet decision to base ballistic missiles in Cuba . The Soviet Union base ballistic missile bases in Cuba in 1962 .
 1959 Cuban Revolution swept proUnited States strongman Fulgencio Batista from power . Fidel Castro's regime led by Fidel Castro was overthrown by pro-U.S. forces .
 Eisenhower administration was committed to fighting the spread of communism . Eisenhower administration planned invasion to topple Castro in Cuba .
 The resulting 1961 Bay of Pigs invasion, approved and launched by Eisenhower's successor, John F Kennedy, proved to be an embarrassing failure . The resulting invasion was a failed invasion of Cuba .
 Castro turned to the Soviet Union for economic aid, as well as military support against any further aggression by the U.S. Following the Bay of Pigs fiasco, Castro turned .
 The construction of missile bases in Cuba began secretly in the summer of 1962 . The missile bases were built in secret during the Cuban Missile Crisis .
 By mid-September, the Soviets had begun shipping nuclear-tipped missiles to the island . The Soviets had already begun shipping the missiles to Cuba .
 Intelligence analysts at first believed they were to be used for antiaircraft missiles . U.S. spy planes had photographed construction of the missile sites .
 Photos taken on October 14 clearly showed the presence of offensive ballistic missile sites . However, photos taken taken in October show the sites of offensive missile sites.
 A week later, President Kennedy publicly revealed this information and announced a naval blockade of Cuba . President Kennedy announced this week that he had been informed of the information .
 All ships headed for Cuba would be stopped and searched by the United States Navy . Any ships that refused to stop would be sunk by the U.S. Navy .
 Kennedy demanded that the Soviets dismantle the bases and withdraw any missiles in Cuba . Kennedy also demanded that they dismantle any of the bases in Cuba and withdraw missiles .
 Castro and Khrushchev initially refused the U.S. demands and denounced the blockade as illegal . Both Castro and Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchell initially refused to accept the United States' demands . The blockade was a response to the blockade .
 Khrushchev argued that Cuba needed the missiles to protect itself against a possible repeat of U.S. aggression . In a series of letters over the next several days, he argued that the missiles were needed .
 Kennedy refused to accept the presence of offensive nuclear weapons poised so close to U.S. soil . Kennedy refused, however, to accept .
 For several days, with Soviet ships carrying missiles sailing ever closer to the blockade zone, the two nations stared one another down . The two nations faced each other for several days as Soviet ships carried missiles .
 Many people feared that the confrontation would result in a nuclear war between the superpowers . The confrontation was feared to end in nuclear war .
 Khrushchev wrote to Kennedy offering to withdraw missiles in exchange for U.S. promise not to invade Cuba . On October 26, Kennedy offered to withdraw the missiles in return for a United States promise to not invade Cuba.
 The U.S. would remove missiles from Cuba if the United States would withdraw its missiles from Turkey . The missiles would be removed if the U.K. withdraws them from Cuba .
 Kennedy publicly accepted the deal Khrushchev offered in writing but privately accepted the second offer . The handful of U.S. missiles based in Turkey would be removed . Kennedy accepted the offer in writing .
 Khrushchev ordered Soviet missiles removed from Cuba on October 28, 1962 . The Soviet ships returned home, and the missiles were removed . The ships returned to Cuba .
 Three weeks later, satisfied that the missiles were indeed gone, Kennedy ended the naval blockade of the island . The blockade lasted three weeks .
 The United States retained potential missile bases in Western Europe that were close to Soviet soil . The U.S. retained potential bases in western Europe .
 With their capitulation in the missile crisis, the Soviets had no comparable bases in the Western Hemisphere . The Soviets were forced to capitulate in the 1980s .
 Backing down in the face of U.S. military pressure also dealt a serious blow to Soviet prestige . The political damage likely contributed to Khrushchev's fall from power in 1964 .
 The crisis proved to be the one of the high points of Kennedy's brief tenure as president . In contrast, the crisis was the most high point of his presidency .
 By successfully standing up to Khrushchev and the Soviet Union, he showed that the U.S. was willing to confront communist expansion and Soviet aggression regardless of the risks .
 Khrushchev gained a much greater respect for his U.S. counterpart after the crisis . Kennedy gained the respect of his United States counterpart afterward . The crisis was the height of the tensions in the world .
 As a result of the crisis, Kennedy enjoyed increased prestige that helped advance his political initiatives, such as the Peace Corps, the U.S. program to land on the moon, and support for United States .
 In 1964, the Soviet Politburo ousted Khrushchev as premier of the Soviet Union . Kennedy was assassinated almost exactly exactly a year after lifting the embargo .
 Castro's regime outlived even that of his former protector . With the 1991 collapse of the Soviet Union, the Castro regime lived longer than his former ally .
 U.S. attitudes, policies, and enmity toward Castro regime have remained unchanged since the days of the missile crisis . As for the United States, entering the 21st century, its attitudes and policies have remained largely unchanged .