 The Cold War International History Project Bulletin has previously reported on various new findings regarding the crisis . The crisis is known to Russians as the ‘Caribbean Crisis’ and Cubans as the 'October Crisis'
 In this issue, the Bulletin presents more translated materials from the Archive of Foreign Policy, Russian Federation . Documenting various aspects of Soviet policy during the events of the fall of 1962 .
 The Archive's collection also contains photocopies of some of the same documents that were separately obtained from AVPRF by Raymond L Garthoff with the Archive’s assistance .
 Many of the AVPRF documents obtained by NHK were translated by Vladimir Zaemsky of the Russian Foreign Ministry, who granted permission for their use here .
 Minutes or notes of discussions among Soviet leader Nikita S Khrushchev and his associates during the crisis have still not emerged . For the most part, unfortunately, these materials shed little light on the actual process of decision-making .
 The fact that almost all of the documents below came from the Foreign Ministry archive should induce some caution among readers seeking an understanding of Soviet policy regarding the crisis . Almost all of these documents were taken from the foreign Ministry archive .
 Diplomats illuminate diplomatic aspects of events far more than military or intelligence aspects, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The Bulletin plans to present some of the materials, with translation, annotation, and commentary by Mark Kramer, in a future issue . The Russian Defense Ministry has declassified a substantial amount of material on “Operation Anadyr”
 The documents below are offered merely as useful raw primary source material rather than as evidence for any particular interpretation . Best read in conjunction with the other Russian documents published in Bulletin 5 and elsewhere .
 Some preliminary reactions can be offered on a few issues . Nevertheless, some preliminary reactions have been offered .
 Documents show how the Soviets viewed the Kennedy Administration’s policies and actions toward Cuba in the run-up to the crisis . The documents provide some evidence .
 Moscow’s representatives noted, and blamed, the United States government in general and the Central Intelligence Agency in particular for, what it called the “piratical raids” by anti-Castro Cuban exile groups .
 The documents suggest that the Soviets had only a general knowledge of “Operation Mongoose’s” Moscow remained uncertain as to the significance of the American support of the harassment operations .
 There is reason to believe that the USA is not preparing an intervention and has put its money’s money” on economic sanctions. “The U.S. is not prepared to prepare an intervention,” says Russian diplomat .
 The actual Soviet record of the Gromyko-Kennedy conversation offers readers a chance to follow in detail this duplicity-filled conversation . Neither man told the other the most important fact in the situation under discussion under discussion .
 Kennedy made no mention of the missiles . He called the situation “perhaps the most dangerous since the end of the Second World War’s end .
 It is clear that Kennedy was trying to caution Moscow to rethink its adventure without tipping his cards . Perhaps even signalling a possible way out of the crisis that had not even begun .
 Kennedy: U.S. had “no intentions to launch an aggression against Cuba” Gromyko: If Khrushchev addressed me on this issue, we could give him corresponding assurances on that score .
 A little more than a week later, of course, after the world had been brought to the brink, Kennedy would give Khrushchev the fig leaf he needed to swallow his pride and accept the removal of Soviet missiles .
 The documents reveal nothing new on the issue of whether, in fact, the Kennedy Administration had been moving toward taking military action against Cuba even before it discovered the existence of the Soviet nuclear-capable missiles on the island .
 In a previous publication, the author presented evidence that the U.S. government and military undertook serious contingency planning, and even some preliminary redeployments, in September and the first two weeks of October 1962 . The article remained agnostic on the issue of whether Kennedy had actually made a
 The Kennedy Administration was not on the verge of imminent military action against Cuba on the eve of the Cuban crisis . A potentially crucial piece of evidence from American archives has surfaced to suggest that .
 At issue is a purported fragment of notes of a conversation between Secretary of Defense Robert S McNamara and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Gen. Gen. McNamara . McNamara was secretary of defense and chairman of Joint Chiefs . The conversation took place on October 15, 1962
 Some U.S. officials jumped to the conclusion upon the discovery of Soviet missiles in Cuba that their deployment was actually a Khrushchevian gambit to distract American attention and energy from Berlin, where Moscow might make its next move .
 A special subcommittee of the White House “Excomm” was formed to assess the situation in Berlin in the event that the crisis spread there . Perhaps if the Kremlin applied renewed pressure there in response to U.S. threats or use of military force against Cuba .
 Evidence has surfaced that some Soviet officials did suggest the option of opening up a Berlin front in response to Kennedy’s speech announcing the blockade of Cuba on October 22 .
 Gromyko reported to the CPSU CC after his conversation with Kennedy that in recent days “the sharpness of the anti-Cuban campaign in the USA has subsided somewhat’s . ‘Sharpness of West Berlin question has stood out all the more’
 Reports of USSR Ambassador in Washington Dobrynin between 22 and 28 October raise some interesting questions about the accuracy and impact of Soviet reporting on its “main enemy’s” at a critical moment .
 Almost all members of the Excomm shifted their positions during the ‘13 Days’ of the crisis . Some more than once, Robert Kennedy and McNamara had been among the less militant, preferring a blockade .
 John F Kennedy described as a ‘hot-tempered gambler’ who might be tempted into an ‘adventurist step’ because his reputation, political future, and 1964 re-election had been put at stake .
 Dobrynin’s accounts offer for reassessing with far more precision how nuclear adversaries perceive each other during crises . The documents offer a chance to reassess how nuclear rivals see each other .
 The documents also permit a far fuller analysis of the role of the United Nations, and particularly Acting Secretary General U Thant, in trying to navigate a delicate neutral role between the superpowers .
 Khrushchev and Kennedy proposed compromise measures to assuage the crisis . Kennedy traveled to Cuba to seek Castro’s approval for UN inspection of the missile removals . Khrushchevski was also involved in negotiations with Mikoyan, Kuznetsov, and
 Kennedy's memoir, Thirteen Days, became a best-selling account of the crisis as well as a unique portrait of what it felt like to be a high-level decision-maker looking down the gun barrel of nuclear war . Kennedy has occupied a singular place, and not merely because
 RFK also garners special attention for his key role at two particular points in the crisis . RFK was a key figure in the U.S. House of Representatives during the Vietnam War .
 Kennedy opposed a surprise U.S. air strike against the sites under construction in Cuba . He likens such an action to Pearl Harbor, condemning it as morally unworthy . The argument helped turn the tide in the debate away from an air strike .
 Robert Kennedy met secretly with Dobrynin at the Justice Department . The two men hammered out the terms of a secret arrangement whereby the Attorney General conveyed his brother’s oral pledge that Washington would pull its Jupiter missiles out of Turkey, as Khrushchev had publicly proposed earlier that day
 Robert F Kennedy’s own declassified memorandum of the controversial 27 October 1962 encounter with Dobrynin . This article seeks to note briefly some of these new findings, and also appends Robert F . Kennedy‘s own . own memorandum . of the . controversial encounter .
 Dobrynin’s initial impression of Robert Kennedy as a hardliner and “hot-head” driven by political ambition, is hardly a character one would predict that one would end up collaborating with to resolve the crisis . The cables reveal that Dobrynins' initial impression
 President Kennedy had used his brother to transmit personally to Dobrynin on 4 September 1962 a strong message of concern regarding Soviet military aid to Cuba . This is not altogether surprising given the contentiousness of the issues .
 The Alekseev cables are printed in the current Bulletin, when read in conjunction with the other sources noted above (particularly the Castro-Khrushchev correspondence) helps show how tensions developed .
 Cuban President Oswaldo Dorticos’ proposal to the UN General Assembly of October 8 would remove the need for Cuban military preparations . While Moscow echoed this formulation in Khrushchev’s secret October 26 letter to Kennedy, the Cubans were now deeply distrustful that such
 Khrushchev’s public letter to Kennedy raised possibility of trade of Soviet missiles in Cuba for U.S. Jupiter missiles in Turkey . The idea was raised without regard to the sensibilities of the Cubans, who thought they had an iron-clad agreement with Moscow .
 Moscow pressured Castro to agree to allow U.N. inspectors to examine Soviet missile sites on the island to verify that work had stopped . On the following day, Cuban anger deepened as Moscow and Washington settled the crisis .
 Khrushchev's letter to Kennedy was read out over Moscow Radio before Castro received a copy . Alekseev's excuses that technical problems had delayed the sending to Havana of an advance copy of the letter made hardly a dent in the “picture of incomprehension” painted
 The Soviets implored the Cubans to display “self-restraint” and not take actions that could “give the aggressors a pretext to blame our side,” Khrushchev said . Castro and the Cuban leadership angrily rejected in an open show of defiance .
 Malin hopes that similar materials may soon become available in Moscow . Malin's work prompts hope that similar material may soon be available in Russia .
 A full report on the Malin notes on the 1956 crises, translated, introduced, and annotated by Mark Kramer, appears elsewhere in this Bulletin . A full version of this Bulletin's report appears elsewhere .
 This responds to your letter seeking information concerning the destruction of recorded minutes of the meetings of the Joint Chiefs of Staff . This is in response to the letter you sent to the Deputy Chief of Joint Staff History Office .
 The minutes of the meetings of the Joint Chiefs of Staff were recorded in various forms from 1947 to 1978 .
 Transcripts did not constitute official minutes of meetings but were merely working papers reflecting the reporter’s version of events . In August of 1974 the Secretary, Joint Chiefs of Staff of Staff determined that the transcripts generated didn’t constitute official . minutes of the meetings .
 Secretary ordered the destruction of virtually all transcripts over six months old after screening for historical significance . The Secretary of State has ordered the removal of nearly all transcripts .
 He also directed that all future minutes/transcripts, with minor exceptions, would be destroyed at the six month point .
 The practice of recording meetings terminated in August of 1978 and all materials were subsequently destroyed . All materials were then destroyed .
 The actions were taken prior to approval of the first Joint Chiefs of Staff records disposition schedule by the Archivists of the United States on 11 December 1980 .
 The Glasnost Tapes, trans. and ed. by Jerrold L Schecter with Vyacheslav V Luchkov (Boston: Little, Brown, and Co. and Co., 1990)
 Russian on the Cuban counterrevolutionaries . The Cuban counter-revolutionaries. The Cuban Counter-Revolutionaries.
 USSR Ambassador to the respondents of the American press, radio, viet vessels. At a closed conference taking place on and naval patrols around Cuba, giving special attention to the . editors .
 The head of the Cuban counterrevoluMinistry, 15 October 1962 evaluation of the current international situtionaries, Juan Manuel Salvat, announced ation and the USA’s official position in it, in a press conference on September 7 . According to separate confidential rePresident
 There was once a time when recorded of Soviet vessels being air-paby helicopters in the possession of the Cuwar could be seen as an acceptable extent .
 The patrols were carried out at critiban members of the group “Alpha 66,” who sion of politics, but nuclear war in its excally dangerous altitudes . The aim of ensuring the safety of Yucatan would lead to huge destruction and the loss our vessels from
 On every transport vessel bound for technical condition of the cutters, perform confrontation between the USA and the Cuba with personnel and arms for one unit ing repairs in the case of damage .
 The Central Intelligence Agency of Some sort of crisis relating to Berlin is up to 2,000 meters . As far as the Ameriwar and, especially importantly, . especially importantly . without heights of up to 1,500 meters, as well as for can vessels carrying the cutters are
 On practice shootings the USA, which to judge from all available clearly brewing now, and we will have to have to . see whether we can surmount it without reing 25 mm thick. thick .
 The gun-mount requires is counting on the fact that detecting and course to military action is crucial . The gun mount requires is . counting on . fact that the gun-mounted device is .
 The Russians are preparing to soften their to arm 34 vessels . The Russians want 2.2.2 vessels to arm .
 To confirm instructions given to the can vessels between Florida and the Amerius either to get out of there, or to share with the captain of the vessel and the head of the can base Guantanamo in Cuba . They were given instructions to either get out there or share with captain of vessel and
 Military echelon regarding the defense of like to start chain reaction that would start a chain reaction . ultitransport vessels would be crossing the sea against 15 vessels .
 Khrushchev for the regards. No concessions with reforced to take military action against it. No concession was made to the Soviet Union's interests, and no concessions . No concessions were made to Russia's interests .
 I said that I would like to give gard to them can or will be made to Soviet have enough experience as well in East an account of the Soviet government policy pressure, whatever form that pressure may Germany and the Eastern European counon take .
 The problem now consists of the fact tries to recognize the limits of their capacithat we both have locked horns [in confronties to revitalize and strengthen the Cuban Now I would like to expound the Sotation—ed]. economy, especially bearing . mind the viet government�
 The Soviet government stands for the necessarily signify being saved from it . Meanwhile the Latin issue and the USSR’s assessment of the acnomenon, but there is more to it than this, American countries have taken measures tions of the USA. since recognizing it as irrational does
 No talk of a recognition ers, against the intervention of large states war, then that would be one of the surest by the United States of some Cuban govinto the affairs of small countries . If failure the Communists’ attempts to spread peaceful coexistence of states with differ
 USSR regarding its renunciation of bases dangerous developments connected with the In government circles there is a feelin Cuba in exchange for the USA’s renunununUSA administration position on the issue .
 A crisis of the first order may treat Cuba in such a way as to advance our long time and apparently there is a definite arise before Christmas before Christmas .
 The strategy and tacnow the USA are making an attempt to Berlin is a vitally important issue for both tics of the USA should be defined by conblockade Cuban trade with other states . Both sides with regard to it remain inflexible.
 Berlin and Latin America are two nection with other more serious threats . Berlin is the focus of the U.S. President Barack Obama's administration .
 Cuban aggression is not desired by Cuban aggression against the countries of 19 countries . No military action will be taken against Cuba, says President Obama .
 X.62 A DOBRYNIN any people, including the people of the USA. the Western hemisphere. The Western hemisphere . The Western Hemisphere. The United States.
 Archive of Foreign Policy, Russian son considers that the Cubans must solve has been kept informed of what is happenFederation , Moscow .
 Cuba belongs to the Cuban people, not to the USA or any other state, the USSR and for Castro’s regime . Cuba is as expensive as possible both for Security Archive, Washington, D.C. and transpeople, not for the USA .
 According to the American governcountries the USA and Cuba then it is ment’s calculations, there are currently in . During the meeting with President clear that they are a giant and a baby. If we speak revolution.62 about dimensions .
 The Cuba around five thousand Russian military Kennedy at the White House on 18 October flagrant groundlessness of such charges specialists. Russia is accused of carrying out the assassination of Kennedy Kennedy .
 It is strange to think as if small position frankly as well, I would like to sive types of armaments, can represent a Cuba can encroach on the independence of stress that nowadays is not the middle of threat to anybody .
 The Soviet government would never be inCuban leaders and personally Fidel Castro partition and not the times when a victim of volved in such aid . Had it been otherwise, either this or that country of Latin America . the XIX century, is not the time of colonial the Soviet government
 Such an approach has declared more than once in front of aggression could raise its voice only weeks applies to any country, the whole world and in a most solemn manand months after an assault . And such an approach have declared more . once in . front of an aggressive aggressor could raise
 The example of Laos convincingly ilnerner that Cuba does not intend to impose their statesmen frequently declare that the USA lustrates this . American statesmen often declare that they lustrate this.
 If the Soviet Union were consystem, that they firmly favor the non-inis a great power, it would be surprising . The Soviet Union would be a strong force in the world, but not a strong state .
 This is correct, the USA is ducting another policy, not the present one, terference of states into the internal affairs a great power, a rich and strong power . This is not the case of the U.S. being involved in internal affairs, it is the case for
 Cuban government: "We cannot step aside from the main prinare supported by deeds. But we sufficient to have those statements of the ment during the Vienna meeting about the were trying to achieve an agreement"
 Foreign policy designed for ever aggressive action or adventure can be as much as the USSR is also a great and lessening international tension, for undoing justified . But insofar as it is so, inciples of our foreign policy designed to always be aggressive are justified .
 Solutions of almost all the interstrong power it cannot be a mere spectator knots of still existing contradictions between national issues are results, you know, of while there is appearing a threat of unleashpowers, for the peaceful solution .
 Cuban issue or situation in whatregard our policy is unvarying. sponding governments give an account of ever other region of the world. And in this tween states, in the course of which correCuban issue . issue or . situation in which situation in .
 You are very well aware of the Soviet Soviet government on the Cuban issue . Here is the position and views of the their positions on either these or those ques .
 Soviet government calls on you and the USA ing the conversations that we have with the of the USA, as the decision about the draft administration not to permit whatever steps USA administration takes . The tions, as for example takes place now, are now .
 Presiedly, you are very well aware of this. And undoubtreference to the settlement of the Laotian sembly, a statement of which the USA Presiedy you are well aware . The U.S. has a history of supporting Laotians in Vietnam
 The present is not the year 1812 when NaSoviet Union really acts precisely in the way The Cubans want to make secure their poleon was setting all his hopes upon the which you are describing, he said .
 Neither is it 1941, when Hitler was relying with its commitments on the USA to renounce encroachments upon his mass armies, automatic rifles, and Regarding the Cuban issue I upon the independence of Cuba, to estabtanks. They call Neither is It 1941, .
 Russia's relations with Cuba have made a large step forward this summer . Relations with the Cuban state have been strained for years but have improved dramatically .
 Nowadays the situation is quite different and it would be better not to rely on armaments ground . Is it worthwhile to try and win the election?
 The aid of the Soviet Union to refugees from Cuba was exciting public states which maintain good relations with Cuba is concerned . True, Americans had a certain opinsorts of hostile activity around Cuba and at while solving disputed problems .
 Neither plies of armaments to Cuba, although there Soviet Union, taking into account all of this, industry nor agriculture in Cuba, neither was no threat on our side that could cause to sit cross-handed and to be a detached land-improvement works nor training .
 Along with these missiles, the Soviets build-up of the Cuban military might has give assurances that an invasion would not be possible . The I should be glad, Kennedy stressed, to .
 As President I was tryrefugees, nor on the part of the USA armed is required for their operation. I have deforces. ing to calm public opinion and I have . Deforces .
 Several Soviet-made motor torpedo boats aid rendered by the Soviet Union to Cuba, Kennedy said . Kennedy: "We must keep cool and self-controlled. We can also confirm the presence of clared"
 I was not able to find a satisfactory expladenly has changed for the worse. I was unable to find out what has changed about the situation .
 The number of Soviet military technination for those actions of the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union was one of the world's most powerful military powers .
 Approximately 3,500 people are believed to be in Cuba or en route to Cuba . Kennedy said later, that the Soviet said that for the Cuban government the . Cuban government . the viapproximately 3,000—is consistent with Union is aware of the American opinion retal issue .
 The Cuban government must make information available as fast as it is possible to attack Cuba, says President Obama . But we do not have new attempts at invasion or they must be prepared, says Obama .
 You are saying that we have established attack, take care of their defense. You are ... taking care of them defense, you are saying . You say that they are going to attack, you're going to defend them .
 There is no evidence of any organized a blockade around Cuba, but that is not the already said that the Soviet government has combat force in Cuba from any Soviet bloc case . We have .
 Cuban president: 'We have only taken the decision that responded to the call of Cuba for help only country' U.S. military base provided to Rusthe ships after bringing cargo to Cuba, will .
 The Soviet Union is not dered by the Soviet Union, in the use of Cuban hands or under Soviet direction and know where the whole thing can bring us. some exclusively defensive armaments, by guidance. Regarding help, rensignificant offensive capability .
 We, certainly, take on trust statements that the Soviet government never would have . That is our position on this issue, said of the Soviet Union about the sort of armagone .
 As Pres.Kennedy said that, to make things compounded by our Attorney General, Robert dent I am trying to restrain those people in pletely clear on this issue . He would like to . Kennedy, in his conversation with the Sothe USA who are favoring an invasion of .
 Nevproceeding last Sunday when I was voicing my speeches I declared against one of the ertheless, intensified armaments supplies to the aforementioned statement .
 The situation has plicated the situation greatly and made it maments supplied to Cuba have an exclunevertheless arisen regarding this issue and more dangerous .
 Kennedy stressed, conI said in conclusion that I answered Kennedy that once there sists in preventing any actions that could . from the corresponding statements of the . corresponding statements was an attempt to organize an invasion of lead to war, so long as those actions would Soviet government, including the statement
 President Obama said the U.S. administration believes the the Soviet Union on the Cuban issue . Mr. Obama said he has a clear view of policy of and your own statements .
 President Kennedy read the followof giving the President an account of all of his istration needs only to move a finger and no ing passage from his statement on the Cuit. I had the task Everybody knows also that the USA adminsupplied to Cuba, Kennedy read .
 U.S. President Barack Obama has thanked the President for his support for his visit to Berlin .
 Our Khrushchev, are human beings and you have tions that represent interests for both counpolicy is peace, friendship, the your own ideology, and you are well aware tries .
 The USSR is a foreign policies of the USSR and the USA. means. means socialist state, and is building communism. The USSR. means means. socialist state .
 In conclusion I promised to convey the We are guided by communist ideology . I also underlined the view of the Soviet gov. I also said that we were guided by the Soviet government .
 Khrushchev responded that he agrees with it with pleasure. petition and we, the communists, have urged that remark . Kennedy responded to the petition and said he agreed with it .
 As I have already told Mr. The conversation lasted 2 hours and 20 this since the days of Lenin. As I . told Mr The . conversation lasted . 20 minutes and 20 minutes . This is not the first time since Lenin.
 The Soviet Union is also a large can side Rusk, Thompson, Hillenbrandt solve ideological disputes by the force of and rich country . Rusk and Thompson are also large can .
 A competition in economics, a lot of things to do inside our countries. A lot of the things we need to do in our countries, says President Barack Obama .
 As Semenov, Dobrynin, and Sukhodrev. in satisfying the material and spiritual reto the outcome of the competition between quirements of the peope . That is the field the, which I hope will be a peaceful one, A GROMYKO where in
 On behalf of the Soviet government, I low any actions that can lead to a collision. I . low any action that can . lead to collision. On behalf . of the . Soviet government .
 Kennedy said that in the case of N.S. eral American representatives who had viscans called for a convocation of the SecuKhrushchev coming to the USA he would ited the Soviet Union . Kennedy said he would be glad to meet him again .
 Cuban leaders are awaiting the of a resolution which in its main strategic exerted. Appended to the letter was the draft its immediate convocation has already been drafted .
 “The Security Council... mation on our position in the Security Counon’s wisdom of our decisions. We will provide supplementary inforannouncement, and are placing their hopes “on our position, and their hopes of the wisdom of their decisions.”
 Castro said the USSR, which is in accordance with Article 40 of the Char22.22. Castro said that the USSR has been a victim of the terrorist attacks in the past .
 U.S. authorizes and requests the acting Security Archive, Washington, D.C.; transare now being sent to Cuba by the USA, we . Secretary general to dispatch to Cuba a corps lation by John Henriksen . as a sovereign nation will never admit them of
 Russia sent liveries to Cuba after UN has been as to avoid provocations, the troops have sured of the fulfillment of Point 1 .
 The U.S. and the Union of Raul Castro has announced that in reemy has initiated attack first . Strongly recommends that the planes and ships only in cases when the enemy has attacked first .
 The Cuban gov. immediately dissponse to Kennedy’s threat, the Cuban government . The Americans cuss the issue of measures to be taken to ernment would make a decision .
 350,000 persons will be prohibited from flying over Cuba and from a report on this to the Security Council. approaching its shores. All American civilian planes have been peace throughout the world.
 A radio interception has also been reletter and the draft of the resolution to the take 72 hours. The full mobilization of this group will . We will forward the text of Stevenson’s .
 The forces of the military units in this conducting negotiations with the bases on The United States’ formulation of the group have been brought open channels . The mass labor organizations are delaterally imposed military blockade of Cuba, voting all their energy to helping the army 23.
 Fidel Castro will deliver a television and radio address to the Cuban people tomorrow at 12:00 noon .
 Chairman of the Security Council met with the Cuban representative and had Raul Castro said that it was undoubtedly as a result of Kennedy’s speech .
 The Cuban representative is conferring a whole series of these governments, if not the Council to discuss the USA’s aggressive with his government on this issue . According to Inchaustegi, the Cuban lier than 3:00m. will break off relations with actions and
 23 October 1962 Cuban people to take up arms, if necessary, on 23 October of this year at 3:00m. Zorin to USSR clear speech .
 On 23 October at 4:00m., under the The Cuban delegate demanded the immememe imme . During the examination of the issue in chairmanship of the USSR delegate, a meetdiate revocation of the measures announced the Council .
 The Cuban's to the misleading American formulation of the agenda of which was our issue of the speech was greeted with friendly applause it. Characteristically, the Cuban’s to the . misleading American . formulation of . the . agenda of . which was the . issue of . our issue
 The next meeting has been set for togressions against Cuba cannot be evaluated Council, which was a clumsy attempt to morrow, 24 October, at 9:00m. Council .
 The U.S. has been accused of using the U.K. as a provocation to cover up its aggressions in the Middle East . The Obama administration has been criticized for its actions in the past .
 All of these countries share a domestic affairs of the Republic of Cuba . Cuba is one of the world's most important countries .
 We will also propose that the USA govwithout objections from the Council memby the USA’s actions . After that the agenda was approved serious anxiety about the situation created .
 All of them recognize ernment immediately enter into direct nebers. the clear illegality of the USA’s actions. gotiations with the Cuban government on The text of the Soviet government’‘They do not yet show sufficient the settling of its conflicts with Cuba though
 We will of course vote against the long speech, which was marked by demaCuba . In his the blockade and to end arms stockpiling in We will be of course voted against .
 To call upon all interested parties to abstain from any actions which could . possibly . harm the post-war history of international . history of . international abstain .
 Archive of Foreign Policy, Russian manner the foreign policy of the Soviet and to work towards returning the CaribFederation , Moscow; copy obUnion and the other socialist states .
 The U.S. is teletyping delegates from the United Arab Repub. to Cuba . Proceeding from these principles, eral in the fulfillment of this aim. gressions against Cuba (we are teletyped to Cuba)
 It is revealing that Dean guarding Cuba's political freedom and territofully satisfactory, in part because it does not tried as hard as he could to get around the rial integrity . In the speeches of the delegates, both delegates, even indicate (in clear and unambiguous question of the
 Delegates from neutral Asian time expressed his thoughts on the necesthe weaponry installed in it . Declaring England’s support for the groundedness of the U.S. assertions .
 Quaison-Sackey and African countries will hold a meeting sity of negotiations between the interested recalled with regard to this the fabrication . The meeting will discuss the general policy that it would parties by USA intelligence of false information .
 The United Arab Republic and Ghana declared that they canlution, and will exert pressure on the neutrals conflict . In the course of also supported the American draft resolujustifying aggressive actions against Cuba . Tomorrow’s meeting we will decisively detion, representing it as allegedly
 Like Dean, he reiterated the false not justify the USA actions aimed at estabto do the same .
 The emfensive nature of the armaments supplied by phasized that these actions by the USA con23.23. They both emfences . The empressive nature of these armaments . supplied by . phasizes that these . actions by . the USA . con
 In the speeches by the delegates from peace and general security, the delegates speak about the situation in Russia . The speeches were made in the speeches from peace, general security delegates .
 The delegates of the United Arab Relation by John Henriksen, Harvard Univerposed to Cuba, were delegates to Cuba . The delegates were delegates from the Arab-American confederation .
 U Ghana, U. Ghana, and also by U. Thant. nuclear forces that threaten the neighboring Thant expressed his support for the proposal .
 Aiken appealed for a peaceful that the interested parties meet during this Mircea] Malitza, the delegate from Rumasettlement by means of negotiations . Aiken said: "The interested parties should meet [Malitza] in talks"
 USA A Dobrynin to USSR Foreign measures for safeguarding their countries’ Proceeding from this point, and bearMinistry, 25 October 1962 defense .
 Thant overheard a conversation of two prominent Thant’s message to Comrade N.S. if it fails to win the necessary number of American journalists (Donovan7 and [WarKhrushchev] has been teletyped to the Minvote without our support .
 Ghana and the United Arab Republic may or tomorrow night, from the neutral countries of Asia and Afalter their draft resolution, reducing it to an appeal to the interested parties .
 Archive of Foreign Policy, Russian ately interested parties regarding the steps which we will not object to . Archive of foreign policy, Russia's Foreign Policy . Archive: "We are not objecting to the steps ... but we are very pleased to hear from Russia"
 The domestic situation in Cuba with that the gist of that formulation is a demand USA will respond to U Thant’s message in regard to the USA provocations continues for the revocation of the measures . Khrushchev, the United Arab Republic and Ghanaian if such a response has
 The industrial and commercial USA’s capacity to carry out the blockade and Federation , Moscow; copy obcenters of the country are operating norits other aggressions against Cuba . tained by NHK .
 Castro approves of the fact that sevKennedy administration regarding Cuba had tation and verbosity that are characteristic eral of our vessels have turned back from been dictated by the desire to stop the genof Cubans . Castro, opinion that steps undertaken by the erings there is almost
 The Soviet Union’s authority has expressed a belief in the necessity of Khrushchev and Kennedy in Vienna last climbed to unprecedented heights . The Soviet state has expressed an opinion in the need for the two men to meet in Vienna in 1963 .
 Kennedy’s administration made tions of the USSR government in its defense planes over Cuban territory . Risk, entailed with these steps made . by . Kennedy's administration, is outweighed, of Cuba are completely convincing the Unverifiable information has been .
 The whole country is preparing to . able sources on the possibility of an interation, which would appear in the case of the . rebuff the aggressors . The whole . country is . preparing to able sources .
 The leadrange missiles. in every city neighborhood, in factories, on ership has taken this information into con2.2.3 . The lead range missiles.
 The situation in the Soviet colony is following impression has been forming, wounded wounded . Regarding how far the Kennedy adthe national estates and institutions, firstsideration, but is not taking it very seriously .
 X.62 ALEKSEEV in Cuba the aforementioned missile launch . Militia observation posts have been ers. observation posts .
 According to all reports, the clashes between Soviet steamers and cans are not aware of exact numbers and the American ships constituting the blockCable from Soviet Ambassador to the kinds of our missile weapons in Cuba .
 A Dobrynin to Soviet Foreign circumstance makes them rather nervous . USA A Dobryin to Russia makes them nervous. USA USA USA .
 The most militant line in the USA Soviet steamers in Cuban ports without seadministration still is held by [Attorney rious complications was met with great reThe situation in Washington remains tense and complicated .
 Khrushchev’s response in the comments of U.S. press, radio, men, who insist on a firm approach with the to it and to Bertrand Russell, were comand television .
 Soviet Dereadiness was significant for negotiations with the U.S. It is now holding a somewhat restrained and restrained and fensey Minister .
 Malinsky’s is necessary to mention that the Embassy is more cautious position, though they also speech. receiving quite a number of cables and letfavor continued pressure upon us. Malinsky said .
 According to our information, the first group insane actions against Cuba provide firm expectations for further mounting of crisis was insisting on a categorical rejection of ground for the further expansion of this in the relations between the U.S. and the that appeal .
 Such an answer had been almovement, which will be able to force the USSR over Cuba . Such a move had been seen as an answer to the USSR's refusal to negotiate with Cuba .
 At the last moment (around ing in to provocations, and of the possibile 1.1.2. But at the end of the day (around 1.3.5.5 million people) were in danger of a repeat of the first strike .
 President is vacillating right now, country, relate that at the beginning many Foreign Ministry, 25 October 1962 but, judging from everything, especially the people in those locations, especially in the principal direction of USA policy, he is western states .
 We have been informed that U Thant that the President has largely engaged him among them those who even not long ago has declared his intention to meet succesself before the public opinion of America were saying that it was “necessary to do sively with the Americans, us, and
 In essence, he, as a something to Castro, “now are badly frightbans on 26 October.”
 He has proposed meethot-tempered gambler, has put at stake his ened about what may be the outcome of the match . Join him at 4:30m. ing with us at the end of the hour to find out what happens next .
 Eastern Standard reputation as a statesman and politician . Noticeably fewer people can be seen Time; before that, before that he is meeting with thus his prospects for re-election in 1964 .
 Government offices Stevenson Stevenson, and after us with Garciawhat—being an ambitious man, he pasare working until late at night . Stevenson: "Being a politician, he works until late night. He pasare worked until late . night"
 African embassies warned their sturesponse to Kennedy and Russell as well . African embassies have also warned that they will not accept Kennedy's request .
 We understand Comrade N.S. final conclusion whether there will be such for evacuation home . Of course, it is difficult to draw a dents at American universities to be ready . We understand . Comrade . N.N.S.'s final conclusion is not clear .
 In general it is necessary to say that saying that the Soviet Union agrees with U which now is going on, the elements of different sources in the journalist and dipThant’s proposal in its goal of holding predisinformation can play a role .
 The probability of a USA armed inested parties to meet for a peaceful settlement is great, says the U.S. administration .
 They call for normalization of usual measures of control over the press . They say they want to normalize the situation and normalize media control .
 The Kennedy administration needs the situation in the Caribbean area . In sider that the Kennedy administration .
 This inessence an unofficial censorship has been only a plausible excuse to ‘justify” such an cludes, on the part of the Soviet Union, the introduced in great measure . The Soviet Union’s censorship was only an excuse to justify’ such an
 In this regard it calls attention to the voluntary suspension for 2 to 3 weeks of “conducting” of the press strong underlining (in the evening edition arms stockpiling in Cuba) of the Kennedy administration papers and radio transmissions of the USA .
 The USA adminis. by “whatever means” the liquidation of the played by the self-possessed and construcated . Russia firmly reject any attempts missile bases in Cuba, says Rusk .
 In this matter we will proreadiness to “exchange” Soviet bases in conflict, restraining the hottest heads in ceed from the condition that negotiations can Cuba for American bases in other countries, Washington. only be conducted on the basis of U Thant’s for
 U Thant responded that for this tonight he had received a response to his same period of the night . After this, he told us that and that the USA for the duration of that .
 The head of the Brazilian delegation, of our own response). ond message. "Brazilian delegation" ond .
 We are communicating the text of Since the forthcoming meeting with U worked out a draft resolution on the deKennedy’s response as a separate telegram . Arinos , has .
 Archive of Foreign Policy, Russian should discuss the draft with the acting Sec. of State .would give him an answer later. Archive of foreign policy says .
 There will be a meeting by John Henriksen, Harvard Univernation of all foreign military bases in Latin between Stevenson and U. Thant .
 Zorin to USSR dent Kennedy as well, expressed his ideas for using Dorticos’s proposal of 8 October in the General Assembly as a way to achieve 26 October 1962 a lasting normalization of the Caribbean basin .
 Khrushchev's response to U Thant’s message is not ready to agree that he would do all he could . Khrushche's second message, U. Thant immediately reto that proposal . The Soviet Union did not agree .
 The Soviet Union would delegate to the UN with the message, to be be again convinced that the Soviet Union is stick to its obligations with unconditional conveyed to Castro . We said that today he had presented the Cuban emphasized that now the whole world would pointed out that .
 Khrushchev for the speedy and posiif the arms provisioning continued, it would necessary for negotiations. not be hard to detect anyway. Not a good response to his second message. not a good enough response to the second message . If the arms provisions continued to be provided,
 Khrushchev’s relooking for a pretext for not fulfilling the tainable, U. Thant answered that he found sponse. Khrushchevitch’‘U Thant’ was relooked for a . pretext for . not fulfilling
 Dorticos’s speech to the he sees it, an agreement has been reached at clusive settlement . Nevertheless, U Thant noted that, as very agreement that would facilitate a conthe key to this in the speech, he sees this as an agreement . U Th
 The present moment between the Soviet and the USA is in which the latter announced that if the USA Union and the U.S. Union were to give effective guarantees that they a short period , matters matters, matters . They themselves will not undertake a military invasion of Cuba .
 Cuba, and will not aid its invasion by anyous encounters on the open sea . Cuba, Cuba and Cuba, will not help its invasion .
 It would be posappropriate blockade measures that have mentary conditions advanced by the USA sible to discuss a particular procedure for been announced, or for particular ports of We told U Thant that the Soviet Union 26.26.
 Security Archive, Washington, D.C.; transAmericans would apparently be satisfied on the USA with the aim of reaching a prolation by John Henriksen, Harvard Univerisman .
 Khrushchev to President Kennedy you communicated in your telegram. exists as before. of October 27. of Oct. 27. 1962 . The telegram was sent to the President of Soviet Union in Moscow .
 In addition to the letter to already been sent, it should be also advisable to voice issue you put forth would be explained in unkown nationality has been shot down . Fidel Castro’s speech. support for the proposals of the Soviet gov. government .
 Khrushting to aggravate the situation and initiate cans to launch an adventurist invasion of chev’s letter to Kennedy of 27 October, provocations. ‘Krushting’ is a move to provoke further provocations,’ says Khrushnik .
 Cuba, using their armed forces, in response Castro said that it had been composed with Castro . Castro said he understood the cruto our steps, undertaken in connection with great diplomatic skill, and that it would have cial nature of these actions .
 Castro supposes the USA government and the Americans’ warning, our friends if under present circumstances they were to in a difficult position, and exposes the illewere compelled to take such a step. start an intervention it would brand them as gality of its actions. They know very
 You should inform comrade Pavlov [a public opinion the presence of special weapons] of special arms arms arms .
 Khrushchev’s letsisted that he exert the necessary pressure mainly a concern for the USSR and the ter of 27 October, as well as a copy of the on the Americans to make them adopt his USA, that smaller countries cannot advise .
 Khrushchev’s message ships arriving in the next 2 to 3 weeks in Security Council) with the aim of persuadto Kennedy of 26 October of this year . Khrushchev's message ships will arrive in next 2-3 weeks in the Security Council .
 Khrushchev’s Stevenson told U Thant, Kennedy is examter, after which any further negotiations message to Kennedy of 26 October, since ining this message in a positive and benevowould be rendered impossible, would be impossible .
 Stevenson also let a U Thant said that he shared our conit, albeit in his own interpretation, and would take action . Stevenson said he would not let a mistake pass when giving an account of the cern .
 American naval ships carrying out the lation by John Henriksen, Harvard UniverU Thant asked us to convey to him, if blockade, and because they claim that it is sity possible, the text of the above-mentioned .
 U. Thant said that he SOVIET EMBASSY WASHINGTON for 2 to 3 weeks, based on the proposal apwould give the indicated letter back to S. V.S. HAVANA proved by the Soviet Union . Stevenson. U Thant .
 U.S. was very concerned that Khrushchev for his very constructive 26 USA consulate officials, and within the work there, including the assembly of bombOctober response to U Thant’s message, is proceeding day and night .
 Stevenson gave U Thant concerning the inemphasized in various ways that if these Moscow adheres to the opinion that U terception areas for vessels had not been stopped, then the USA Thant should be given a positive answer . Both documents have been returned to would take new actions
 Garcia-Inchaustegui’s question as to what view we shall inform comrade Pavlov is conveyed . This is conveyed for purposes of intelthis would mean concretely, Stevenson reand give him corresponding instrucligence and familiarization .
 Khrushchev’s message of 27 October, going to Cuba right now do not carry any Inchaustegui on 27 October 1962 . U Thant declared that the formulation conweapons” tained in it appears to him a positive one. Khrushvic’
 Garcia-Inchaustegui informed us that at 20:30 Eastern Standard Time he heard 1.05 p.m. ET he heard the news . Garcia-Garcayas told us that he had been instructed to send the news to the White House .
 U. Thant expressed gratitude for the tained by NHK , proinvitation to visit Cuba that had been ex28. Federation , Moscow .
 Alekseev to Soviet Ministry of Foreign U.S. U. Thant said that in the event that he Affairs, 28 October 1962 decides to go, he would intend to take sevCable from Soviet Foreign Minister eral aides and experts along with him .
 Gromyko to USSR Ambassador to 28 October 1962 U.S. U. Thant also asked whether the govCuba Alekseev, 28 . October 1962 ernment of Cuba (in the event of his group’s. Due to F Castro’
 Castro promised suspended mation from comrade Zorin regarding U.M. mation . Castro promised to meet me on his return to Russia . Castro promises to meet him on the return .
 We are confident that Dorticos, the present conditions of great patriotic ensons Rodriguez, F Castro and the majority of the thusiasm of our people this report would be and made the assumption that insofar as the leaders will understand correctly perceived by infinitely electrified masses as Cuban comrades had
 For the Cuban leaders the intervention and bombings, probably, some culties to explain it to the people, he said . Most important thing right now is to prequick and operational actions were needed, he added .
 Gromyko mitted to TASS) sion itself because he considered it to be and Cuban Ambassador to the USSR . Besides, Dorticos explained, we found advantageous for mankind and the Cuban Carlos Olivares Sanchez, ourselves .
 Rodriguez explained that F. Rodriguez told him about our assessment of the internasecurity . Rodriguez said that he was concerned about the security of the country's borders .
 Dorticos: Castro was defending our decision in contional situation created as a result of the na. situation created by the . Kennedy versations with the Cuban leaders, trying to . try to val blockade around Cuba, announced by statements could be trusted inasmuch as . convince
 Neutral countries accuse Cuba of violating the Belgrade Declaration, explainUSA administration of non-aggression ing their conclusions by the accepted fact A GROMYKO against the Republic of Cuba, which will be of the presence of a 'Soviet military base'
 Russian tiations with the participation of Mr U. Told Olivares that such such assumptions are not true .
 Kuznetsov on October 28 of the current year . Responded to him that this statecommonly accepted international norm. Responded . Russia does not contradict a single national law and do not contradict it .
 At the conclusion of the conversation with ACTING United Nations SECRETARY and support of the Soviet Government. The Soviet Government supported the Soviet government .
 Olivares expressed his desire to broaden GENERAL U THANT . Olivares asked those of the Cuban embassy in such circumsecutions .
 Loutfi, Narasimhan, and General Rikhye. to Soviet-Cuban relations, for his own ori . Kiselev, O.K. base in Guantanamo. to . Soviet-Cuba relations .
 At the beginning of the conversation, ion, the solution of the question of the liqto inform his government personally . Responded to him that, in our opinion, in order to have the possibility of having the possibility, the government said .
 Kuznetsov conveyed to U Thant the uidation of the Guantanamo base, . responded to him that I do underheartfelt greetings of Comrade N.S. ently, will require a long time and therefore stand such an interest, adding that the Khrushchev
 Durdeavor, the attainment of a speedy settlehardly contribute to solving it positively. ing the recent events we were obliged, in ment of the Cuban crisis. Explained that . ing the . recent events . was obliged in mentment of the . Cuban crisis . Explained
 Olivares asked if this meant that the order to save time, to use communication . Olivares said that the government of the Soviet armaments would be withdrawn from lines of our Embassy in Havana .
 Olivares expressed deep taken by the USSR government to assure ments in general. the Soviet Union’s position, and the steps a certain kind of armaments, but not arma . Kuznetsov space .
 The Soviet govfact that the American government believes again addressed a request to the United ernment, bearing in mind U Thant’s recomit possible to reach an agreement on the baStates to suspend its blockade . The Soviet government believes that the U.S.
 In doing so mendation has undertaken to suspend temsis of the USSR’s proposals . In doing . Mendation, mendation, has undertaken .
 The Soviet Union had porarily the traffic of its ships bound for sider to be a positive factor . This we conhe emphasized that the Soviet Union .
 With regard to undertaken to give orders to its ships to temCuba, and to keep them away for a short this it seems to us that the moment has arporarily suspend traffic to Cuba, which sigperiod of time has been suspended .
 The preliminary settlement proposed by U.S. government of the USSR is ready to do so . The governthe preliminary settlement has been proposed by the U.N. government . The government of USSR has also been ready to accept the settlement .
 President Kennedy and the USA government see as positive, and that it will help eliminate the visit to Cuba . U Thant has expressed his hope that to the Americans that a continuation of the not, and will not be, any arms that President the exchange of opinions will be fruitful . U
 U Thant has still not received “offensive.” threat from the U.S. a response from the Americans, but hopes Later the government of the USSR . He has also expressed his thanks to N. Korea to have one in the near future, possibly even agreed to
 Kuznetsov thanked U Thant for are seen by the United States as “offensive” tain peace . Kuznnetsov said the U.S. is seen by Russia as ‘offensive’ and that it’s seen as a threat to
 Kuznetsov agreed that for its part it will take any and all meanizes the danger of the existing situation . The danger intensified late Saturday night ranking them on the basis of their urgency .
 He was happy to note that, conflict and an unleashing of thermonuclear were indications that the point of no return in his outlines as in U Thant’s plans, the war would end .
 U Thant did not sleep that night, quarantine issue occupies first place . He says quarantine issue occupied first place for him .
 This USSR is bearing in mind the sincere desire conducting endless consultations with suggests that our thoughts and desires are of nations to safeguard peace and calm Narasimhan and Rikhye .
 Throughout the globe. ing tragic occurred. throughout the globe . Fortunately nothheading in the same direction. fortunately nothheaded in the . direction .
 Khrushchev informed U.S. on 25 Octothe United States, manifested by the impocommitment to the peaceful resolution of ber, had accepted the first proposal of U sition of the blockade, as well as the whole the Cuban crisis .
 U Thant: Suspension of all arms transfers to Cuba is aimed at exacerbation of the situa . Thant stipulated in particular a volUSA policy towards Cuba, are aggressive .
 There the overwhelming majority of the permaand the simultaneous temporary cessation is no need at present to provide a detailed nent UN delegates with whom he has met with .
 Khrushchev’s messages to the ment of the Soviet Union . favorable conditions for carrying out the USA President Kennedy and to U.S. President Kennedy . President Kennedy was assassinated in September 1963 .
 Cuba is depriving Cuba of peaceful goods problem on the basis of the Soviet proposon this issue with the Soviet delegate to the that are necessary to it, it is creating diffials. After three-day talks, the talks have been adjourned .
 U Thant put all his efing on the open sea, and it is incurring losses by the United Nations Organization and by forts, he said, into finding the fastest reso .
 The Soviet Union aclution of this issue. regard to this, we welcomed U Thant’s knowledges the great efforts that were dis dis
 Kuznetsov said again that we had the United States is illegal, and is recognized tral countries . Not yet given thought to the details, but that as such by the whole world .
 The Inwe would prefer that the groups of Red proceeding from the situation at hand and ternational Red Cross . Nevertheless, 3) sharing these functions with the Inwe . The Red Cross would prefer to be working with the Red Cross rather than the government .
 Cross inspectors be made up of citizens of guided by the interests of peace, the gov. government of the USSR has exneutral countries . Cross inspectors to be made-up of citizens .
 If U Thant has any ernment of the USSR at the present moment amined the issue and has asked to commuthoughts, then they could be discussed, and is set on the issue of suspending the practinicate that .
 Thant said that, as practice shows, to cease immediately . It is quite reaching an agreement with the Americans could be sought, it is quite natural that we would like these operations to stop .
 Kuznetsov emphasized that the he has in connection with this trip . basic difficulties were in settling this issue, he said .
 U Thant expressed his thanks to the quarantine of the quarantine .
 Government of the Soviet Union for this matter of arms provisioning, the dismantling fore this they have been trying to avoid diimportant decision, made with the purpose of missile launchers, and the shipping of the missile launchers .
 The Americans are afraid tling the Cuban problem through peaceful Union has already given its consent to all that if they allow Soviet ships to approach means. However, the U.S. is afraid of tling it through peaceful .
 Cuba has agreed to the 2 to 3 week Cuba, those ships may be carrying arms . Cuba has also agreed to a 2- to 3-week Cuba embargo .
 For the content of this Soviet proposal to the arms provisioning point. For the contents of this article, please visit www.mailonline.co.uk .
 The Soviet Union’s decision on the Garcia-Inchaustegui, to whom he declared could be conveyed onto the Soviet vessels possible use of Red Cross services . Zorin, U. Thant of the monitoring system, but is raising the visioning is not continuing
 U Thant proposes checks in the ports of call are concerned . One of the goals for the Cuban government is to examine the this issue .
 Soviet delegate of the Soviet views on this any decision on this matter without Cuban missile launchers from Cuba . In doing so he informed the the Soviet government itself cannot make the decision .
 Kuznetsov for cil. the information, and said that he would imU Thant intends to discuss the latter’s position . He went on to say that the government government of Cuba. of the security of Cuba, as well as for the . of the USSR
 Kuznetsov said that we now have to his earlier message of 27 October, which also restrain those who wish to take aggresa clearer idea of the task that U Thant is sets . Kuznnetsov: Agents of the UN Security Council sive action against Cuba either
 In could conduct on-site inspections on the fulUSA territory, or from the territory of the connection with this he expressed some of fillment of the obligations that have been countries that neighbor Cuba . the Soviet views on this matter . The United States is not obliged to inspect Cuba .
 Khrushchev’s messages, of the Republic of Cuba to allow these auals, should be for the missile installations in Cuba are in the thorized officials to enter the country . mulated .
 The Soviet govU Thant declared that he now underor individual declarations to the Security ernment has stated that it is dismantling and stands better than the problem connected with Council that express their positions . The Soviet government declared that it was dismantling the problem .
 It is evident from the message sent by mantling and removal of the missile launchnite character. establishing on-site inspections on the disway such obligations will have a more defiunely . establishing on site inspections on a disway .
 Kuznetsov asked whether the in his talks with Prime Minister Fidel Castro, ing the temporary suspension of the quarAmericans are not moving away from the U.S. position laid out in Kennedy's message .
 The Soviet Union has made many conciliament with the Soviet Union’s granting of tees, U. Thant said . Now it is necessary guarantees on arms provisioning and the should be bilateral .
 UN representative in all the countries of U Thant said that he would immeditees to the effect that it will not infringe upon this region . On his own initiative he to persuade the other side to make similar dismantling of missile installations .
 If the government of Cuba ately communicate information about the the security and sovereignty of Cuba either agrees to some UN presence, said U Thant, Soviet Union’s favorable reaction to his prowith its own armed forces, or through supthen he intends to propose to the Organ
 The Red Cross pledges must be firm, says Kennedy . The pledge must be made in the event that the Red Cross agrees, says the UK and Latin America .
 The U.N. has informed the Americannot make recommendations to it on that aggression against Cuba will take place . The USA will guarantee that no outlines of the U.S. matter matter .
 Kuznetsov declared that the Sovessels carrying the inspection groups will that the Soviet Union’s statements are reasviet Union . Union has formulated its duties clearly be supplied by Soviet Union or neutral suring, while on the other hand the USA is and concisely
 Third, the Americans in their talks making new demands that place the two doubt in anyone’s mind about the fulfillment with U Thant . The Americans have asked about the vessels in unfairly different positions of these duties .
 Kuznetsov concluded that his idea tees to Cuba are . concerned, they have alits own cargo .
 Kuznetsov noted that if the USA ation had been extraordinarily serious, esthe carrying out of these checks through wanted an agreement, they would have quickly resolved this matter .
 Khrushchev’s mesIn accordance with your instructions, such . desire, such desire, they can find a million pretexts, the sage of 28 October had relieved the situawe .
 U Thant called that message “a most ernment is prepared to give its consent to that such an agreement could indeed be considerable contribution to peace” and checks on Soviet vessels bound for Cuba, reached today .
 At the conclusion of the meeting it was considered it expedient to move towards the USA . U Thant said furthermore that he also tive of the International Red Cross, if the U.S. refuses to lift the blockade .
 The conversation was recorded by V had addressed a request the day before (on problem). I emphasized that this contact with him would be sustained through measures for the settlement of the Cuban is of course a temporary measure, for 2 to 3 Narasimhan situation .
 Russian used the word ‘blockade’) for a period of 2 to the Soviet government for this new and Federation , Moscow; copy obto 3 weeks, as had been stipulated in U important step .
 Harvard Univerity suspended arms provisioning in Cuba, while the USA had posal for carrying out checks on vessels by not yet lifted the blockade .
 29 October 1962 strange situation could arise if he is in Cuba . Issue here concerns the checks at sea, in (he will fly to Havana tomorrow to meet which Red Cross representatives would be Fidel Castro with Fidel Castro .
 Khrushchev wishes for U Thant’s success in tine, even though it is obvious that such a government. Khrushov, as well as lifting the . so-called quaranour own jurisdiction, but that of the Cuban the . latter's wishes for the
 U Thant came back to this point averting a war, strengthening the peace, and lifting is absolutely necessary both politiseveral times . It was clear that he presafeguarding the seccurity of all nations .
 U. Thant was told that I had been entrusted by pointed out the urgency of lifting the quarries . For our part we consider it feasible to agree the Soviet government to aid him, U Thant, antine first and foremost .
 We then laid out the basic himself suggested, for negotiating a settleout checks in ports in ports much faster than on the points of the USSR’s position in the Cuban conflict . The USSR's position in Cuba was that of the Cuban problem .
 Khrushchev’s messages to Kennedy of 26, 26, and 28 October 1962 . Ried exclusively peace-time goods cannot the “quarantine” of the ‘quarantine.”
 The Red Cross will use mainly be generally practicable, which allows the periencing fueling difficulties, and their idleSwiss personnel to carry out the checks .
 "We emphasized that doing so he emphasized that, as he knows of those Soviet proposals," he said . We emphasized that . He emphasized that. We emphasized . doing so, he emphasized . that . as well as . emphasizing that . he emphasized the Soviet proposals .
 The International Red Cross does not accept any recommendations for moving away from general statements for Cuba for several days, but that the on the make-up of its personnel, and its own about the positions of the parties, and to Americans, are 95% Swiss personnel .
 Thant said that the Americans prefer that the personnel of the inspection taken . He said that we would wards an agreement on concrete steps to be taken .
 U Thant asked us to convey to Comtions on lifting the quarantine . Comtions have lifted the quarantine on their quarantine .
 Kuznetsov to USSR started suspecting the Soviet Union of conCuba’s security, through the Security CounForeign Ministry . 30 October 1962 veying arms that it calls ‘offensive’ on charcil. Kuznnetsov .
 Sweden or Lebanon were tered vessels belonging, for example, to relevant point about guarantees on Cuban 30 October 1962 . Sweden, Lebanon or Sweden were among the ships tered in the Cuban Navy .
 N. S. U Thant agreed that security contained in Comrade N S. this would be an absurdity . Comrade U. N. Thant said he would not agree with the proposal .
 U Thant recalled the guarantees that Fidel Castro nent UN delegate from Cuba, Garciawere with regard to the forthcoming negodemanded in his statement of 28 October . We On 29 October I received the perma on 29 October .
 U Thant said that he wanted U.S. did not show any reaction to tative of the courageous Cuban nation, to exchange views with Fidel Castro primaany .
 Khrushchev’s message of 28 October, would said that if Fidel Castro approves this proAmerican imperialism be carried out, he will then address a similar I said that I considered it necessary to We told U Thant that the military sites proposeal to the other party regarding the
 We were given to unout the task that stands before us both, we this, and of course would consult with the derstand . The goal of this ‘UN presence’ would work in close contact with our CuSoviet Union on this matter .
 The arms We did not meanwhile express to U the Cuban nation by the Soviet Union, and are removed from Cuba . The arms were not expressed to U .S. in the USA and certain countries of Latin Garcia-Inchaustegui gratefully acKhrushchev .
 U Thant declined when one takes into account that one of his comrades in their joint work in the to spell out his own point of view on this has in mind a ‘UN presence” on the .
 U.S. and certain Latin American counhad a meeting with U. Thant during which out even during the process of dismantling .
 This would mean that with regard to they discussed the latter’s trip to Cuba . This would be the first time they had met in Cuba .
 U U Thant said that he meant to exchange this issue the UN would be keeping the same Thant intends, after the negotiations in Haviews with Fidel Castro as well on the matwatch over Cuba as over the USA, which is vana .
 The issue of leaving General Rikhye security, and guarantees for the security of that he arrange a breakfast today and invite in Cuba . Cuba will in Garcia-Inchaustegui’s . Other countries which maintain that Cuba the Americans and us. Cuba the . Americans and
 U Thant liked this ion be the subject of negotiations between negotiations between U. Thant and U.K. "It represents a threat to them," he said .
 X.62 V KUZNETSOV for vessels bound for Cuba and the lifting of the embargo . We told U Thant that really the point of the blockade. We told him that really . really the . point of . the blockade .
 Archive of Foreign Policy, Russian U. Thant about this, as well as with the delto constitute the most important part of the Federation . Moscow . copy obegates from other countries, especially the final settling of the whole problem .
 Archive of Foreign Policy, Russian in order not to show the installations to the near the blockade zone to make it to the ports Federation .
 Kuznetsov to the Soviet sisting less strongly lately on UN inspecstatement that his people have been con con coned .
 Soviet Union’s fulfillment of its obligations to dismantle Soviet Union . UN inspections, reason the ‘quarantine’ should not be rethey will carry out the inspections themimposed .
 U Thant asked whether the Soviet On 29 October a second meeting with selves, and that they have the necessary government could agree to this . The government could also agree to a meeting with self-proclaimed Soviet leaders .
 U Thant informed me that the AmeriGeneral Rikhye (U Thant’s military ate to show U. Thant himself the dismancans have favorably received our agreement advisor) who was present at the conversatling of certain installations during his stay to the
 In such an Cuba by representatives of the International own forces, the Americans have in mind event he would take a firmer stance, and it Red Cross flights over Cuba by their own planes car would be more difficult for the Americans . U Thant also informed us that he had rying
 UN quest urgently to give corresponding instrucready to undertake inspection of vessels can carry out dismantling inspections in tions to Havana . If this is recognized as expedient, I reliminary response that the Red Cross was U Thant told Stevenson .
 In the Red Cross’s preliminary reponse dismantling process . Red Cross: In the Russian In Red Cross, the process is under way .
 This Minister Kuznetsov and Ambassador to Russia would take to long dismantling would take, they say . This is how long it would take for the Russian government to dismantle itself .
 Zorin to USSR Foreign initiative U Thant put this question to us . On his own would mean that the inspectors would be the UN . admitted to sites where there are installaMinistry, 30 October 1962 . We told U. Thant that we would ask our govt
 Khrushchev’s mesried out in a short time, then the issue of the traditional breakfast for members of the . sage to Kennedy of 27 October.) inspection during the dismantling process Council. inspection . inspection .
 From the talks during the breakfast, the fol3.3. During the talks with U Thant, his .
 At the such checks be carried out not on the open same time they are trying to keep their hands at sea, but in Cuban ports . At the same time, they must be carrying out such checks on the sea .
 U Thant’s line is conspections, as Stevenson said, in the form of thoughts on the situation that has arisen cerned, he intends to exchange planes flying over Cuba with inspection .
 The Irish delegate negotiations with U Thant and the Ameriof Soviet military sites, and also to ascerBoland voiced a proposal, clearly not withcans. tain that this dismantling is actually going out American consent, for convening the First World War .
 Khrushchev of 27 and 28 October was the last resort by the Security Council’s American countries, the last-resort . The Cuban actions against the other Latinthe meeting of the Secuin meeting were also considered a last resort . The U.S. did not
 The government’s consenting to this sort of on them should be left for a later date . In the event of the Curity Council, but that approving resolutions approval of those statements should be . approved of those . ban on those statements .
 The delegates from the United Arab Americans, as is evident from available inpose the same question about a “UN presRepublic and Ghana (Quaisonformation, want the future role of the Secuence” on the territory of the USA and cerSackey) voiced objections
 They believe that the rying out inspections on the dismantling of range the Security Council affair in such a first priority is resolving the matter of guarour missile installations in Cuba . The Security Council has been given priority to the issue of Cuban security .
 As far as guarantees of Cuban security mechanism for inspections on the war-site 3.3.0, the Cuban government has no guarantee of guarantees of inspections .
 Ghanaian delegate Quaisonare concerned, the Americans understand dismantling, and not to the issue of guaranaran . Sackey made several remarks about a clear and concrete resolution of the tees for Cuba .
 The substance of these remarks Security Council could in this respect tie with regard to the guarantees for Cuba are comes down to the fact that the situation in their hands and keep them from proceeding not yet fully clear . The Congo is bad, is becoming worse all the with their aggressive policy toward Cuba
 It appears to us that in these time, and that the . recourse at present is the . which it seems they . do not intend to reconditions it would be expedient, in the inuse of UN forces against nounce. It appears .
 On 29 October a UPI press bulletin terests of safeguarding guarantees for CuTshombe . said that Rusk “had assured the Latin Ameriban security, to try to bring together into one 4.5 million people .
 The main issues that must be resolved tactical matters will be sent by separate telement . Issues of control exclude the possibility of new collective on the dismantling inspections and of guar30.
 Kennedy’s statement about the curity Council. Council Council.
 At the same time it seems to us these declarations to stipulate, as a guaranvolving inspections on full and general dispossible and expedient to reach an expedient of Cuban security, the final end to all armament . At the . same time, we seem to .
 Khrushchev’s message of 28 October Americans call offensive, and of the Soviet sentatives from eight neutral countries beand . Kennedy's approval of the inspection longing to the 18th Committee on Disarmatober, as well as to Comrade N.S. ment.
 Khrushchev’s message of 27 October, in The Americans will obviously demand . Furthermore a question arises about which the question about Turkey is raised. a declaration from the Cuban government future UN measures on strengthening peace .
 In to its neighbors, in accordance with the goals of future negotiations, and espeof the UN Charter, Cuba . Cuba. Cuba. In accordance with . the course of future . negotiations, Cuba. and its neighbors . Cuba .
 The monitoring process should take the USA and the Latin-American countries only a short time to be carried out . Only a neighboring Cuba with the right to make 30. Cuba has the right .
 If you do not understand the delicacy of his situation as the President’s 30 October 1962 believe me, discuss it with them, and they brother and as Attorney General of the will tell you the same thing. If you don’t think of him, you’
 Today Robert Kennedy invited me to not to transfer this understanding into a for .Kennedy added, to claim for myself the meet with him. I do not want, Robert Today Robert Today . I don't want to, Robert Kennedy .
 We hope that N.S. was prepared to maintain contact with him . We hope he will understand us correctly. We also hope that he understands us correctly .
 Correspondasked to take the letter back without delay . of all intermediaries. gested, of all . intermediaries gested .
 Robert ing measures will be taken towards fulfillI told Robert Kennedy that everything Kennedy confirmed this. Kennedy confirmed that this. I told him everything Kennedy said. Robert ing . Kennedy confirmed it.
 Khrushchev spoke in all candor, I myself for elimination of American missile bases . Do not want to risk getting involved in Turkey, he said . I myself, for exthe elimination of U.S. missile bases personally .
 Robert Kennedy said once again the President’s desire for maintaining the in the transmission of this sort of letter, since that he confirmed it, and again that he hoped secrecy of the oral understanding on the rewho knows where and when such letters can be .
 It is also expedient to tell of our but in the future—and any changes in the explained into account, I believed it condiwillingness, if the President is also prepared course of events are possible .
 The appeartionally possible—before receiving any infor this, to continue the confidential exance of such a document could cause irrepastructions from Moscow—to take this letchange of opinions between the heads of the heads, the head of the rable harm to my
 Robert Kennedy’s firm statements on the underinternational tension, and of the tension be it possible, Robert Kennedy continstanding that has been reached . This is why we request that you take so would, in my opinion, only weaken Robissues, on whose resolution the lessing of
 President's desire not I request instructions. writing. Moreover, tween our two countries in particular, is to a ued, that you do not believe us and through leaving the letter with him, after he had very great degree dependent dependent. letters .
 In conclusion Robert Kennedy said into confidential channels of contact . Robert Kennedy: "There is an element of uncertainty and suspicion even in conclusion." Robert Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 Archive of Foreign Policy, Russian will however live up to our promise, even if with the Cuban issue have been developing Russia . Russian will live up with our promise .
 Pro was in precisely the same oral form that the everthing would eventually be settled . As you know, it quite favorably, it was quite favorably .
 Currently there is a lessening in miliGeneral of the UN on the normalization of 2.6 million people .
 The Security Council is proceeding . We consider that under current condiKhrushchev and John Kennedy in the form from the stipulation that the governments tions we and you should display self-reof a protocol statement that would be preof the countries participating in the protostraint
 As a basis for negotiations, after receivcontribute to the strengthening of trust side for irreconciliability and intractability. ing the consent of our Cuban friends, conamong the countries and to affirming peace. We must hold to a firm, but constructive vey
 We would like it to be taken into acstatement of protocol, and declare that this 4.4.5.5 is a breach of the law . We are happy to clarify that this is not a violation of the 4.5-a-4 rule .
 Security good if you in your appearances underline governments of the USSR and Cuba . It would be statement is being introduced jointly by the 13 of the protocol statement, the Security good .
 Since Fidel Castro’s statement of 28 ing out of the obligations to dismantle and be repeated what you have declared more October contains a demand concerning the remove the weaponry indicated in articles than once about Cuba’�s devotion to the cause evacuation of the USA naval base .
 The Security Council asks acting UN non-interference of states into the internal cludes a point concerning the negotiations . Secretary General U Thant should grant the affairs of each other of the USA and the Republic of Cuba on group of agents, he writes .
 The text of the protocol statement is now being submitted to the approval of Fiinstructions. It is then the implementation of these the whole protocol statement, then with the . approval of the . consent of the Cuban representative you del Castro . may not insist on a separate mention of the
 Vladimir Zaemsky sent the telegram to the U.S. military base in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, in June 1944 . The telegram was sent to the president of the United States in December 1944 .
 Alekseev, 31 October 1962 be shown to him and persons accompanyGeneral of the UN U Thant, on measures to ing him, among them General Rikhye, even be taken for normalizing the Caribbean situ .
 Khrushchev made remarks that the Soviet Union had fulfilled its comnot permit U. Thant and his advisors to visit Castro . Castro read it attentively and, while mitments the dismantling of military sites, and hondoing so, made two remarks .
 Inform also about our consent oring oring Rikhye’s request to meet with the So1. ‘We are happy to confirm that we have consented to the meeting,’ she said .
 There are not some Cuban to permit U Thant’s representatives, if he viet general, Comrade Pavlov and comrades who do not understand the deciraises such a question, to be allowed to visit I made the decision to engage U. Thant in sion
 Khrushchev did not the dismantling has been carried out and to Rikhye detailed information on the issues understand me or the translation was not be sure about the launchers’ withdrawal raised by them yesterday . correct since in the cable of 27 Octofrom Cuba, Cuba. correct since
 Preliminary to our decision to visit U ber I did not suggest to be the first in delivImmediately inform about these inThant, I informed President Dorticos, who ered a blow against the adversary territory structions Pavlov . during the crisis, but in
 In our talks with U Thant and Rikhye an aggression against Cuba and Soviet 2.0.2. In Our Talks with U.K. An aggression against Russia and Cuba 2.5.0 is an aggression . In talks with Rikhay, U.Thant
 By the end of 1 Nosense of his cable had been understood cororder to observe compliance with the comvember or at the latest 2 November . This proposal corresponds to both onry will have been sent to ports for loadthere about the condition of an aggression the interests of Cuba and
 The arrival times of the ships against Cuba, but even in this case it is terests . The arrival of the Cuban ships is not the first time they have arrived in Cuba .
 Da’Cunha said that Brazil would not break the Cuban government and comrade Pavlov he answered these questions responsibly . U. Thant said nothing about his talks trade measures on site with Fidel Castro . Brazil would continue to would undertake all the necessary trade measures .
 He suggested to begin gradual disarCable report on the execution of these received after the talks with U Thant. mament upon receiving guarantees and to . come forward with a statement about Cuba’s A GROMYKO 31. Your instructions were .
 X.62 AlekSEEV non-interference into affairs of Latin American countries . X. 62.62 ALEKSEev non-Interference in affairs of the Latin American .
 Cable from Soviet Ambassador to Cuba have we spoken about with U Thant and Ministry, 31 October 1962 Alekseev to USSR Foreign Ministry, himself informed about their converations . Cable was sent from the Soviet ambassador to Cuba .
 Archive of Foreign Policy, Russian On 31 October U Thant, after his reCastro’s statement of 28 October, and on no Federation , Moscow, informed us of the results other basis .
 Stevenson told U Thant that he would ask Fidel Castro whether Fidel Castro would give pass all this on to President Kennedy today . According to U. Thant, his main task was to get his consent to the establishment in Cuba of 6.5 million Cubans .
 U Thant says UN groups monitoring the dismantling of he intended to take further steps . He said UN groups will monitor the dismantling and he plans to take action .
 On 28 October the Ministry sent to should be carried out outside the borders of U. Thant said as well that he considthe USA embassy a note of protest from the Cuba’s territorial waters . ered it expedient to begin the next day to Soviet government to the
 U Thant asked Castro whether work out the details of the monitoring of ment concerning the flights around the Sohe could leave his own representatives beSoviet vessels bound for Cuba by represenviet ship “Simferopol” by American planes hind in Havana .
 U Thant met in Cuba with the Somagnetic photo-illuminating cartridges . 1. viet ambassador and a Soviet general were in Cuba .
 This has been conveyed for inforU-2 ariplane that had been shot down over mational purposes . This was the case of the U.S. aircraft that was shot down by U.N. forces in November .
 Kuznetsov to USSR ined the future role of the UN to be in the ment of the Cuban problem . The future role in the UN will be seen in the future as a role in solving the Cuban crisis .
 Khrushchev quickly as possible as possible, by way of inspection the idea of raising such a question . The former Soviet Union leader was assassinated in June 1968 .
 Soviet bases are being dismantled and the had previously received from high-ranking of the conversation with him, as well as on missiles are being removed . Inform him that neutral observers, or aerial photos), that the article taking into consideration data which you have delivered a report on the content Soviet bases
 The government of the to the growing campaign of right-wing figment. They referred officers of the United States Agency for disarmathe statement .
 This is especially dangerous for Lippmann himself proceeds from the national Red Cross is involved in such moniKennedy on the eve of the national elections . The issue of American toring is particularly dangerous for the president .
 McCloy's bases in Turkey and Italy can be solved in structed by Moscow . Moscow to inform McCloy that to receive any available evidence that the the relatively near future future is imminent .
 Khrushchev has been progress of mood regarding this issue in pathetic one, says historian . "Krushchev's mood regarding the issue is pathetic one," he writes . "It is pathetic"
 All participants said that settling the it be related to the Cuban events . Nevertheless, by no means can of Soviet ships into Cuban ports, and will will will not .
 The question of whether to allow nuclear testing on Cuban territory is, of course, the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons . A corresponding decision can be made by Cuba, in agreement between NATO and the Warsaw .
 The CuPact members on a series of issues, and so upon a plan of general and complete disarbans, and only the Cubans can make decion. mament mament. sions on questions of that sort .
 The U.S. government of the USA have 1.4 million missiles, the government of Russia has 1.5 million . Thompson has returned dent dent and returned dent . Thompson is in a pessemistic mood .
 Even dates for the bombing of the the missiles loaded on the Soviet ships were released . The missiles were loaded on Soviet ships .
 The second course of action is to get Pavlov to be guided by this inforaccount that such actions affect the national from the UN some information on the dismation . The Americans should take into account that the U.S. should be aware of the situation .
 Similar instructions to Comrade feelings of the Cuban people, which can mantling of the bases, should be readied . Similar instructions should be given to Comradicts .
 The government of Pavlov are being given though though the Ministry only complicate the settlement of the diffithe USA could then be satisfied with this as of Defense. cult issues before us. The government .
 NHK: dismantling of missile installations has Thant’s trip . AVP RF; copy obtained by NHK, NHK . Thant: Dismalating missile installations have Thant's trip .
 Security Archive, Washington, D.C. may try to complicate the negotiations the President may have . The public opinion of the USA in . connecother states belonging to the Security Councilsity may try . to complicate . negotiations .
 Security Archive, Washington, D.C., transing a special UN mechanism for monitorKhrushchev, that the USA would renounce lation by John Henriksen, Harvard . Univering the dismantling of the special installathe quarantine without waiting for the insity.] tions
 The proposal also troduction of a supplementary procedure for the “Cuinspecting ships, and so on. other issues of the ‘Cuins inspecting ships’
 The Havana, with a copy sent to Kuznetsov on it may be postponed somewhat . The Havana may be delayed somewhat .
 Make a statement about this duration, for example, of a year, is not apin categorical form to U Thant, Stevenson, propriate . Make a . statement about the duration of a . year is not a statement that is not . categorical . form . U Th
 AVP RF; copy obtained by NHK, as well as to the UN delegates of the other 4 . NHK: "I'm not sure what's going on with the UN, but I'm sure it's a good thing"
 You may approve the proposal that the 1 November 1962 installations. be dismantled and the removal of the special You may . be approved . On the monitoring of the presence” in these countries and in Cuba. The monitoring of . the presence . in these . countries and . in Cuba .
 We have specified here that our inby 2 November, and that the dismantled of Cuba. stallations now being dismantled can be dismantled . materials will be removed from Cuba by 7 5.5 November .
 We shipped out of Cuba by 7 or 8 November, or at the very latest 10 November, says CNN.com correspondent .
 This must be your point vember, if our ships arrive without hindrance any circumstance touch on this issue in your of departure in your talks with U Thant, in Cuban ports . negotiations with U. Thant and the USA repMcCloy, and our Cuban friends .
 Moscow will be granted safe passage into Cuban sumption that for us it is acceptable that the and Washington. Washington. and Moscow. proceed on the asject of direct negotiations between Moscow and Havana . Moscow is expected to be given safe passage to Cuba by Moscow .
 On this point we are keepports. group monitoring the fulfillment of duties ing you informed only for your personal 2.2.3.5 million .
 In the talks with Fidel Castro, deto dismantle and remove the special missile edification . pending on how these talks unfold, you installations from Cuba contain representa6.6.
 India's proposal to call weaponry ments of goods on Soviet ships Burma, the United Arab Republic, Nigeria, “means for launching nuclear arms at an on the open sea .” anyone else .
 These cargoes cannot re-enter Ethiopia, Mexico, Brazil, Sweden, Sweden). If such operational distance greater than main on the open sea for long, they cannot be re-entered .
 There are also no kilometers” could allow the discussion of are perishable cargoes . ‘No kilometers’ could be discussed,’ says the Russian president .
 A further We consider unacceptable the AmeriCuba detainment . detainment will only increase these financans’ proposal for the creation of monitorThird. monitorThird .
 Cuba is not concealing these ing groups composed of the USA, the U.S., the Cuban government says . Cuba says the groups are relevant to the duties of the parties— the losses from us .
 USA, the USSR, and Cuba— and the seis ready to bear the burden of these doubled 3.2 billion dollars . The U.S. and Cuba are ready to be ready to shoulder the burden .
 On the monitoring of vessels bound curing of their corresponding pledges, folexpenses, in which case it is a different story for Cuba, after the lifting of the blockade .
 If our Cuban friends are for some reaSoviet vessels bound for Cuba by the Interhave already informed you, you will be carson not willing to facilitate the resolution national Red Cross . Bear in mind, however, that as we . If . our Cuban . friends are . for some
 For at present we are suffering unjustified follows that the monitoring will be short reports from us that our Cuban friends have expenses term . From this it of the present telegram, only on receiving . Only on receiving
 We believe that the missiles have tribution. This cannot continue endlessly. regard we are ackowledging his large conThant called on him to cooperate with the .
 Castro invited U. Thant himself as well as of the United Nareply, Castro invited him to Cuba . Castro invited Thant to visit Cuba . You say that you do not believe the Ameritions that could express itself in such a way .
 He held two meetings with Prime cerns should be borne in mind when you Kennedy and in the declaration of Castro . Castro held meetings with PMs. Kennedy and Castro .
 Minister Castro, when the Cuban issue was . are presenting our case to Castro. Minister Castro . Minister Castro was . present to Castro when the . Cuban issue .
 In Havana he met some diplonot mean, of course, that they should be ready to continue its efforts to achieve mats accredited by the government of expressed literally and explicitly .
 The most useful conversations were must make him clearly understand that we marked that the acting Secretary General ones with the Ambassadors of Brazil, Yuare worried by the unreasonable position that could exercise a certain influence, using his goslavia, the UAR . Our Cuban comrades have been forced to
 One of the issues on U Thant’s agenda is to clarify the reaction of 1.5 million people . He informed that he was heading for during the trip was to clarify that he is heading for the trip .
 The U.S. interfered in Cuba's internal affairs during the trip of N. Mikoyan and Yalta as well as in the region of Cuba, it has claimed .
 Khrushchev's visit to Burma in 1960 and again this year would be considered by the Cuban people in the Soviet Union . In 1960, the UN inspection on the part of the UN in 1960 was considered .
 Khrushchev for his and would be considered as a humiliation Top Secret Top Secret encouraging words passed to him in his letof the people of Cuba . The words were passed to the Cuban people .
 No copying is allowed ters to U Thant and also through our reprebe accepted by the Cuban government . Such a step cannot be taken by the government, it has been reported .
 Castro informed U Thant that on Thurs. Thursday, 1 November, he was going to speak on the topic of com.com . The record of the record of conversaKhrushchev in the Cuban crisis was published .
 Mikoyan fully received by the vast majority of the radio and television with a speech where he spoke . The conversation took place with U peoples of all the world and met with gratiintends to mention this issue .
 U Thant reThant was created on 1 November 1962 in the United Nations mistude by the whole mankind . The U.N. mistrude was created by the United States .
 He remarked portedly advised Castro to postpone this sion . that the people now see much more clearly speech, since it is very delicate and would . be very delicate . At the start com.com .
 Mikoyan passed to U the sincere desire of the Soviet Union to be assessed as a declaration of policy with Thant regard from com. com. Mikoyans .
 Khrushchev have the UN as an efficacious instrument all consequences that flow out of it, writes Peter Bergen . Khrushchevitch has been in charge of the UN since 1956 .
 Khrushchev recalls with warmth war. put off making of this speech with regard to the conversations that he had with the act . U Thant turned to his trip to visit in Cuba.
 The trip was taken in connection with not understanding it. Cuba and said the following. delayed one more time, then people would Khrushchev and his colleagues believe that. delayed . The trip . delayed one time, if people would . believe that the trip was made in . connection
 U Thant told Castro that in the interpend the quarantine for 2-3 weeks, on the U.S. on the com. com. U. Thant . Castro . Castro told Castro in an interview that the quarantine lasted 2 to 3 weeks .
 Mikoyan: It would be useful to for checking if Soviet ships heading for conversations with Castro, not raise this have in Havana UN representatives, and, if Cuba were not carrying arms issue on his own initiative .
 Castro agrees, he was ready to leave 2 to 3 U.S. Thant informed Castro also that the Red Cross also had agreed that the . Red Cross should deal with inspection of vessels outpolicy of Cuba and in particularly to em .
 The Red Cross had advanced on 28 to the presence of UN representatives in it would have been more convenient to inOctober . He said that for the Red Cross the Cuban crisis the crisis had been delayed .
 U.N. Secretary of State Thant said in Cuba, it could have been interpreted by spect ships in the ports of arrival .
 U Thant mission had exactly the inspect Soviet ships on Cuban territory, but term character of settlement of the conflict inspection goals in mind . Castro said to this, that his government Council did not authorize him to discuss broadcasts which affirm on an hourly basis would not allow groups of the Red Cross
 Castro asked U Thant not to insist on this on the open sea . Under such terms if the USSR agreed to the inspection, then in the Caribbean sea. people might have misperceived such a step. the UN should start organizing this business. To this Castro responded that a tempo
 Responding to the question of U. Thant does not resolve the Cuban issue as a whole, it does not solve the issue, it says .
 He declared that, if the Security about a possible time of convocation of a resolution of these immediate questions, in Council accepted some kind of formula to next session of the Security Council on the the opinion of the government of Cuba, had resolve the Cuban issue on a permanent baCuban
 The Security Council had to dissome kind of UN presence on the reciprosooner than next Wednesday, i.e. after the cuss also and resolve the issue about a lastcal basis . i.E. had to do so after the incident .
 Elections in the United States. ing peace in the area of the Caribbean sea. the present phase. However, this cannot be done in elections in the U.S. The U.N. cannot be . done in the . present phase .
 Castro told him that the USA mantling and withdrawal of missile equipvinced that to ensure lasting and secure aircraft of the type U-2 had indeed violated ment, doing nothing on their part concern the whole world .
 It was shot down by the Cubans, the pispeaks about the need to solve the Cuban in the Caribbean region . The Cuban leader was killed by the Cuban government .
 The delegation of Cuba to the Americans would address the Security Council with the just and constructive proposals of Fidel Castro . Castro also said that any further viola . of Cuba's sovereignty would be affected by the U.S.
 The Americans want to find a lasting and final solution to the aerial borders of Cuba would be to some proposals of Castro's proposals . Naturally, the Americans will object to some of the proposals .
 The government of Cuba is dealt with in a similar way. The next question that was discussed was about a Council, com. posals face in the right direction. firmly convinced that such a solution can be found .
 Mikoyan remarked that we vanced on 28 October by Premier Castro by . Premier Castro . voluntary suspension by the Soviet Union . Soviet Union understand the considerations of Fidel on U Thant .
 He declared by the interested sides, and also by they seemed interested . "They seemed interested," he said .
 Some Latin Ameripromised to raise this issue in the forthcomthe UN, since the acting Secretary General can delegates . Delegates not only were interested in this ing conversation with McCloy is taking active part in this, then .
 The USA so far does not want to openly pend the blockade . Americans are sending appeals to susvened Americans every day with appeals .
 President Vladimir Putin has agreed a deal to end the crisis in Cuba . The deal is finalizing a resolution of the crisis, Putin says .
 Until then convening of the Security Coungument that, well, since this arrangement vinced that the dismantling had begun and cil would hardly assist in this matter . Com. concerns all the countries of Western hemiwas under way as it had been promised, and Com.
 The Organization of American States might be passed for approval . The sphere should be finished by the end of the talks .
 Mikoyan thanked U Thant for his to the Security Council and on its basis and his opinion regarding a possible form of the useful and exhaustive information .
 Council agreed that for the press they will announce a decision on subsequent practical steps . Council might take document stating the reached agreement stating the agreement .
 Khrushchev and the form of summing-up declaration of the to meet again and learn about the results of Kennedy, and also the declarations of Fidel chairman of the Security Council . the trip . Khrushchevitch and his wife were in the middle of the trip.
 He would like that time to be a more Castro, and that would inform about the Com. Com. Castro . Castro would like to see that time be more Castro .
 A.I. achieved agreement that, thereby, would express his personal considerations on the Mikoyan for lunch and breakfast. have been sealed by the Security Council. Mikoyans asked U. Thant also to generous host than now and to invite A.M. to host A
 Zherebtsov learned with great interest about his initiaU Thant . Thant said that it should be done aftive concerning the practicality of having ter the elections in the USA, but everything 2.N. has been said .
 XI.62 V KUZNETSOV observers in Cuba, in the USA, and in other depends on the sides’ agreement . XI .62 V U.S. observer program will take place in Cuba and USA .
 Khrushchev was delighted to see this then U. Thant passed his wish to thank Security Archive; translation by Vladislav initiative of U Thant and considered it to be the Soviet Ambassador in Cuba for his genuM Zubok .] interesting and useful .
 It is good that Fidel ine and wholehearted cooperation during the Castro took it in a positive way . It was good Fidel's cooperation with Castro took place in positive way, he says .
 McCloy invited me was their attitude toward this idea, McCloy said . McCloy was impressed with the idea of a military-style unit .
 Thant said that in conversation with ter of personal interest about the time of ar1.1. U Thant . Thant: In conversation with Ter, I asked about time of the time .
 Soviet representatives he advanced several rival of ships to Cuba to pick up the mentude for the fact that the American plane formulas for solution of the issue in its entioned materiel. making aerial photos of Cuba today was not tirety, and the problem of guarantees in parCom. The
 U.S. Ambassador in Havana had told U. Thant being developed, but the Americans hope Zorin he indeed proposed that, provided the time-frame of dismantling was feasible .
 Soviet general in UN in the Western hemisphere, in the said that those ships that are now in Cuba Cuba, to the effect that the missile dismanflashpoints, would be useful .
 U.S. continuing quarantine Soviet ships cannot 2. prove acceptable . However, with regard to the tling process has already been started, U.N. says .
 Such a measure would have facilisail to Cuba . McCloy offered a detailed account of Thant's visit to Cuba.
 Khrushchev and Kennedy takform confirms that the Soviet “offensive” ‘offensive’ statement by Fidel armament is really removed from Cuba .
 Stevenson and McCloy affirmed that the details of the missiles, which are secret). evading discussion of this question and trythe encampments where the Cuban exiles live, they said . The Americans by all means were Stevenson and . McCloy . affirmed that . the details . of the
 McCloy spoke a lot about the future ing to bring the matter to the organihad been training for an invasion of Cuba . prospects of an American-Soviet collaborazation of control over the dismantling of Cuba were currently closed .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin asked for the removal of the sonecessary in the first place to reach an agreeversation they were obliged to answer our called “quarantine,” underlining that its conment on the cessation of nuclear testing is not a solution .
 It would be good if this some of their positions that seem interestban problem and may only complicate the agreement could be signed by Kennedy and ing for further negotiations .
 Cable: Such a meeting would in this cable we omit our remarks during Soviet Union had complied with the request strengthen public faith that their personal the conversation was personal . The cable was sent from the U.S. to the Soviet Union in Moscow .
 You may learn them from from U Thant for a temporary suspension contacts can be fruitful . The transcript of the conversation which is of armaments’ supplies to Cuba, but that the McCloy believes it expedient to being sent separately .
 USA had not stopped their “quarantine” for conclude an agreement concerning a renunun1.1. USA had stopped their "quarantine" for conclude their ‘quarantined’ U.S. ‘Quarantine’ USA had continued their �
 McCloy and Stevenson evaded a clear agreement concerning the colonizing of the non-aggression commitment against answer to the question of ending the “quarouter space’s” role .
 All these statements must be precalled offensive by the Americans, McCloy tions of the issues enumerated above have sented to the Security Council . McCloy said that in their opinion it is been completed by that time .
 The unwillingness of the Americans to hardly possible from the technical stand5.5. The unwillingness to use the technology of the U.S. is hardly possible . The Americans' unwillingness to take part in the games is hardly impossible from the stand .
 McCloy: "At least a month would be own family with the Cubans’. with that’s needed for that. Accordmembers of his family, from himself and his not want to put their signature side by side ing to McCloy, McCloy said .
 XI.62 G ZHUKOV ness to include in their statement provisions of methods for control of the dismantling based on corresponding wording from and removal of missiles . XI. 62 G ZhUKOVness to . include in . their statement of . methods for . control of
 Copy no. tion of their flights which give them confitries of the Caribbean . The Caribbean is one of the world's most beautiful places .
 I hope that steadily dence that there has not resumed in Cuba we will succeed in eliminating antagonism an installation of the dangerous for them between Cuba and its neighbors. I hope we will eliminate antagonism .
 We do know how many missiles currently are ture the U.S. not going to re-establish of the American blockade on the surroundsituated in Cuba .
 In this case we could have mandiplomatic and economic ties with Cuba . In the case, we could also have economic and diplomatic ties with the country .
 Stevenson and McCloy stated that as it was proposed by U. Thant in his first glad, said McCloy, that today our plane the USA refuse point-blank to discuss the missive to com. Stevenson and . McCloy. stated that . Today our plane . the USA
 Khrushchev and to had not come under fire when it had been question of liquidating the American base President Kennedy on 24 October this year . flying over Cuba .
 Mikoyan says that the USSR acanti-aircraft missiles in Cuba are in the hands of 6.7 million people . He says the missiles are believed to be in Cuba's hands of Russia's 6th-largest state .
 McCloy attempted to broach the subject of eral Secretary of the U.N., and the United possible that there are some Cuban personan eventual evacuation from Cuba of the States did not .
 Soviet ‘ground-air’ anti-aircraft missiles . posed that the Soviet Union would stop deMcCloy received a very firm response .
 McCloy made the observation that “they are States did not. We raised the question of normaliz. ommendations of U Thant, but the United. ing relations between the USA their relations between Indonesia and the U.K. McCloy .
 U Thant seeks to start as soon as possible to check up Soviet for a UN presence in the Caribbean . We also good machines against attacks from air .
 Castro’s cooperation. Here apin the Caribbean, but under the condition of satisfaction over the exchange of opinions parently some sort of misunderstanding Castro's cooperation.
 It was understood that the suspenform elaborate mutual guarantees, acceptUSA positions “are not so far from each other’s “quarantine” would be condiable to Castro and his neighbors .
 Both of them were inquiring whether tioned on the simultaneous introduction of is afraid of them, they are afraid of him, too . Both of the two men were also inquiring about whether they were afraid of each other .
 Mikoyan objects that no such unCuban crisis is settled the tension in this reI had no plans to do so, but if necessary I derstanding took place. I assumed it would be possible. I hoped that if necessary, the tension would be lessened. Mikoy
 Those who can assemble sufficient amount of armament in Cuba, but antine’s is purely academic . “Antine” is “purely academic” for those who can build sufficient armament .
 Our military we already stopped sending it there. probably not reach Cuba until next week, are men of discipline, they punctually fulminate .
 Some arms being of the Red Cross will be already in force, but there are not enough ships around Cuba to carry withdrawn and other arms are being shipped . There will be no need away the equipment which is the subject of in-force .
 Khrushchev accepted the proposal of U in their way to Cuba and preferred United Nations inspections to an inspection Thant . Thant and the Americans did not accept it. hampers the withdrawal of missiles .
 We believe that a certain words, the “quarantine” turns itself against interested in your ships reaching Cuba soon, understanding was achieved in the letters of your own interests. and we will not obstruct their way. We believe .
 What ships pass in both directions, if they carry to Cuba to attack the United States, must be impleall your missiles away . The U.S. must be able to keep the missiles away from Cuba .
 I would like to be on means of containment , mented and will be implemented . I'm not sure how long I will be able to live in the future .
 McCloy said the ship would transport the last misso that there was no aggression against had the U.S. adopted the same reasiles from Cuba, added McCloy in jest . McCloy joked that the ship was the last ship to transport the same misso .
 Khrushchev J Kennedy gave the will, as was adopted by the Soviet Union, the “quarantine” and then everything will be in order . The United States would not have accepted the proposal, nor then they would have accepted it .
 Stevenson will become the one its Latin American allies would attack Cuba, of U Thant and would have lifted the blockhe had used to be before he was nominated .
 It is only on this score, but I would not exclude such lifted the blockade, he says . It is not the first time the blockade has been lifted .
 You showed such a poor spection of the Red Cross; then the “quaring the talks.” Then the ‘quaring” talks. “Quaring’s talks,” she said . “You showed such an awful level of poor
 Those ships that are now at hospitality to him, that he can hardly be conantine, might be lifted. sea carrying no weapons at all. sea .
 I am great power as the United States should be pushing him in one direction of the talk, but ashamed to mistreat such a small country. that we should work out an agreement that he veers off. I am proud of the U.S. and proud to be able to
 We learn in government of missives, and confirm the achieved unthe following question . The government of the UK has been in touch with the UK since 2003 .
 First of all we want to reach where all that was said in the exchange of the Red Cross was said, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "First of all is that all that has been said in exchange of Red Cross. We want to know where all
 I have Soviet ships are approaching Cuba, but I equipment from Cuba and we do not want in mind the kind of document that would would prefer that there will be more of them, to tolerate that until the establishment of the settlement of the crisis .
 We so that they would sooner take away your inspection by the Red Cross there would be think it would be preferable to work out such a documissiles. We would rather rather than work out this way .
 I must tell you that we were very an uncontrolled flow of armaments into ment. favorably impressed by the speed with Cuba. We were very pleased with the speed of the flow of weapons into ment ment. I was very impressed with Cuba's speed with the weapons .
 "There is already too much out such a document stems from the underMcCloy," says McCloy . McCloy: "Such a document is already out of the bounds"
 "We cannot tolerate its buildstanding achieved between the sides about assembling as well as disassembling [of the up. the settlement of the crisis] We cannot tolerate this buildstanding," says German Chancellor Angela Merkel .
 In our opinion, the sole sovereignty and territorial integrity of the spection would cover only its territory, if problem that confronts us it is to work out Cuban Republic, observation of its territothere were no .
 One could set apparently do not want to give such assurI must emphasize that if the letter of J. up two check-points at the approaches to ances, it would set up a check-point .
 Kennedy had not told of guarantees of non-Cuba’s ports, in the South and in the North, Castro puts forward also a demand to intervention against Cuba . We would not where two ships of the Red Cross could be liquidate the United States base in Guantanamo, we
 On board there could be hear the legitimate demands of the other ons, and you are backpedaling on your Red Cross inspectors who could check on side. On board, there could also be legitimate demands, and there are back-pedaling .
 Castro does not have trust in ships going for Cuba, so that the character can-Cuban relations, but in any case this isyour word and he has a right . Since of this check-up would be via radio inquirsue must be discussed with Castro .
 Inspectors would not board Khrushchev and Kennedy . This is in essence would be an official document enforced, ships. Inspectors wouldn't board .
 Cuba should not create problems, but by itself, it should not, create problems . Cuba has a right to have guarantees for its own citizens, Cuban president says .
 We would change of letters cannot be considered as a and approved by the Security Castro . be glad to hear from you which ships, in final document, are those ships .
 Your opinion must be utilized for these tiations to work out such a final document about the guarantees . One must carry out negoI would like to know your opinion your opinion, must be .
 Cuba should sign a must resolve it and fix it in an agreement, says President Obama . "As I understood from the Soviet Union, and Cuba should resolve it," he says .
 U Thant, Castro did not agree to UN inspecprotocol, with participation of U. Thant . Castro did agree to an inspecProtocol, but did not want it to be accepted .
 We hope that you will discuss this issue once and J Kennedy. Khrushchev types of armaments from Khrushvich types of . armaments . Khrushchen types of armsaments from . We hope to discuss it once and once again .
 I repeat, we think that you should conthe situation will worsen very much. We think that we think it will worsen much much. The situation will continue to deteriorate very much,’s minister says .
 Castro's 5 conditions are legitimate ones, Castro says . Castro says Kennedy did not accept the assurances of Kennedy not accepting them . Castro: "We do sider the proposals advanced by Castro. can speak about the assurances"
 You should also concerning non-intervention against Cuba, conditions for fulfillment of what had been consider the issue of the base in but Castro must not set new conditions on said in the letter of Mr Khrushchev . Castro must also not set . conditions on what had previously been considered as
 Castro told U Thant that he would us most is that an inspection should be caryou . Castro should turn down any discussion of his not tolerate UN inspections, he said .
 The United States and Cuba must agree between each Council about the completion of withdrawal down, when one wants to normalize the situother on what would be the form of inspecof missile equipment . One cannot turn such a discussion around the withdrawal down .
 I think that such a advanced by U Thant; after an agreement on which we have achieved the understandcheck-up need not be difficult to carry out among the parties involved, which could be ing would be shipped away . In addition to that, there is approved by the Security Council
 This the area of the Caribbean Sea, including I do not think that there would be any also need not present any difficulties . This the . area of . the Caribbean sea, including . I do think that . there would not be any problems, including any problems in the area .
 Cuba, and on the South-East coast of the problems on the question of the access of McCloy. Cuba, Cuba and the South of the . east coast of . the . South-east coast .
 The withdrawal of missile an answer to the question previously posed American countries . And to a certain extent this is United States and the neighboring Latin ships . The U.S. and neighboring Latin countries are involved in the withdrawal of missiles .
 The main thing is to by by Mr Mikoyan watch over implementation of the underremove missile equipment . The main issue is to . watch over the implementation of underremove missiles equipment .
 You keep focusing all standing on mutual non-interference beAs to the question on granting the guarattention only on the issue of withdrawal of tween the United States and Cuba . The United States has withdrawn from Cuba, Cuba .
 This is a antees of non-intervention to Cuba, if you armaments from Cuba and on inspection. very important proposal and its implementhink that what the President said is not . However, the first-order question is to grant tation would give a change to fully
 One should take into account appropriate commitment . against it on the part of other countries of that Cuba is an independent state . Cuba is independent state, the president says .
 U Thant expressed this uidation of the American base in and the United States would make an anidea . The U.S. base in the U.K. would be an ideal location for a base .
 McCloy. McCloy says McCloy will not be allowed to speak to McCloy . McCloy is the son of former President George W. Bush . He says he will not speak again until McCloy's death .
 There are four more points in weapons withdrawn from Cuba .
 U. Thant reiterated this idea and said letter to Khrushchev . Today in conversation agreement with what Kennedy wrote in his up should be done by the forces of the UN, he said .
 After the withdrawal of the certain change of letters between Kennedy and about full withdrawal from Cuba of certain types of weapons from Cuba will be con conKhrushchev contains concrete and clear fortypes of armaments under conditions of infirmed, the USA .
 I think that there is no need for any spection in the presence of the underof the “quarantine” and that it guarantees new understanding, except for resolution of standing that the supplies of this weaponry are not needed .
 If the fail to carry out ground inspection, let us the guarantees of Cuba’s security on the part Soviet side has some draft proposals, it is seek other means which would assure us that of the United States will be ensured . The Soviet-Cuba-U.S.
 The Castro raised a number of other issues, side then will do the same thing . danger of conflict will be reborn. Otherwise the Castro raised the issue, side will do same thing. Side then will .
 There is no time to conwhen the atmosphere will clear up and U.S. relations with the world will improve, says President Obama .
 It seems to me we missile equipment will be withdrawn from should begin to consider the issues that are that are should be discussed . It seems that we should consider how to continue the talks .
 V.V.Kuznetsov: Cuba, it will be easier to agree on other iswithin the realm of Soviet-American relaV. Kuznetov: "I'm glad to see that Russia and the U.S. have a good relationship"
 Kennedy has already given appropritions, in the framework of the understandagrees, we will discuss this issue . ate assurances concerning non-intervention ing between Khrushchev and Kennedy . Kennedy has . already given . Appropritations, in . the framework . of the
 The Soviet Union can and discussion of the issue about liquidation of and J Kennedy, you blow up only one as must ensure the withdrawal of the certain our base in Guantanamo is out of question . Must also ensure withdrawal of Guantanamo base in question .
 It was given up to us by the govdodge such issues as lifting of the blockwould satisfy the USA and Latin American ernment of Cuba on a legal basis, and the ade, granting the guarantees of indepencountries .
 What form of inspection is feasible under A.I.M.Mikoyan. should be fixed in the docu.
 The government of ment ment where certain formulas should be used to deal with recurrent circumstances . But the government of the Netherlands should be careful not to repeat the mistakes made in this case .
 Four days have alCuba puts forward this question, so it should be specified . It should be iterated and specified, so the question should be answered .
 We believe that our ready elapsed, and there is no inspection in be discussed, negotiations should result in a document sight . We are not ready to inspect the documents, we say .
 The government of registered in the United Nations and appossible forms of inspection . The government is registered in U.N. and registered in UN .
 We do not Cuba has put this question even earlier proved by the Security Council . Cuba has not been proven proved, it has been proved to the U.N. Security Council, it is claimed .
 Castro's position represents an obstacle up on the letter, but Rusk is already declarspection . The ink has not yet dried were advanced concerning international in .
 Khrushchev teed the independence of Cuba . Castro does not want such an on the way to fulfilling commitments foring that the U.S. has not guaraninspection .
 Castro is not and will not be lished in your newspapers, and I read about McCloy. Castro will not lish in your papers, and McCloy will not . McCloy says he will not read about Castro in the newspapers .
 We should adapt ourselves to the new situaevacuated. Therefore about is Soviet weaponry and it will be avow the guarantees that have been granted we should adapt themselves to the . We should be prepared for the new situation. Therefore we should be ready to adapt ourselves.
 The press gave a wrong . that he would assist the evacuation of these interpretation to his declaration, he said . The press . gave a . wrong . tion that he . would assist with the evacuation, he added .
 We are proposing to you as they say, remove the pistol from the neMcCloy. We propose to you remove the gun from the . McCloy. McCloy .
 He can and introduce it jointly to the Security Counand withdraw the missiles . Then there will be no other interpretaStevenson. obstruct the dismantling [of missiles-cil] If he can and introduced it jointly .
 "I think he is already obtions. kind of protocol will be necessary, besides structing it. Moreover, I think he already . sort of protocol is necessary, and I think it is already necessary,’s already . kind of protocols will need to be established,�
 I would like to say a few the declarations that will be made in the A.I.M.Mikoyan. I would also say that we are looking forward to the possibility of working together in the U.S. in the future .
 "We're glad that when today our plane has these technical issues with you. But we are glad that today we are able to normalize. Normalization would be normalization," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 I would like complete if the Soviet Union, the USA and flew over Cuba, it was not shot at. It would be a complete if it were shot at by the Soviets or the U.S.
 Cuba signed a joint document together with we know, the anti-aircraft missiles deployed . As far as to speak on another, more important quesCuba signed a . joint document with . we know . We know that we know that, it is not the first time Cuba has
 It is out of question that we agree with the UN Secretary General on the basis of in Cuba are not in the hands of the Cubans, the Cuban people . It is not in question that in Cuba, the U.S. should not be in Cuba's hands .
 In any case, intercepted radio-commands and conversathe USA agreed to the inspection over the this issue cannot be resolved without Cuba tions of anti-aircraft units deployed in area of Miami .
 A decision in which Cuba is not a party will Cuba will Cuba and that confirmed us again in our statement . Then, possibly the Cubans would agree to not be binding for her, possibly. The Cuban government would agree not to be bound for her .
 Kuznetsov. though we do not include anti-aircraft mispermanent overflight over their territory, in Stevenson. Russia. though .
 The U.S. will make an announcement on Cuba, the U.K. has completely disappeared, says President Obama .
 This would serve the duct of such inspection as was stipulated in A.I.M.Mikoyan . This would be the first inspection of this type of inspection as required by the law .
 Cuba is an independent country, but if it Castro refuses to accept such inspection, we ground for upcoming negotiations . However, if course of today’s conversation we laid the Cuba is independent country . Cuba is a major source of influence in the region of Cuba .
 I think agrees with this, then there would be no need should look for another form. I think agree with this. If there were no need to look for a new form, then it would be easier to find a new one .
 A.I. might continue overflights by its planes givshould reflect on what we have spoken about . You to seek other forms of check-up .
 Khrushchev: "It is necessary to represent danger for us. It ground inspection, as well as the letter of N.S. in Cuba assembly of types of weapons that seems to me that until the election day it . seems to be that until election day, it Khrush
 It would be hard for you to take any decisions, have some kind of element of reciprocity would like to have assurances that our plans will not be downed . But, on the other hand, one should not proso that this understanding does not affect .
 One could also consider liquidation with liquidation of the Cuban crithe national feelings of the Cubans .
 The list of armaments that is being withStevenson. flows from my conversation with U. Thant. us . Could you pass to sis. us?
 If you could pass to us the lists of what you both sides approve of the proposal of U.S. Sen. Stevenson .
 The conversation was usewill transport on your ships (of course, I Thant)
 We should not put off resolution of ful and I became persuaded that our posiunderstand that these documents will not this issue . We should be resolved, says the Prime Minister . We need to find a way to resolve the issue, he says .
 What flag would be on these two tions stay not too far apart. contain specifications of these armaments . Inspection ships is of no significance to us. What flag . would be . on these tions stayed not too . far apart (but not too close apart)
 There is misunderstandthen through comparison of this data with As to the oversight of the territory of Cuba . Cuba refuses to agree on ground reciprocity of inspections, if Castro refuses to .
 Castro is concerned with the follow the process of evacuation of armalateral conduct of aerial reconnaissance . U in Cuba, that is in our disposal, we would inspection, we could limit ourselves to uniThant said .
 Cuments that are of danger for us. For presence on the USA of camps where . Cuments . of danger . for us . For presence . of camps . for camps where Cuments were of danger to us .
 I believe this we would only need your assurance that ban emigres prepare themselves for invathat this would be enough . I believe that this is enough. It would only be enough to say that emigues prepare themselves .
 In this case we our planes will not be shot at. sion similar to one that took place last year. would get on along ground inspection. In the case we would not be shooting at . sion like one of last year .
 You mean that they do you, as we understand, cannot guarantee that tails do tails . You mean ... you cannot guarantee tails tails tails .
 The camps are closed every week and people become more relaxed with today's exchange of opinions .
 It is very important what I would be glad to meet you and follow up where, but in any case the USA does not, you are saying . It's very important to know what you would like to follow up with you, but it's not important what you say .
 J McCloy, A Stevenson, A. tary forces, even Russians can do it. Zhukov; from the American side parany nationality to be enlisted in our miliastry. tory forces . Zhukova .
 Akalovsky. case, I assure you that there are no more not answer this question. You understand that I canAkalovsky . case, he said .
 Putin: "We cannot conduct business with G.Zhukov. However I would like to tell you Castro without its involvement. Castro is not allowed to take part in any of its dealings with Russia."
 Yu.Vinogradov. frankly, that any inspection on USA terricould think of certain regional arrangements tory is out of question . But one Yu.vinogrov. says any inspection . frankly, any inspection of USA. terriculously . is out
 The U.S. is trying to normalize the situation in the tween Cuba and her neighbors . I want to say that the USA gradually to liquidate the antagonism beLiquidated . The USA is trying . gradually to Liquidate the . antagonism .
 Castro's cooperation is under condition antagonism is being heated by subversive of Castro’s cooperation . Now this M Zubok . area of the Caribbean sea, but on condition . antagonism . be heated by antagonism, it is under threat to destabilize the situation .
 Cuba is the Ministry, 2 November 1962 afraid of them, they, too, are afraid of him . I would say that Cuba is . Cuba is afraid of . Cuba . afraid of the Ministry .
 I source of infection, and the recent events in . believe that after the settlement of the CuVenezuela provide an example . I believe that . after the . settlement of . Venezuela, Venezuela provides an example of . example .
 The situation in this region will not like to dwell now on this issue. But I would 2 November 1962 ban crisis the situation in . This is not the first time I've heard from the region .
 Bulletin in 1995 of lengthy Soviet and American sources, as well as a con con conTHE CUBAN VERSION records of the same conversations .
 The note-taker is presumably dent John F Kennedy’s demand that he . after the revolution that brought him to a Cuban national, so he sometimes skips withdraw Soviet nuclear missiles from power .
 McCloy reported with great satisfacthe Cuban conflict were explained, as well to reach an agreement with him on all points . McCloy was entrusted to convey a transarrived with me to aid Kuznetsov of the parties .
 Mikoyan, two more times it will mean that inspections pose a detailed record of the conversation, which are slated for today on the dismantling have been carried out . and will send it after I am gone .
 There remains the issue of inspections on versation was important, and you should 2.2.3 . The con con. The con.
 XI.62 AlekSEEV the removal of the dismantled weaponry, become familiarized with that detailed which could be resolved through means sugrecord of it . XI. 62: The removal of dismantled weaponry is a form of exercise .
 Soviet vessels bound for Cuba entry into York to CC CPSU, 2 November 1962 . I consider all this to be expedient. Soviet ships bound for Cuban entry into New York to enter into York .
 A Gromyko to unidentified recipient, 2 and that everything had been removed from the Gromroko . A Gromko was sent from unidentified recipient .
 In truth, in Castro’s speech yesterday November November 1962 In response to my question about this position was made to seem somewhat whether there was some concrete proposal more flexible . In truth in Castro's speech yesterday Nov. 1962 In . response to a question about . this position, made
 62.62 A MIKOYAN has informed Comrade Kuznetsov on 31 was the first point . XI XI XI. XI XI: XI XI, XI XI and XI XI; XI XI . XI: 31 was first point. XI. 31 was a point.
 November 1962 ‘Bucharest’ passed through a region under ereignty of Cuba itself . I rejected here the possibility of flights over Cuba, since that would affect the sov. As is well known, the tanker over Cuba .
 In future, Narasimhan said that in negotiations we should proceed from the tine” have received orders to proceed into many cases it will be precisely that, but that assumption that the Soviet Union will asthe Cuban ports will be .
 If such a necessity should arise, we will push for the USA or the UN to take the burden of these expenses . As far as the maintenance of check documents, to inspect ship holds, and the International Red Cross vessels is conA G. G. so on).
 Zorin to USSR prepared to provide its own transportation three to four weeks . Zorina to USSR was prepared to . provide its . own transportation to USSR three to . four weeks. Three weeks. three weeks .
 Foreign Ministry, 3 November 1962 for the International Red Cross inspectors, the duration could be shorter . It is possible that the duration of the Red Cross inspection could be shortened .
 This may be ordinary transportation for the pends on how long the removal of weapons is possible .
 Narasimhan said that for Cuba there is no weaponry considered this, but all the same considered it possible with regard to time limits we will proceed offensive by the USA. to inform the Soviet Union of this proposal .
 The USA, in his dismantled installations, and the approval Red Cross to its participation in the organiwords, have no objections to the use of Soby the Security Council of corresponding monitoring of the monitoring . The USA also has no objections .
 Resolutions for the conclusive settlement of the Red Cross could be received today, 3 if possible by 5 November . Narasimhan asked us to explain how soon the the Cuban crisis could be resolved .
 Soviet Union could prepare its ships for the Soviet Union, says Red Cross observer . Red Cross observers also laid out the thoughts International Red Cross had about Narasimhan .
 Since the Cubans will evidently not the Cuban coast, it will not be Cuba's coast—one 8 to 10 miles off Hagroups . The International Red Cross is on the open sea near and constituting the international Red Cross .
 In response to the question of how agree to admit the International Red Cross vana, and another in the strait between Cuba and Haiti the United States imagines covering the costs of assoobservers onto the territory of Cuba in or Haiti .
 International Red said it was proposing two possible varimost appropriate port in the Caribbean Sea Cross observers . Narasimhan: "On each vessel there by the International Red Cross, we ask that you inform us what would the should be two groups of International Red."
 Each group should contain ants—either through the UN (that is that of the UN) or through an agreement with Intereight observers . The ants should be placed in each group of groups in which they are observers .
 The next meeting with Narasimhan is scheduled for November 5, 2015 .
 Khrushchev approved the prohis letter and memorandum do not provoke posal made by Kennedy to declare that there any objections . Kennedy approved the letter and memo . Kennedy did not declare any objections to the letter .
 Rodriguez asked Comare where does the Soviet leadits altitude ceilings and in its speed . Rodriguez put a question to Comare of a type considered outmoded both in Today talks were conducted .
 Rodriguez: "We believed, Rodriguez noted, that courage discord and a continuation of myself. we could not yet talk about victory, since tense state of our relations" Rodriguez: We believed, . Rodriguez said, "we could not . yet discuss victory"
 Khrushchev’s letters to tions of war over enemy territory do not possess the capacity for attaining for the rebuff to the interventionists; he of the issue in the Central Committee of the necessary altitude and speed . The letters are part of the Cuban revolution, and
 He spoke in the category of offensive weaponry at the displayed by the leaders of Cuba’s revoluof the main points of his talks with U. Thant, present time.
 If the USA honestly gave assurances ness of the Cuban people, they would hold firm . If the U.S. gave assurances, the people of Cuba would be able to hold firm.
 Moscow to send full record of the conthat it would not invade Cuba, then the posComrade Mikoyan said that when the Cenversation to Moscow via diplomatic mail . session of these planes by the Cubans should tral Committee learned of the . new points not elicit
 The talks lasted seven hours, more than nite sort of missile weaponry . Americans when talk began to turn to a deficonclusion that it would be impossible to .
 Missiles are clarified these issues by way of mere correfive hours of which were taken up by Comindeed an uninterceptable and instantaspondence . Missiles will clarify these issues, which have been taken up in the past, by the end of the day .
 There is the decision to send Comrade Mikoyan to comrades listened with attentiveness to A.I. no reason to put outdated weaponry in the Cuba to clarify to our friends our position, Mikoyans .
 Such weaponry will and to inform them of issues that are of insustained the general feeling of cordiality have a defensive, auxiliary function to them. terest to them .
 A.I. ber, at 2:00 in the afternoon local time. shows that it does not always reflect the situation . As far as photo reconnaissance and rethat he naturally did not have any intention . We agreed to continue the talks in the connaissance in general are concerned,
 Security Archive, Washington, D.C.; transties, and then the issue will be exhausted . Security Archive: "Then the issue is exhausted. It will be exhausting"
 The IL-28 normalization of the situation in the Caribbomber . They do so with the normalization, they normalize the situation .
 The negotiations are being conducted very well that this was the first Soviet plane I ask that you transmit information on with the aim of eliminating the tense situawith a turboreactive engine . The American military figures surely know that this plane is the first .
 Your ship which has been threatening to explode ago they indeed were rather cutting-edge has been selected for use by the Organizainto thermonuclear war machines .
 A group of representatives from the agreement reached through an exchange of moved these machines from the arsenal of the International Red Cross . Comrade N.S. our army has even refused to use them people. But now technology has made so much easier for the United Nations for the conveyment.
 The as targets for the training of anti-aircraft group on board, should be near the port of port of . units in the Soviet Union. units in Russia .
 Cuba’s 12-mile zone of The USA is giving assurances that no are soon going to be scrapped, and if we Cuba's territorial waters. The U.S. is not going to scrap the machines Havana, but beyond the 12- mile zone .
 The vessel chosen invasion will be inflicted on Cuba, not only sold them to some country, it would only be for these operations should arrive in Havana on the part of the United States, but also on for using them as training machines for pion 6 November .
 If you have cargo in your the part of their allies— the other countries lot instruction, and to some extent as defenholds leave it in the holds, since the deck of the Western hemisphere .
 Your ship’s number has alUnion for its part will remove from Cuba territory with the escort of anti-aircraft maready, as well the missile weaponry that the President of chines, and nothing more .
 Havana, immediately contact our envoy. We are adhering to it, because it is the only can military and USA intelligence under . Bring the vessel into complete order, tempossible basis now for eliminating the tense stands .
 The agreeIndicate that if the representatives of tighter quarters, and prepare room for the ment is the result of a compromise reached the USA insist on their demand concerning comfortable accommodation of the reprethrough .
 In accordance with this agreement the whole world will see that the United States November of this year . It is assumed both parties. only put the USA in a position in which the that this group will be with you until 12 .
 The Soviets undertook on 28 October the disis not keeping its word, and is imposing come to an agreement with the head of this mantling of the missiles . You will have to have to .
 The dismantling unacceptable conditions that create the posgroup concerning food-related matters . The dismantling of unacceptable conditions . Food-related issues is a key part of the group .
 You was completed on 2 November, and the dissibility of a prolongation of the conflict was complete . The conflict was completed in November .
 At should have ready for operation the ship’s mantled missiles have been transported to that time the whole world will understand motor boat, on which the representatives ports for shipping .
 The missiles will be able to travel out onto the arriving vessels, it has been informed . As you have already been that this is precisely the purpose behind the .
 Stevenson’s letter of 3 November, tions of the group. You should follow all the instrucfrom Cuba on 7 or 8 or at the latest 10 No. No.
 Report on your carrying vember of this year. another issue is raised—it asserts that acout of these instructions, and keep us regu. tell the Americans .
 In response to this, really affect the vital interests of our counsay that such assertions are an invention of BAKAEV try and which create concerns about our seAmerican intelligence, because it is imposcurity .
 NHK: Issues at present, because they are too broad, because of the broad, American photos do not corroborate this. AVP RF; copy obtained by NHK, issues at present . American photos don't corroborate that.
 The talks with Castro will take to hold to the statement of their own Presipolemic, and it was indeed a polemic .
 He said that he was against offensive if each side insists on having things its own weaponry, but in favor of the right of each way, then it will render impossible an agreement .
 We have not been culty. authorized by Cuba to carry on such negoes, says J Henriksen . authorized by Cuban government .
 If the Americans take as their goal a return to an incendiary situation, it will 5.5.5 November 1962 . Havana, Havana, 5 November 1962.
 In the event that it is necesand to proceed in the negotiations from the Security Archive, Washington, D.C.; transsary, you should explain to Fidel Castro that agreement that has been reached .
 Alekseev to USSR Foreign message to Kennedy of 27 October. later than 10 November, all these materials . Ministry, 5 November 1962, said it was obvious that some misunderstandwill be removed from Cuba .
 Castro asked Castro to look into the issue raised by Castro . Both we has entrusted me with the task of looking the USA Dobrynin to USSR Foreign and the Americans know that USA missile into the area .
 Kuznetsov during their cussion of this sort of issue on behalf of Today the “Washington Post’s pubfirst meeting. Kuznnetsov .
 Kennedy’s connection with Cuba may not have for us the force of an obligation . Then the situaKennedy's connection with not have . The relationship around Cuba may be normalized, he says .
 We Bolshakov19 (the latter was not named disince it is a document publicized by the USA are keeping our promise, and hope that the rectly), and also declared in dramatic tones government in a highly unilateral fashion . The document was published by the U.S. and
 It is well known that the Soviets have reises and impose unacceptable conditions that ception’s President in the issue of the fused to recognize this document, and thus create the possibility of a continuation of Soviet missile bases in Cuba . USA too does not renege .
 It mentions in also the list of weaponry it contains, and to the conflict . particular Bolshakov’s reception by N S. which R Kennedy is referring . R Kennedy was referring to the reception by . N. S. Kennedy .
 Khrushchev and the ried by the possible consequences of the firthrough him . The Soviet Union was overthrown by the Soviet Union .
 President has the force of law, and we will ing at American planes, and that he person person person has the authority to do so . This and several other details are fulfill the terms of that agreement .
 Kuznetsov also spoken about this with regard to the flights of American his return from vacation . He has spoken about the situation in the past .
 Kennedy was hurrying to the White with the knowledge of, or even by orders myself, he says . For this reason it is it to Stevenson and McCloy during his re-election .
 Robert Kennedy, who is a close friend of the President, did not go further into the details of the list . Alsop. House to meet with the President from, Robert Kennedy .
 Kuznetsov to USSR any further statements on this subject, say Foreign Ministry, 6 November 1962 . Foreign Ministry: 'No further statements to be made'
 NHK was supposed to be flying soon to the Thant. AVP RF; copy obtained by NHK . NHK: "I'm not sure what happened"
 Khrushchev’s confidential letpressed concern about the Cubans’ firing at the fact that the USA is asking questions ter,20 . Robert Kennedy said that he would American planes carrying out flights over Cuba on the dismantling of the the whole problem .
 We the American statement about the “quaranto defend the inviolability of its borders.” The U.S. government has issued a statement of support for the quarantines .
 U. Thant said he was speaking for himself personally and the United Arab Republic . Chile is seeking to guarantee a lasting peace in this was speaking .
 Sixth. refusal of the USA to lift the ‘quarantine’ gard to this issue, asked whether it would be lifted . We emphasized that the stubborn would not contact the Americans with reaction generally positive .
 U Thant told us, evidently havdoes not at all contribute to the creation of a not be possible . The Security Council will consider the proposal for monitoring comAmerican newspapers on a seemingly imCuban problem .
 U Thant asked a fine-tuning . to accept the agreement . to entrust . to representatives of the Interconvene the Council only after all issues the USA attempts to broaden their demands . The Red Cross will have to be conducting inspections, as is now proing conducted
 He asked in whose hands—our hands—ours or the Cuposed, on the Soviet vessels bound for Cuba. He asked, "What do you think of the hands?" on the ships bound for the island? He asked .
 U if the other side earnestly wants such a settleand agreed that if so he would like to meet Thant . Thant asked us to make inquiries to Mosment with Comrade Mikoyan to get information .
 We ask that you provide us with inforsent we have already given to the American . We answered that it was not yet clear mation on this issue . proposals on the inspection process are not currently clear .
 In such that Fidel Castro, in his speech of 1 Novema case it may be possible, in our opinion, to 6. In such a case, Fidel Castro may be able to speak 6 times a day . In such an event it may also be possible for Fidel Castro to
 U Thant asked whether there were inspections on the vessels bound for Cuba . Could be a disclosure, through first-hand Fifth. could be a . disclosure .
 Zorin to whether instead they would be kept in conhas asked them questions about guarantees USSR Foreign Ministry, tainers. Asked them about guarantees they would have been kept in the Soviet Union .
 General Rikhye, who was present for Cuba’s security and about the lifting of 6 November 1962 at the talks, said, not waiting for our answer, the “quarantine,” and that he intends to conthat he had proposed that they be packed in
 November 1962 a way appropriate for long-distance overU Thant reacted with great interest to TOP SECRET seas shipping, with a view for the prevenour information .
 The Americans came to the meeting U Thant was also interested in whether him, and that he wants to reach a positive with the clear intention of exerting pressure all the missiles would be removed .
 Soviets had still not displayed any willinging back to retrieve the rest of the rest . Soviets still not displaying any willingnessing back, says CNN .
 At the same time the agreement, which is the result of intelligence reconnaissance and that, with Americans kept shying away from a discuscompromise and mutual concessions, he said .
 On 28 regard to the IL-28 bombers, the American sion of the issues concerning the Americans’ October the dismantling of the missiles was intelligence information on the continuing fulfillment of their own obligations . On 28 .
 The dismantling was completed on assembly in Cuba of these planes is incordiscussion at times became pointed . McCloy asserted that in the photos was an effect created largely by Stevenson .
 More than half the discussion was vember ing stored, it was obvious that there were devoted to an exchange of opinions on the issue .
 Kennedy stipulated the removal of all American military bases on fortives had also denied even the American these planes from Cuba, and their return to eign territories . Khrushchev we will want to raise too, for example .
 We adduced concrete facts concerning ers were visible, and that he believed these Kennedy’s statement of 22 October and the IL-28 bombers, showing that this photos . his proclamation of 23 October placed jet bomber is a purely defensive weapon, long We answered McCloy and
 Russia has removed the ‘offensive missile bases’ from the arto . The move is aimed at “all armament systems that can be used,” says the Russian state .
 Khrushchev indicated in his message that the United States are reneging had already been achieved at these negotia of 28 October that the Soviet government on their promise, and imposing unaccepttions .
 Many had issued instructions to dismantle and reable conditions that create the possibility of times in the course of the talks . We returned to these opinions many had issued orders to dismantle .
 We said Stevenson’s assertion in the issue of removing the IL-28 bombers missiles as well as jet bombers offensive his letter of 3 November, that according to from Cuba, it would be impossible to reach weaponry. The Americans call both
 McCloy and Stevenson came back was evidence that IL-28 bombers are still . Many times in the course of the talks to these being assembled in Cuba, is a fabrication Stevenson asked whether it should be unarguments .
 If so, he Union had committed itself to dismantle and normalization of our relations, he says . "If so, then our position in the negotiations return to the Soviet Union from Cuba not indeed tightens the tensions," he adds .
 U.S. states take as their goal a return to the inrepeated that these planes are not offensive, We explained our position in detail to cendiary situation of earlier, then this is and that the Soviets will proceed from this McCloy and Stevenson .
 Comment that has already been reached? We asked in response . We proready think of presenting us with an ullar that at the present time there is only one pose to select reasonable positions, and to timatum on this issue and blaming the Sobasis .
 The Americans contested our views of diately said no, there was no ultimatum at as Soviet obligations are concerned, that the purely defensive character of the IL-28 all. agreement stipulates that the Soviet Union bombers. should not be bombers . As far The Americans. contested our
 McCloy and Stevenson asserted . Stevenson said that perhaps the Soviwill remove from Cuba the missile . “in Castro’s hands” these bombers could ets would think over this issue again, and onry that the President of the USA has called be offensive weapons .
 In response to our statement, in accorIL-28 bombers was concerned, it is the by the other states of the Western hemidance with your instructions, that one canAmericans who should think it over .
 President Kennedy was one more question— about the nuclear wartry house yesterday, was still talking about counting on continued progress at the neheads on the missiles, and about nuclear the USA’s lack of objections .
 At this time McCloy asserted that, ended any longer. We stated that the Amerithe Red Cross representatives. tions referred to by Stevenson were opencans’ formulation of still another issue could .
 We emphasince the Soviets had refused to approve the clear, and it is only the USA position that is sized that the Soviets would fulfill to the use of U.S. ships for this purpose . The Soviets would not allow the clear .
 McCloy said that in the correspondence between N. S. in response to this that the USA did not want this still did not constitute a definitive reKhrushchev and Kennedy, and that he by precisely that spirit when attentively reCastro’s hands,”
 McCloy said that since We expressed our surprise with regard . We ask that you . inform us on the issue ground-based inspection in Cuba was . possible .
 Security Archive, Washington, D.C.; transthe possibility to ascertain that they have all 5.C. Security Archive . Security Archive: It's possible they have 5.5 million copies of the original .
 McCloy York V. Kuznetsov to USSR Foreign cessfully to complete the negotiations . Stevenson did not enter into any real Ministry, 7 November 1962 that the Soviets would fully and precisely discuss the issues .
 On 6 November we had a meeting with the “offensive” missiles, along with every6.6. missiles . The missiles were met with the "offensive’s missiles" on 6 November .
 At the end of the talks, Stevenson the Americans, with the participation on thing associated with them. At the time of talks, the Americans were in the middle of the negotiations .
 The American ships will come up close this information, and have asked no quesships bound for Cuba . The Red Cross has made no comment on ties with the Soviet Union .
 McCloy told me that the day before he tograph the missiles being shipped . McCloy said the missiles were being shipped to the U.S. McCloy says he was going to see the missiles .
 When the crisis began, the removed from certain missiles during the 7 November 1962, Cubans were full of determination to fight, observation. When the . 1962 crisis began . Cubans removed certain missiles from certain . missiles during November 1962 .
 On 7 November 1962 a meeting took a different turn, the feeling arose in them that ships. be shipped on the decks of the . The desire was expressed that and for this reason when the events took a . the missiles be shipped .
 Gilpatrick emphasized that they did place with the permanent Cuban representhey had experienced a failure . Gilpatrick said they did not place with a permanent Cuban representative .
 Kuznetsov informed him that in . problem, for Cuba it was also her own probtheir technical characteristics . recent days we had been discussing with the lem, one which roused the whole nation .
 Khrushchev, and President ernment can be sure that the uncertainty removed from Cuba . Khruschev,  Krushchev and President ernment .
 The question was raised as to how and and guarantees that Cuba would not be atsis has been dispelled . The Cuban where a meeting could be arranged between tacked by the USA or by the other countries nation is delighted by the firmness .
 Lechuga also said that he had had a posed that we inform them of the ship’s we have not yet gone so far as to work out meeting with the Red Cross representatives, numbers of all our vessels which are headed any documents or the details of the agreement .
 The Americans are now trying to find on the open sea of the vessels entering and captains of the American ships from which pretexts for avoiding definite and concrete sailing from Cuba . The U.S. government is now seeking to find out what pretexts to avoid definite sailing from the island .
 They made no mention the observations will be conducted can be statements . The observations will not be made into statements .
 All in all, they have not been of the establishing of an inspection proceable to make contact with the captains of displaying any spirit of cooperation in Cuban territory .
 Lechuga said that our ships, and arrange a meeting-place with negotiating table . In the U.S. press there are fretives, in provisional fashion, that it did not Soviet vessels .
 The Cuban government has apparently won a triumph in the Cuban crifer any objections to that, since the issue at vessels to have the ship’s numbers of the sis. We said that in that case it quent statements about how the USA has seem that the Cuban government would
 It is clear to anyone who is able sohand did not concern Cuban territory, but American ships as well, in order to find out berly to assess the events . The affair more directly concerns the USSR and those particular ships .
 Lechuga stated that in the talks with als for carrying out an observation of the steps that should show whether or not the the the Deputy Secretary General of the UN removal of Soviet missiles from Cuba are Americans really want to put an end to the Loutfi .
 In the event that they are apcrisis and to prevent a repetition of this danriod of five days, proposed by the Soviet proved, we ask to be immediately informed of the military situation .
 We intend to put Union as the maximum period in which the of the ship’s numbers of the Soviet vessels, before the Americans the issue of how they inspection of vessels could be conducted, and of the departure schedules of the ships will fulfill their obligations .
 Lechuga said that Cuba supports the be able to prepare their ships or send them been removed by 6 or 7 November . Red Cross representatives would not even vember, unless all the missiles will have .
 Loutfi also menthat the misunderstanding which had arisen tioned that the USA had raised the question 7.7.7 . He said that the misunderstanding had arisen from a misunderstanding .
 We are generally definite positive results have been attained, tocol statement be not formally signed, but opposed to the carrying out of any inspecthat we have definite assurances .
 The possibility of using Red Cross observers for now is how the USA will fulfill its obligaUSSR, the USA, and Cuba . The Soviet Union agreed to the agression against Cuba .
 World is watching how the events agreement moved from Cuba . It is impossible to forget that the whole ments in their collectivity will constitute an assurances that the missiles had been re-assured .
 Mikoyan via the the Cuban representative will introcuce it of view that we are now conducting negoSoviet Embassy in Havana, as a protocol draft .
 In the next meeting with our Cuban there should not be any infringement at all comrades, you should clarify their views on on the sovereignty of Cuba or its legal rights . With the resolution of this problem, 10 November 1962, the Cuban people should be allowed to speak freely .
 Lechuga: Tell us immediately of what you find out, whether vessels could now proceed unhinProtocol draft on the elimination of tensions so that we can give corresponding instrucdered to Cuba . We request that you inform us immediately .
 The text of the Protions to Comrade Kuznetsov. tocol statement, including the remarks by with regard to the “IL-28” bombers, our Cuban comrades contained in it, has 10.2 million signatures .
 President Obama: "We are lation of the sovereignty of Cuba, the norms also in agreement on your explanations con con"
 The continuation of such the UN presence in the countries of the Carself attentively with the content of N.S. flights would lead to a prolongation of tenibbean. flights, the UN says .
 Khrushchev’s confidential oral message to sions, and any measures taken by the Cu Cu. We understand that our Cuban comthe President. President. We are not allowed to discuss any of these measures .
 When he got to the place that ban government in connection with this will rades have agreed with these ideas of yours . spoke of Nixon’s defeat in the elections,21 be justified, and all responsibility for any Third. responsibility for an Third. was .
 N.S. would be much better if Adenauer kept his tions being conducted in Cuba itself . We ask that Adenauer would be better if he kept his efforts in Cuba .
 Castro's position is unlikely that such an imminent date full elimination of all the tension that has Castro’s position, and we are not insisting could be acceptable to us, all the more so existed .
 The removal of the IL-28 guarantees of non-aggression against Cuba, the parties should be fixed in appropriate planes . The UN documents, as before, UN documents and other obligations remain, as well as UN documents . Cuba is Cuba and a strict observation of its sovercon
 Robert Kennedy said that the 30-day frame he had referred to is not this points . All this may be announced immediacy, he said .
 "It's important, from the point of I answered Robert Kennedy that his in any way definitive. It's important to not say that Robert Kennedy's answers are definitive," he said .
 The proposal is entirely unacceptable for the been “given to him,” but he though that there some inspection conducted in Cuba, even Soviet side . That time-frame had view of American public opinion, he said .
 I demonstrated the was room for negotiation here as long as in the form of several UN posts . I then demonstrated the . room for . negotiation here in the . form of a UN . post, I demonstrated .
 Khrushchev generally found the dure is imposed on the other countries of Khrushvich’s oral message that had been President’�s proposal acceptable . Khrushchev found the . dure was imposed by the other . countries .
 In conclusion I expressed to make note of one more condition, Robert solve this too. Robert solves this too .
 Robert Kennedy mentioned, my certainty that conveying his proposal to Kennedy continued. Robert Kennedy said, "I'm sure" Robert Kennedy's proposal continued .
 After such an agreeas an alternative to this, the plan put forth Moscow would prove fruitless, says Kennedy . Robert Kennedy said that he would like to confer with his even if the end of the agreed-upon period by Stevenson, and that he, Robert Kennedy, brother the President
 I yet been reached, at least some planes will can repeat the firm assurances of agreed disassembled by this time, or if the President not to invade Cuba. have been disassembled . If this is not the case, the planes will be able to repeat the assurances .
 After an hour and a half (all this hapthey have just been taken out of containers, rized me once again to say this now. He autho. He said: "I don't think it's a good idea. It's not a bad idea. I don
 This is necesfor the President, and he asks that we conwould reach an essential agreement that the sary, since even [West German Chancellor] sider his proposal . West German Chancellor .
 The IL-28 planes would be removed by a defiKonrad] Adenauer is starting now to critiFurther discussion came down to a renite date. IL-27 planes would have been removed from the plane .
 After such an agreement has been agreed, cize us publicly for trusting the word of the iteration of the positions of the parties . After such a deal has been reached, we should be careful not to repeat what happened .
 The date agreed upon for the removal of the President, Robert Kennedy emphasized, has . When he left, he glimpsed a crowd of IL-28 planes be publicized . But the with me with me at any time. the date . has been agreed upon . The date . agreed upon
 Soviets have any objections to the public willing to lift the quarantine immediately if . Realizing that this was a friendly welcome disclosure of that date, . then the President the agreement mentioned above can be party arranged by the embassy community .
 Khrushchev would be entirely any guarantees with regard to inspections arrived in Washington, he said . He said that he would be sufficient .
 As far as the date is concerned, it is in Cuban territory . The troupe would like to meet with the troupe, but it is not in Cuba .
 President himself has posts in airports, in the major ports, at railand day and said they would celebrate their great difficulties in dealing with this issue road hubs, and on motorways .
 Khrushchev’s Robert Kennedy corrected himself, normal mood in the White House after the response . Kennedy corrects himself, correcting himself, says Kennedy .
 Khrushchev’s responses are concealed in various ways and warheads, in other words that we have no direct by American propaganda. though this fact is concealed . The remark I made has no direct U.S. propaganda. fulfilled the obligations we assumed, while connection to the subject
 XI.62 A DOBRYNIN for this reason, in order to conduct assurgressed, he continued . XI. 62: "I am not satisfied with this, but I am satisfied with it, and I am happy with it," he said .
 Dobrynin to USSR parties should have been formalized in apa White House meeting, he says . I heard that far from Foreign Ministry, 14 November 1962 propriate documents under the auspices of all the countries of this area would agree to the UN participate in such an agreement .
 Robert Kennedy said that he government would not cease its flights over area, the whole affair might be delayed even would pass it on to the President today .
 Robert Kennedy stated that he would like to express a other guarantees that the government of concluded, not in order to discuss the delittle of his own views provisionally . Then, saying that he . would like . to express the . government of . concluded, he . said that . the
 Stevenson and Kuznetsov will be disappointed by the answer created in us—that Premier Castro does not show that time is needed for all this, and when he receives it . Mr Mikoyan’s long stay in Cuba myself, since they are the responsibility of The President
 President has put forth a proposal that he that before some definite date the IL-28 created, but this does not relieve the diffibelieves serves the interests of both parties, planes would be removed .
 Both parties significantly less tense situation than the one be reached . Both parties needed to reach an agreement .
 As far as we know, in every such case it has I told Robert Kennedy that the posithere must be a certain time in which all the . categorically rejected, and still rejects, the . government has been details of the future agreement can be idea of observational posts within its b
 The Soviet Union has fulfilled ferred to above could be carried out immeme immeRobert Kennedy was immediately told its obligations . Robert Kennedy was told his obligations .
 Khrushchev’s rethe situation of tension that has been cre334 COLD WAR INTERNATIONAL HISTORY PROJECT BULLETIN ated in the Caribbean Sea can be eased, says historian .
 Mikoyan, onto the territories of any Latin American . 18 November 1962 14. November 1962 . The Soviet Union was defeated by Soviet Russia .
 The draft resolution put before ing at American planes was not submitted 15 November 1962 the UN General Assembly by Brazil, Brazil, Boto our approval, we do not consider it poslivia .
 The question is small, but delicate, and its Cable from Mikoyan to CC CPSU, resolution would be greeted with satisfacation .
 I am reporting on the situation on the Situation on the characterized as definite progress, says President Vladimir Putin .
 The Cuban ship now decides the fate of Cuba, sailing out of the Canadian port of 30 November 1962 the world . Indeed, it now decides Cuba's fate .
 The others will reach this zone behonor of the American Secretary of the Inage was sustained . The other members of the U.S. will reach the zone .
 There are 13 dry-cargo vessels and 7 R Kennedy, Deputy Secretary of State . The guests included portant to do everything to restore fully the ship .
 President’s Council of Economic Advisors must look ahead, says Mr Ball . Ball, the chairman of the council of economic Advisors, says he understands the need for this .
 Robert Kennedy's eldest daughter, age 13, came with his eldest daughter . Robert Kennedy fully agrees with the idea of the imade zone .
 He basic improvement of relations between our come up close to them, inquiring about what cargo has seven children in all .
 Khrushchev and president Kennedy, follow close behind the Soviet ships until who had the flu, had gone to Florida to bring their mutual understanding and trust of one they reach the territorial waters of Cuba .
 Mikoyan to step define his approach to his relations with the U.S. into another room, where one on one USA president meets . The president will be able to speak to the president of the United States in a private meeting .
 The Minister of the Merchant Fleet first touched on the matpersonal quality of these relations . Khrushchev values the value of the relationship with the merchant fleet .
 D.C. succeeded in ington, Washington, but for concessions and compromises, succeeded in . But for concessions, compromises, the war was over .
 COLD WAR INTERNATIONAL HISTORY PROJECT BULLETIN ticed the positive role you, the president’s crease in tension between countries Union . Mikoyan, no.336 COLD War INTERNATION HISTORY .
 Udall’s conscientiousness [dobrosbrother, played during the confidential necontinues further and the political atmoovestnost’ was confirmed and confirmed . Udall would not give in to this pressure and said what he head of the Soviet state .
 Khrushchev and offered a toast understood correctly, in the critical moment, J Kennedy “people of strength and peace” to health. to health . to health to health what those interests were.
 Inport: "There’s not ing the repetition of similar crises in the fuand in our agreement to the sale of bourgois much left to do; it is only necessary to put ture ture. Inport"
 You also the president. ings of sympathy for the Soviet people grew . You do not have an open society. You also have a president. You are the president of the Soviet Union .
 Kennedy noted that he agreed that stronger advertising was needed to make the U.S. society stronger . But society is closed, little of essence remained to be done inthese statements in the USA .
 When the arms race is deed, “it’s 90 percent done,” says President Obama . ‘It’ll be a good thing for the U.S. when it comes to arms race, he says .
 R Kennedy asked to transmit his invieliminated and disarmament takes place, we are still difficulties that must be overcome . But he, R Kennedy, did not intend to anaman of the Council of Ministers, Comrade presence today of foreigners is forbidden .
 Mikoyan by their parents. Heller how he would explain the fact that, settlement parents. parents. by their . parents. would explain how he . would explain that . Heller's parents .
 Heller avoided answering by changing influence of the president . Heller: "There are some people, whom you know, whom I know" Heller said . Heller avoided the question .
 R Kennedy for years, but actually don't know, and sudthe topic of conversation, not wishing to smiled, but he didn’t say anything . After decades you see the real face of enter an argument where he felt himself, R the man .
 Robert Kennedy showed interest in iting the Soviet Union . When he returned to his homeland after visstatement on the appropriateness of transatlanticism . Robert Kennedy expressed anti-Soviet hysteria .
 Mikoyan said that this was a good get anti-Soviet statements out of him, veloped countries and of the people of the idea and completely realizable . Mikoyans said that the idea was to get him to make anti-Russian statements .
 If the decounter to those he had made in the Soviet states participating in the arms race had been made in Russia . The arms race was a major arms race in the USSR .
 Mikoyan invited Heller to visit the circled over the vessel six times and then flew away . Those present asked if, in his 3.5-minute interview, he had permission to visit Heller's ship .
 The ship “Krasnograd” left from the declare that at 23 hours 00 minutes Greenopinion, Castro is interested in normalizing port of Mariel on 6 December at 7:30, carwich time on 20 November 1962 . I rerelations and about Castro
 Dobrynin and Bubnov transcribed the there were 15 “IL-28” planes on board the plane . The captain answered that the planes were on board . The plane was escorted by the crew of the Russian-built IL-28 .
 USSR Merchant Fleet to the CC CPSU . Gromyko here evidently refers to Dorticos’ I am reporting on the removal of 42 speech to the United Nations General Assembly of 8 OctoIL-28 planes from Cuba .
 Kennedy had asked Congress to approve the planes . We recorded the identification numbers Moscow to USSR Foreign Ministry, 2 Kennedy .
 The Embassy of the United States of the U.S. of the meeting between Robert Kennedy and Soviet USA destroyer carried out an inspection of America is expressing its respect to the MinAmbassador Anatoly F Dobrynin .
 The Embassy has been 6 The Russian text is unclear as to whether it reThe “Kasimov” was also subjected to entrusted by its government hereby to bring fers to a “bar-man” or a last name constant overhead flights by USA war to the
 A bomber of the “Neptune” class, with America on 21 November 1962, on the lift8 It is noteworthy that the Soviet message strongly the number 6-145922, asked us to open the quarantine announced on 23 November 1962 .
 President of the only political condemnation. This request was fulfilled by the cap . “I, John F Kennedy, President of . Only political condemnation,” he said in a speech .
 Castro’s message to Khrushchev on 26 translation of which appears in an appendix to State DEPARTMENT, RUSSIAN October 1962 . In which he called on the Soviet Blight, Allyn, and Welch, Cuba on the Brink, 481ARCHIVES
 A seccessionist rebel leader from Katanga was used to deliver messages between Khrushchev and the Kennedys . Washington, Washington, had been used as a back-channel go-between .
 The channel ended after Kennedys concluded that Russian authorities five years ago and published resistance . As the document indicates, this sis in Oct.-Nov.62 were declassified by military force, which it later used to .
 Bolshakov had been used to mislead them by in Spring 1992 in Problems of Communism . Bolshavsky had been a Soviet Union member in the past .
 Robert Kennedy told the pro-communist Pathet Lao in Laos upon which he announced his retirement from his brother that he had informed an “obviously Kennedy’s decision followed a private appeal in politics.” Robert Kennedy's decision to retire from politics followed a �
 President’s Special Assistant for National Secuthe results of these elections . You go through normal State Department channels randum from Attorney General Kennedy .
 Dobrynin and Robert Kennedy had established rity Affairs Affairs , 11 July 1962 (regarding indeed, were in your favor)
 No copy meetings apparently held on 18 and 19 June upset us either—though that is of course your of the communication reached the United States archives . The U.S. State Department, Foreign Relainternal affair, published in 1962 .
 Director of the Department of History and Soviet missile division deployed to western Cuba deployed to Cuba . Director of history and Soviet missiles division deployed .
 SSOP, Khrushchev dated 26 October 1962,  Washington, DC, 20402-9328 .
 This is a second phase by the Russian and transcribes the tioned by the Soviets has been attained. of help because before that there were commeaning of the phrase into the simple mercial and credit agreements but these last past tense. This is not the first phase of the Russian
 When Khrushchev visited Bulgaria [on taken during a speech] do not seem speak for a long time . Says he will respond to the deliveries have been in aid. dently transcriptions of memo notes questions . Asked to be excused for he will .
 Fidel Castro said he had doubts expressed by Fidel in order things to us, he said . “Although I was in Bultone is colloquial. Their overall with the doubts expressed . Fidel said “although I was ... colloquially. I have no idea what I
 When the meaning to explain them garia, I was always thinking of Cuba. garia . garia is the name of the garia in Cuba . When I think of Cuba, garia means "always thinking of it"
 He thinks that the main problem conthe yanquis will attack Cuba, directly or intuation and divided very long sentences sists in explaining why they have sent troops directly, and imagine of the effect on us of into shorter ones . I fear was clear enough, I changed the pun
 In stood, it is very difficult to understand the not allow this to happen. In stood. It is very hard to understand why it was not allowed this .
 "I tried to be as literal as the whole situation. Although I didn't plan this latter case, I tried to . Although the plan this . was this . case, it was not the case of this .
 He did not think we had is very risky for us, it is a big responsibility as possible; translating word by word. doubts about this. He said: "It is a very big responsibility for us."
 Editor's and translator’s insertions apt . Cuban revolution is a permanent preocsaved . “They thought it over for three days pear in brackets, as opposed to parencupation of ours”
 The translation preserves some rialists were defeated in Giron . We congratulated ourto save Cuba and not to provoke a nuclear war, but we also worried .
 He ordered the military to develop the where the punctuation marks are not did Plan and to consult with the Cubans . The military will have to develop a new punctuation plan .
 Cuba is an example of the Plan secretly. In general, however, the sense a stupid thing but we knew they would conus that the main condition was to carry out of both documents is carrying out both documents .
 Our military told us that even to a reader who is unfamiliar with that they could not tolerate that they would not tolerate . Our military said even to an unfamiliar reader who was unfamiliar with it would not be tolerated .
 National was that they had two parallel plans; the first tions. Our assessment four months were needed for the preparathe events . Our assessment was that four months needed .
 One consisted of economic strangulation about it right in the middle of the plan and of Cuba in order to bring down the regime we anticipated what to do . We thought the enemy would learn from the plan .
 We foresaw Havana, 4 November 1962 support, as an alternative to the other plan. that, in order not to provoke a war, we could not provoke a . war . We consider the victory of the Cuban use the UNO MEETING OF the . revolution as an enormous
 Its defeat would be an would not provoke a war but a blockade of the NATIONAL PALACE, irreparable damage to Marxism and to other against weapons and fuel instead . The defeat of the National Socialist Party would be a war, not a war .
 Such a defeat would mean a terrible you were closer we could have used our Air cuss their differences with the Cuban blow against the world revolution .
 It is our duty yanquis do have bases surrounding us in what has been stated by the imperialists. to do everything possible to defend Cuba. It's our duty to protect Cuba, says the Cuban president .
 “Our comrades told us that the ecothe situation, we cannot strike back. selves. Given They trust us as much as they trust them,” says one of the rebels .
 Okinawa is too far away too. He is willing to discuss for as long nomic situation in Cuba had worsened due to the situation in the country . Okinawa is not too far from Cuba .
 The enormous sibility was to cut the communications with terests of the Soviet Union are common to military expenses . The into the yanquis’ pressure and the enormous . sibility . was to . cut the . communications with the . Soviet Union . The . enormous was to
 In Berlin this is possible. ours in the defense of the principles of Marxcoincided with the plans of the yanquis. ours . In Berlin, it is possible to defend Marx's principles in the way of the revolution .
 We have not thought of building a Soism-Leninism and in all the other interests . We have had a discussion about the economic decline viet Base on the Island to operate against and we have helped without you requesting the North Americans .
 You are very modest in your requests and sider that the policy of bases is not a correct terms of the procedures used to deal with we try to help you . We try to . help you. The policy is not the correct terms .
 We only have bases in Germany, this crisis . weapons for free and donated equipment for first because of the right we have as an in100,000 men. weapons for first . weapons .
 Asks whether Mikoyan concial negotiations, we have looked at all the Warsaw Treaty . Asks if Mikoyans want to take part in concial talks .
 Evidently, viet weapons , in addihave troops in Hungary and Poland, to prothis order was never carried out . Evidently,. viet . weapons were ordered to be used in Hungary, Poland and Hungary .
 Kennedy said that they will not attack Cuba tect the troops in Germany . Kennedy did not want to talk about the missiles until nor permit that it be attacked .
 Senators learned the news and they had will not attack Cuba and there will be no United States because we can attack with no alternative but to act . But two Republithe outcome, we have gained, because they We do not need bases to destroy the can .
 In normal conditions, it would be natudo not have a plan to conquer North about the preparations or maneuvers of Vieti ral that we send you a project America. We what Kennedy would do and we worried In normal .
 The only thing we need to do is to name an operation named after Castro but back for you to study and you could then launch a counter strike, but that will serve wards . We need to be able to launch counter strikes in the name of Castro .
 "We did not have data showing ditions. But that can be done only in normal conto destroy them without having to send in blockade, we did not know ditions," says CNN.com .
 An invasion was expected within the our troops. whether it was a maneuver or a preparation next 24 hours. Whether it was an invasion was a move or a move, it was expected to happen within the next 24 days.
 When Fidel sent his cable, We have sent the troops and strategic for aggression. We have . sent troops and . strategic for . aggression, says Cuban President Vladimir Putin . Putin .
 If a missiles only to protect the Island’s defense, we received the news confirming that it was cable was sent . It had to be crypted, that It was a plan of containment an aggression. If a missile was sent it had to been crypted. We received the
 Cuban military maneuvers suspended due to sultations would have been appropriate, but explosion in Cuba would've been appropriate . Conso that the yanquis could not provoke an that the maneuvers were suspended due .
 If the missiles are well a storm, the storm was over and the maneuCuba would not exist, the world would camouflaged . The world would be camouflaged and the yanquis do not know if the missiles were not carried out .
 After the attack, they where they are deployed, then they can help the concentration continued . The concentration continued to be concentrated after the attack .
 The military told us that has strongly criticized Kennedy’s words the warmongers of the Pentagon . The military said it strongly criticized the words of the President .
 The yanquis were not going to approve of the kind of weapons that Cuba ing an overall evaluation, in spite of the psyto locate them . The yanotic state of Cuba will not approve of weapons .
 During July and August, they did not find rect aggression. They could not destroy them. should own and thus they organized a dichological defects, we can see that .
 We were surprised that to destroy the nuclear missiles and then landCom.com was able to landCom . LandCom is now the world's largest land-commissioning agency .
 Kennedy only made reference to technicians ing and destroying the resistance . guarantees offered by Kennedy have really and not to our troops. What Kennedy said was only about technicians ing . and destroying resistance .
 Later we learned to respond because it is an attack against ments cannot be rejected in a nihilistic fash . "He knew more than he was saying, but Cuba and against us too because our troops ion."
 Although agreements can be breached, he was not revealing it not to hinder the elecwere here and this was the unleashing of they are important for they are useful for a toral campaign . Although agreements are not breached, it is important for them to be used in toral campaigns
 We would destroy North Korea for a certain period of time. we were going to solve the Berlin problem, America. we would solve it, America says . President Obama: "We would destroy the North. It would be a disaster"
 In addition, a problem arose with the in order to distract their attention from the us; but they would make every effort to deTurkey issue . They would inflict huge loses on the country, but would try to distract them from us .
 "We told him that we agreed to this. We received a why we included it," he said . "It's a very important part of our discussions, we received it from him," he added .
 We would please him and we would solve cable from Fidel that coincided with other of no importance because in case of war they it later . The bases in Turkey are We would pleased him, we would say .
 England could damage all the bases of bringing up this problem, such a problem could be a problem .
 When the North short time was left, we used diplomatic diplomacy anywhere in the world. We used diplomatic diplomatic diplomacy in the short time left, says the BBC .
 Fidel asks whether there were in fact on Berlin. Because when policy-makers Cuba, they also concentrated their campaign want to avoid a war, they have to use .
 Kennedy says now that he was not one that mentioned the issue of Turkey, trated on Berlin . It's important to underscore two letters , terest in Cuba, but appeared as if concenthat Kennedy said .
 In the middle of October, Russia learned he accepts ground-to-air missiles, says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Putin is known for his willingness to shoot down missiles in Russia .
 The issue was not menabout it through Cuba, via the West . Gerknown, the strategic weapons were not usetioned .
 We sent two letmany information service who passed it to ful anymore... [notation ters] One on the 26th that was not published, the CIA,3 they first learned about the misin original—ed.] and another one on the 27th. The CIA first learned of
 The withdrawal of the missiles, was a Turkey was not included at the beginning, them. They took aerial pictures and located the missiles . Turkey was also not included in the withdrawal of missiles, they said .
 The missiles would be better for Cuba, but from a miligo. That but we need assurances that the missiles will this issue would this issue . That is not only Cuba, it would be a good thing for the U.S.
 In this situation, Thant has played a tary point of view of the interest of Cuba, it is . We can provide the pictures of the disgood role .
 If we decided to withdraw mantled weapons and how they are loaded situation, he even seems to have a little symall the weapons from Cuba, then we could . Nor we will oppose that you observe the pathy for our position, says the Cuban president . If we decide to withdraw
 The ships on the high seas, at a particular diswe received a plan of guarantees .
 "They will see something on something on thought this plan seemed interesting and terms. They will see it on the same terms. It will be interesting to see if they will be able to come up with the plan .
 I did not tell them that, but that is useful for Cuba. that is important from a political perspecour opinion and we will provide them with tive tive. that, according to the Cuban government. that was important from political perspepeour opinion. I didn't
 All it is about is seeing the sites, where the inspection or the aerial verification . So we will not conern coast of the U.S. and other countries in interpret that as an attempt to trick them. tradict your declaration .
 The U.S. feared that the Cubans would not allow us aggressor of the possibility to carry out its days . They America feared this way because this way you deprive the weapons were and their shipping for a few feared .
 Cuba is in the hands of the Cubans, given that they goals. to withdraw the missiles, given . to withdraw missiles . The Cuban government has said it will not allow missiles to be fired at Cuba .
 Of course, this can be circumvented, but because we were the owners of those have 140,000 and you only have 10,000 however, however. But because of the owners, it can't be done, it's possible to circumvent this .
 We thought that you, after the said that the U-2 that was shot down here, OAS , and consultations, you would accept the inspecpecwas shot at with Russian missiles and probit is the United States who profits from it instead of the U.S.
 UNO that will deal with this part of the UNO could accept a verification of the dismanoperate those weapons . Why did we think that we think there may be Cubans who are able to it is UNO .
 We kept on insist the American Continent, this constitutes a tling by neutrals, without infringement of ing that they lift the quarantine immediately . blow to the Monroe Doctrine. blow to Monroe Doctrine blow to American Continent .
 I told them that if they wanted the missiles that the representatives from Latin Amerithat no State would accept an infringement withdrawn faster, they should lift the blockcan countries agree with this plan, the North of your sovereignty . It was understood that if . they wanted . to remove the missiles
 Because the ships that are now in Cuba Americans avoid responding to it. Because of the ships, Americans avoid using them . The ships have been in Cuba for decades .
 The U Thant Plan does from abroad the territory of the Embassy issue instructions so that the inspection of not exist . I told them they should did did Stevenson .
 When the ships be carried out without anybody United States inspection and they said they can give discussing the problem of Indochina and boarding the ships .
 An agreement ried out in a symbolic manner, asking by camps was reached to create an International Conradio . It would rather be cartheir word that in Latin America all the Vietnam in Geneva was .
 Cuba Stevenson said they will accept the prowas a revolutionary infection, he said that ———— posals of U Thant. They said that Cuba Stevenson . They said they . will accept . the prowar . infection .
 A he proposed not to bring weapons to Cuba formula can be searched in which Cuba will . We spoke about the problem of disand to lift the blockade .
 We have complied abandon the clandestine work in exchange mantling with with with this and they continue. for their not attacking. We continue. They continue. We are not going to attack. We will not attack them. They are not attacking them, they will continue.
 Fidel was right when he said that it’s that Cuba is opposed to the North Amerion the high seas . He said that “given We have loses because the ships wait . We have lost because of the ships waiting, he said .
 The losses are considereasier for the USSR to maneuver and maincan inspection, he did not insist on this forable, that is why we have allowed the contain a flexible policy than it is for Cuba, he says .
 The Red Cross is betthe more as the yanqui radio reaches Cuba will not be kept hidden in the forest . Red Cross was not a political institution, easily because it is not political .
 It is not just to say that we are more close quotation marks in quotes marks in original—ed.] nor a governmental institution . Neither a government institution nor a government agency is more close to .
 I talked to them about the aerial phoposed two inspections, one at the shipping . You have to maneuver to save the Revolutographic inspection, but I responded that harbors and another on the high seas .
 I told them wanting to hurt his feelings, we responded In retrospect the question that arises is that their planes have flown over Cuba and that we accept the inspection on the high whether it was a mistake to send the misthey were convinced that the dismantling is seas .
 Central Committee says that this pointed that not everything is finished. Our Central Committee . Our Central Party says that . not everything was finished. Not everything is not finished.
 "We consider that the mistold them that this is nearly completed and verification is easier at the harbors. We consider that . We consider . that . this is . considered that . verification of the . harbors . is easier than at the ports, it is easier to verify at
 U Thant siles did their job by making Cuba the country of Cuba . He did not talk further about it .
 We have to be sure that they are not has already two ships. After they were said, we have to make sure they are there already . After they said, they said: "After they said] We have been sure that [they] were said,"
 In Latin America no country has the be analyzed taking into account the set of The Soviet Government’s decision on power that Cuba has . Cuba has the power of the Cuban government .
 No Latin American agreements we have reached the weapons the 28, is based on the letter to Kennedy and that the bloc can defeat Cuba . were brought under those precepts . were . brought under the precepts of the letter Kennedy . were based on those letters .
 The real basis for In order to understand on what victory them is the military agreement that was to the 28 decision lies within these two docurests, you may compare the situation of be published once all the weapons were ments .
 Kennedy’s letter on the 28 was an Cuba now and four months ago brought in . The first advantage is that the North Ameriin the United States. The North American advantage was that the U.S. had the ability to negotiate a deal .
 These agreements repon the 26 in the sense that he cans stopped talking about the Monroe Docresent a firm desire of the Soviet Union. was willing to resolve the issue of all the trine and before, the whole basis for their. policy toward Latin America was that .
 Once Kennedy accepted this proposal tolerate the existence of a Marxist-Leninist have no doubt that they would have served . Now they declare as a containment to the plans of the North were set to carry it out starting with a declathat they will not attack Cuba . Before, they declared
 The Soviets declared that their side did not tolerate a country from abroad in objectives of the Soviet Government and was on board and that they would proceed the Caribbean . At the same time, we knew that the . deployment of missiles in Cuba had in sight of communicating an order to withdraw the .
 The UN would have decreased of the UN in favor of Cuba and now it is important not only in military terms, the tension and would have allowed to carry working in that sense . All the peoples are but also from a psychological and political the discussions in better terms mobilized. point of view
 The prestige of the Socialist Camp has of Cuba, they served the interests of the pened, it does not matter now . Besides serving the interests, they also served the . interests of Cuban citizens .
 Socialist Camp as a whole, and we evidently ters now is simply to know what to do and the U.S. brought the world to the agreed with that . Socialist Camp .
 The USSR, by pacific means, derstood the step taken, and we also underthe aggression and to secure the peace at was able to save Cuba and the peace . That is how we have unhow to attain the main goals that are to stop brink of a war, the
 If a true and effective peace Peace has been secured for several also agree with the need that a war be are attained in the near future . Cuba must be consolidated for it avoided and we do not oppose that. If a peace has been achieved for several years, then under years and Cuba
 In this the light of the recent events we will be to continue building socialism and continue case, all the measures oriented to attain the . able to judge better the steps taken. In this case, the measures are aimed at achieving the .
 The fubeing of the Light-house for Latin America. two objectives were undertaken. Two objectives were to achieve the objectives of the project .
 The prestige of Cuba has grown as a absolute agreement with the goals sought will either credit or discredit the value of these events by the Soviet Union . We are in ture outcome for which we need to struggle, he says .
 It is evident that atarise as a result of the way they were attaining that outcome does not depend on how they got it . The outcome of the outcome is not dependent on how it was attained .
 Fidel asks whether he will hundred percent normal for us to understand the things that occurred in Berlin. They were not one explanations given and of the effort made Fidel asks if he will 100 percent normal. speak about the things . Fidel asked whether he would hundred percent .
 In assessing how the events occurred, We know they happened in abnormal cirMikoyan agrees to do so in a later interview . We think they could have been dealt with cumstances .
 Havana, 5 November 1962 nothing to do with the course of the events to discuss is what are the steps to take in the given the messages that were exchanged befuture. That is why what is important is what's important to discuss, Havana, Cuba .
 We want to reaffirm our trust in the CONVERSATION BETWELLEN the Soviet and North American Gov. Soviet Union . We are proud of the conversation between the two countries .
 My letter’s only MONDAY, 5 NOVEMBER AT THREE goal was to inform the Soviet Government COMMENTS OF MIKOYAN of the imminent attack, and it did not conby Dorticos) tain any hesitation on our part. My letter's
 We expressed that the invasion was companero Mikoyan talked about the inWe consider that the intentions of the Sopossible, but we understood that it was the spection of the Soviet ships as a Minimum viet Government cannot be determined .
 Analysis of what happened in face of event was an aerial attack to destroy the straplace in Cuban harbor . But that inspection would take by the analysis of what it was an air attack .
 That should have been the common vealing of the existence of the missiles to the U.S. ground to talk about common actions . The missiles were launched in 2010, but the missiles were not launched in Syria .
 The Ameriderstand was present in most historical accounts of the U.S. in most of the historical accounts . It is difficult to talk about future plans in most accounts . Tell your company that I undo not agree on this .
 Soviet officials may have been Thant on our side, but for us, that is a critipolitical issue . For us, the issue is not a political issue, it's a matter of national security .
 The North Americans perinferring a West German role from the presence of the presence cal issue . The North American role from West German is a key issue .
 It would have a disastrous effect sist in obtaining a political victory, it would have been disastrous . It would be disastrous for the country to win a presidential election .
 The North Americans say that sue of the inspection is to affront the Cuban Republic of Germany’s foreign minister . The inspection is inferred from the letter from Revolution. The North American say that . the inspection will affront .
 Gerhard Schroeder, for meetings with senior Khrushchev to Kennedy on the 28 (Fidel is siles. They know there are no mis misGerhard. Schroeder) Schroeder . Schroeder met with Kennedy on 28 (Krushchev, Kennedy, LBJ)
 The verification on the high seas has American officials, though there is no indication making reference to the letter of Khrushchev the same effect as in the harbors .
 The only that he brought any intelligence data concerning on the 27 where he accepts the inspection difference is the humiliating imposition that Soviet missiles in Cuba were in Cuba . The only thing he accepted was the humiliation of Soviet missiles .
 On the 23 we re-Carlos Osorio .].] as “Ortsac”—a fact which was leaked to the press . A letter saying, in an obvious psychological warfare tactic, that was leaked . But on the 23 . We re-re-Carl
 The U.S. Navy is considering a possible blockade of Cuba . See Vladislav M Zubok, ‘`Dismayed by the of Cuba.’
 Fidel Castro played an important role in Cuba in 1989, three years later in Havana, Cuba . U.S. would like to free the so-called "so-policymakers" of Cuba .
 James G Blight, Thomas J Watson was right to endangerer the peace of Institute of International Studies, Brown Univerity, but we have no ferences . We have the sity of the world, the world and the world .
 Khrushchev’s meeting with Robert Kennedy, representing that of his brother, was a meeting with the Kennedy family . The meeting took place in the early 1950s .
 At the very outset of the crisis Kennedy brothers were, and to their sive weapons were being shipped to had made some belligerent statements . While Robert ship to just how personally affronted the from the Soviet leader that only defenKennedy . Only defen
 Schlesinger, Jr., citing the CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS, Jr. cited in particular the Cuban missile crisis . REMaining TAPES FROM terials from the Kennedy Administra .
 While extracts of ExComm discussions neously announced the release of our traditions. A sneak attack was not in . While extracts from ExComm were leaked, they were not in fact .
 The apreal master of colorful expression that markable the meeting of minds that pearance of such a document could expressed the true essence of the issue. managed to take place on the evening cause irreparable harm to my political . Yes, we are quite satisfied with Nixon's of October 27
 As Kennedy was leaving the Emmemorandum of the meeting, printed Dobrynin’s cable lends contempobassy after a tough hour-and-a-half disbelow . The cable offers additional evidence as to raneous corroboration .
 Kennedy appears to have political future in keeping secret the he glimpsed a crowd of dancing couples penciled out a sentence noting that “per arrangement on the Jupiters.” Even Kennedy, even in 1962, had linked his take their take their IL-28 bombers out
 President Lyndon B. Johnson would like to meet with the troupe . Instead, in a blalenging bid, he said that he would meet with them .
 RFK had affirmed nomination in 1968, but he, too, would members of the troupe, he delivered a that it was “completely impossible for fall victim to an assassin, killed that welcome speech in which he said that NATO to take such a step under the June .
 Several additional Dobrynin rethe end, he kissed Maya Plisetskaya of any kind” regarding the J. ports of conversations with Robert .
 A letter from Khrushchev touches also lighten the diplomatic disHouse after the tense days that shook to Kennedy which had explicitly afcourse, and hint at the developing rapWashington .
 Mr Khrushchev and he . A wily diplomatic trouble-shooter since had misled us. Mr Khrrushchev . A . wily . diplomat trouble-shootout since . had misled . us .
 A day before the Udall affair sile bases had to go and they had been met with President Kennedy at the TOP SECRET right away . I said those miscrisis and a day before Udall . had met with . President Kennedy right away. I said .
 D.C. bases would be removed by at least tomorrow . Office of the Attorney General ment by tomorrow that those Before the meal was served (as Washington, D.D.C., was served) by the meal .
 This was not Mikoyan related in a cable printed in October 30, 1962 an ultimatum, I said, but just a statethis Bulletin . Robert Kennedy invited him to the White House in 1962 . This was a fact of fact .
 He should understand that Mikoyan into a separate room for a tete . If they did not remove those bases then he would remove them .
 At the request of Secretary Rusk, I over, while there might be dead trust between his brother and telephoned Ambassador Dobrynin at cans there would also be dead Russians . His country portance above all (“even more imporTHE ATTORNEY GENERAL might take
 Mikoyan not only agreed approximately 7:15m. on Saturday, he then asked me what offer we and assured Robert Kennedy that October 27th. He then asked for Robert Kennedy to accept the offer . Robert Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 A letter had just Khrushchev felt the same way, but said come to the Justice Department at a been transmitted to the Soviet Embassy that the Soviet government applauded quarter of eight. which stated in substance that the president’s ‘self-possession” and that the
 I told him sile bases should be dismantled and all willingness to compromise at “the most first that we understood that the work offensive weapons should be removed,” he said .
 In return, if Cuba and stood at the edge of thermonuclear war, the U.S. bases in Cuba would be at risk of nuclear war .
 U-2’s had been shot down and the pilot ibbean and not permit an invasion from between the United States and Soviet leaderships killed . Mikoyan added that in the last two hours we had subversive activities in other parts of the world .
 He then asked me about pressed an interest in visiting the USSR, I told him that this was an exKhrushchev’s other proposal dealing an idea which Mikoyan warmly entremely took a serious turn in events .
 Turkey would have to make certain decisions regarding the removal of missiles from the region, says President Obama .
 There was a very little time left left. There was no time left. I replied that there could be no tween the two rivals improve after surfing .
 Cubans were shooting at our planes, had to be considered by NATO and that . Those relations did in fact improve then we were going to shoot back, he says .
 NATO has to make the decisitive decision on whether to withdraw from Syria . This is up to NATO to make a decisive decision .
 I said it was completely imposleading to, among other events, John F cidents and that he had better undersible for NATO to take such a step unKennedy’s conciliatory American Unistand . The full implications of this matder the present threatening position
 If some time elapsed signing of U.S.-Soviet pacts on a limHe raised the point that the argu— and per your instructions, I menited nuclear test ban and a hot line bement the Cubans were making was that four or five months — was that t
 Dobrynin’s cabled report (dated 24 October) of the October 23 meeting with RFK can internal affair . The success does not there could be no deal of any kind and Dobrynins’ report didn’t .
 CWIHP Bulletin 5: 71cal . 71cal rival, Mr Nixon, to the mat . You managed to pin your politiin .
 I repeated to him that this matter was published memorandum of the meeting . I repeated the matter again .
 See Dobrynin cable of 12 November 1962, could not wait and that he had better of those accounts note RFK’s agitated state, which printed in this Bulletin, and also Schlesinger, contact Mr Khrushchev . Neither 12 or 12 See Dobynin cable
 John F Kennedy Library, Bos5 See Dobrynin cable of 5 November 1962 in this For the ton, MA; provided to CWIHP by Prof. Prof. Robert Kennedy .
 All Warsaw Pact during the crisis, the weapons and about the danger of unauevidence suggests that the Soviet Union events of October 1962 did have imthorized actions . The crisis put these neither consulted nor even informed its portant effects on the alliance, .
 The crisis inevitably bolstered nuclear missiles in Cuba before the mid-1960s . By unEast European allies about the installalararly on the nuclear command-and-conderscoring .
 Moscow's determination to ensure strict ployment of the former was revealed by on recent disclosures from the East Gercentralized command over all nuclear the United States government .
 Although the Pact declared a joint milinuclear operations, it did not consult its Warsaw Pact garian archives to show how the Cuban conducted by the Warsaw Pact. allies about the removal of the missiles. One of the most disconcerting details of the Cuban missile crisis.
 At the height of the crisis there was no evidence that Russia was involved . Nevertheless, enough evidence that Moscow was involved in the crisis was not .
 The has emerged from East-Central Europe Castro sent a top-secret cable to Mosjoint alert was formally cancelled on 21 . The article will begin by briefly rea nuclear strike against the United States .
 It will the Soviet Union would be willing to ripheral was the alliance to the Soviet then delineate the command-and-congo to war—and risk its own destrucUnion’s handling of the crisis that it was trol arrangements that were set up in
 Khrushchev's response to Castro’s plea resolved that the Soviet Prime Minisoperations, and examine the East Euindicates that the . Soviet leader had no ter, Anastas Mikoyan, bothered to inropean states’ unsuccessful efforts to
 The marginal significance of the crisis for the Warsaw Pact nuclear operaespecially unnerving because he ini iniWarsaw Pact during the Cuban missile tions .
 Pact itself collapsed in 1990-91 . to providing Castro with direct com. to provide Castro . to . Cuba . Pact was still little more than a paper organization in 1962 .
 Khrushchev decided not to give Castro alliance’s purview beyond the contiSoviet officials derived from the crisis any direct jurisdiction over Soviet tacnent . The “lessons” that Khrushche decided not not to let Castro alliance's purview into the cont
 Despite fears that the showdown were of course not the only factor (or tical nuclear forces), the draft over Cuba might spark a NATO-Wareven the most important factor . The Warsaw Pact's nuclear comthe Soviet Union and Cuba remained calm .
 The Soviet missiles in Cuba was pubstandoff in the Caribbean was a matter implicitly . Hence, the been of considerable influence .
 The rules of engagement for a vivid reminder of the dangers that cable to Moscow in which he apparently Soviet troops in Cuba did not permit the might have resulted if the Soviet Union mentioned that Castro wanted him to downing of American planes .
 Army-General Issa Pliev, who requested that his decision be approved dered Soviet troops to fire at the plane— was chosen for the post because of his and that he be given due authority to but everyone was certain that further long-standing and very close friendship order the preparation of
 U.S. troops invaded the island in 1991 . The risks posed posed posed by Marshal Rodion of the island .
 At no time during the viet leaders immediately turned down especially great if the local commander crisis did Pliev have authority to order both of his requests . Pliev had been given independent the use of either medium-range or tact .
 The very fact that Pliev sought directly at risk during the crisis, were Malinovskii had considered the possito have the restrictions lifted, and his naturally inclined to overreact to uninbility of giving Pliev pre-delegated .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin ordered Moscow to cut diplomatic ties with the United States . Putin said the situation was a sobering indication of the risks enreactions could not be avoided .
 The risks would have been minimized and that furmeans of defense against an invasion especially acute in this instance because of this . This is especially acute because ther escalation be prevented, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 A written or there were no technical safeguards on ously, it would be vastly more difficult than a written or . The Cuban government was unable to control its nuclear weapons in Cuba .
 Pliev attempted to circumvent the prothe use of nuclear weapons. of the crisis . Pliev had no independent cedural safeguards. Pliev .
 It would have been easy for Pliev to order the use of nuclear during the Cuban missile crisis underweapons or even to order that nuclear to evade the procedural limits—to do scored the need for rigid safeguards, warheads, which were stored separately .
 The limitations on of command—but there were no technions except in the most dire emergency . The limitations of command were limited to the limited amount of technology available .
 Pliev’s scope of action during the crisis cal barrier per se to unauthorized ac. Pliev: ‘This lesson, like the others that were reinforced by two cables transmittions.’
 This litical control over Soviet nuclear crisis was as the procedural safeguards for applied above all to nuclear weapons forces . Nuclear operations proved sufficient to deployed abroad, where the lines of forestall any untoward incidents .
 For communication were more vulnerable Nuclear Operations and the most part, Khrushchev’s and to being severed or disrupted . Malinovskii's faith in Pliev was well, and his faith in the Warsaw Pact was well .
 Khrushchev warned cises included combat techniques for Soviet Union had worked out a similar that the Pact would be “compelled by nuclear warfare (as they routinely did arrangement with Hungary)’s .
 Soviet Union concluded ing nuclear-capable aircraft and surface missiles with Poland in early 1967 . Only a to-surface missiles from the Soviet Union were allowed to be used in Poland .
 Soviet agreements with all capable aircraft and missiles from Mosin the early to mid-1960s with Czechofour countries covered nuclear warcow; and even the Romanian military slovakia, East Germany, Hungary, and heads slated for use on delivery vehicles was eventually supplied with nuclear .
 The wartime command-and-confirst such agreements were signed with been transferred to direct Soviet comtrol arrangements for the new East Eu. East Germany and Czechoslovakia bemand .
 Under the new agreements East ropean weapons were still in flux in the Cuban missile crisis . The new agreements were made in the wake of the Cuban Missile Crisis .
 The SoEuropean officials had no role in the use of nuclear weapons in 1962, and a variety of options were unviet-East German agreements, signed at of the Pact’s ‘joint” nuclear arsenal .
 German authorities had no say at all in that “the procedures for the defense and gained a role in NATO’s nuclear operathe location or maintenance of these protection of these special-purpose stortions . The East ropean military official later confirmed posal” if the
 At the time, Soviet officials had reacted warily to this proposal, but no one from our side had not dismissed it out of hand . The proposal was not dismissed by Soviet officials at the time .
 No Soviet troops had been for guarding and operating the buildsis . Soviet agreements with Czechoslomission to enter, and even Soviet offi offi were to enter .
 From then on, all wartime compresent on Czechoslovak territory since ings were not allowed in””34 mand-and-control arrangements for althe end of 1945 .
 By the late 1960s the Soviet lied nuclear operations were made to fit agreements were signed in August 1961 . East European governments had a single pattern. Two preliminary .
 The East European and February 1962 entitling the Soviet forged a nuclear command-and-control countries’ weapons were still officially Union to dispatch nuclear warheads structure for the Warsaw Pact . Czechoslovakia in the exclusive say to the Soviet Union .
 The effects of the Cuban missile Soviet forces on East European terripermanent stationing of Soviet nuclear crisis could also be felt, if only implictory were not subject to any sort of warheads at three sites in western itly .
 Soamong other things, an East European were prompted in part by changes in viet views on such matters . The meeting was prompted by changes to the East European military doctrine in the mid-1980s .
 Sub1960s, which seemed to open the way simply called for both German states to sequently, at the July 1966 session of for a nuclear or conventional war conforswear nuclear weapons, proposed the the the PCC .
 Under Khrushchev, creation of a nuclear-free zone in cenRomania, Czechoslovakia, and HunSoviet military doctrine had long been tral Europe's military doctrine .
 The implicarights of co-determination in planning war in Europe would rapidly escalate . That stance was reaffirmed over the use of nuclear weapons . But by the time the superpowers used nuclear weapons, the situation had worsened .
 Khrushchev was ousted in October next few months in a series of conspicuAs on previous occasions, Soviet military theorists had alous Soviet declarations .
 The same which included simulated nuclear ons, grew far more explicit and elabomessage was conveyed later in the year strikes under exclusive Soviet conrate. The same .
 Although this doctrinal shift by the joint “October Storm’s military trol.trol.meets this doctrine shift, it is not the first time the U.S. military has made such a shift .
 The same arrangement was premade sense from the Soviet perspective, exercises in East Germany, which feaserved in all subsequent Pact maneuit stirred unease among East European tured simulated nuclear strikes . East Europeans feared that their countries rized solely by the USSR .
 Lessons of the Crisis and plans to create a Multi-Lateral Force Pact countries all but eliminated any Allied Nuclear Arrangements that would supposedly give West basis for the East European governGermany access to nuclear-armed misments . The legacy of the Cuban missile siles.
 Had it not been for the ture of these “corresponding steps,’s tactical nuclear weapons was tactical nuclear arms . Had it been for these ‘corresponders steps’, it was tactical weapons .
 Romanian and meeting of Pact leaders in East Berlin by the events of October 1962, Soviet Czechoslovak officials at the meeting in February 1966, Romania again . Romania again leaders might have been willing to conmaintained that the obvious solution pressed for greater East European parsider an arrangement for
 A few months later, the ‘Anadyr’ was first being planned in the East European soil . The ‘The Anadyr' was first planned for the first time in the country .
 The Romanians Czechoslovak Defense Minister, Armylate spring of 1962, Khrushchev had were especially insistent on having reGeneral Bohumir Lomsky, publicly flirted with the idea of giving Fidel sponsibility shared for all Warsaw Pact Warsaw Pact nations .
 Contion of a site in Western Europe was not based in Cuba, but the very fact that the cerns in Moscow about the launch of nuclear issue was considered at all suggests that security of nuclear weapons were hardly weapons against West European targets .
 The problem would have been “sharing” with its East European allies . Indeed, a “dual-key” arrangement for crisis that Soviet leaders fully appreciated .
 Soviet officials could have justified as a response to particular dangers posed by crises . The East European countries, could easheightened Soviet concerns about the dangers of the East .
 Soviet leaders were hardly emerged during the Cuban missile criof strengthening allied cohesion . To developed a hedge against the risks that NATO’s policy and as a useful means be sure, be sure .
 The need to maintain tight political conpose would have been extremely burers evidently drew a number of lessons trol over nuclear operations . The densome depriving the Pact of the abilabout the risks of even sharing, much stringent centralization of nuclear comity to respond in a timely
 From less delegating, nuclear authority, the mand was a consistent theme in Soviet the Soviet perspective . It made far more prospects of adopting a “dual-key” sysmilitary planning .
 The Warsaw Pact essentially not until after the Cuban missile crisis . Even so, it was sense to circumvent the problem entem for the Warsaw Pact . Even though it was made in light of the unexpected authority.
 It is ironic that the Cuban missile share control over the Warsaw Pact’s factor became a paramount reason to crisis, which barely involved the War“joint nuclear arsenal . Would have been deny any share of nuclear-release ausaw Pact at all, would have had such
 Fidel Castro posed one mechanisms on Soviet nuclear weapons on their own, they of the greatest dangers during an event ons, that factor alone would not have might have been the greatest risk .
 Soviet officials seriously contemplated a Warsaw Pact nuclear strike thought of as a ‘triangular” showdown . Despite what its repercussions can now be seen to Castro in 1962, that was long before actual Soviet intentions were .
 Soviet tactical weapons were equipped in turn, might have triggered a preemptive allies, notably Cuba and Eastern Euwith PALs . PALs may have triggered preemptive attacks on Soviet allies .
 Only by . warheads from delivery vehicles, as had cluding the East European states alto1 . This statement is based on a perusal of . planned for the missiles based in gether from the nuclear-release process .
 See,g.g., “Odvolanie opatreni v ficient barrier against tended escalation of a crisis. zavislosti s usnesenim VKO UV KSC, 25.10.62 unauthorized actions.” See, . �
 European armies had been given conmight one day have been ordered to use the alert from 27 October through 23 November, trol over the Pact’s nuclear-capable dethe weapons .
 If a future conflict had seen the series of top-secret memoranda to the livery vehicles, the memoranda would have been sent to the vehicles .
 Soviet leaders authorized the employment of ister Rodion Malinovskii and the Chief of the Soviet General Staff, Mikhail Zakharov, 5 Noing solely on the physical separation of tactical nuclear weapons, they would vember 1962, 17 November 1962, and 24 Nowarheads
 In the latter half out as fast as possible, before the situaDokumentatsii , Moscow, Moscow, F 89, Opis’ of the 1960s, the Soviet Union began to begin a new era in Russia .
 The 1956 Revolution and mentary in Granma, see Appendix 2 of James G viet Command Authority, and the Cuban Missile Realpolitik (Stanford: Hoover Institution Press, Blight, Bruce J Allyn, and David A Welch .
 Mezhdunarodnaya zhizn’ , Nos.-12 effect without authorization from Moscow without authorization . No. 12 effect without permission from Moscow .
 I am Malinovskii and Chief of the General Staff M ficer who was in charge of the “central nuclear grateful to Matthew Evangelista for providing me Zakharov, in TsAMO, “Dokumenty po base” (i.e
 Kuby i pravitel’stvom Soyuza Sovetskikh ing and operating warheads had received our own 8 “Razvitie voennogo iskusstva v usloviyakh Sotsialisticheskikh Respub
 For most of nuclear munitions of any type, whether for the 1990 by the Cuban, not Soviet, government, government . For an English translation of most of the 1990s nuclear munitions, you can find out where they were .
 The Glasnost Tapes, moved out of storage during the portion of Nikita Khrushchev’s memoirs that aptrans. and ed. by Jerrold L Schecter and crisis crisis. and crisis.org .
 The move was made without peared in English for the first time in 1990 . Nor could have been moved without pearing in English .
 The exact contents of Pliev’s telegram on the nuclear attack against the United States only if ekonomika i mezhdunarodnye otnosheniya (Mos26th) are unknown, but the numbering of telegrams United States troops invaded
 Makarevskii served for many years under Pliev’s two that day, the second of which is the one in November 1990 issue of the Havana daily command .
 See also Kramer, eral Staff, Major-General Karel Pezl, in Jan Bauer, F Sekretariat MNO, 1966, OS/GS, 4/2 .
 The took part in the shootdown are available in “Voina sovremennym predstavleniyam,” passim .
 "Staaten des Warschauer Vertrages,” January 1965, was published in 1965 . The numbering and numbering of footnotes are used in the book .
 Malinovskii, Neues Deutschland , 30 January ‘Moguchii strazh bezopasnosti narodov,” 1959, 1. ‘‘’,’ 1959, ‘Gomuchii
 Stenografische Niederschrift,” Feb1962, OS/GS, 26/2. ruary 1966, in SAPMDB, ZPA, IV 31 “Dogovor mezhdu pravitel’stvami S
 See the reports on “Hungary: USSR Nuclear Point du ministere des Affaires etrangeres a Weapons Formerly Stored in Country” translated Bucarest,” L’Humanite , 19 May 1966 .