 The U.S. armed forces were at their highest state of readiness ever . Soviet field commanders in Cuba were prepared to use battlefield nuclear weapons to defend the island .
 President Kennedy and Premier Nikita Khrushchev saved the lives of Nikita . Nikita was the only person to save the Soviet Union from war .
 In 1962, the Soviet Union was desperately behind the United States in the arms race . The U.S. was leading the race in the Cold War .
 Soviet missiles were only powerful enough to be launched against Europe . But U.S. missiles were capable of striking the entire Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev conceived the idea of placing intermediate-range missiles in Cuba in 1962 . In May 1962, Soviet Premier Nikita Nikita was in charge of the missile program in Cuba .
 A deployment in Cuba would double the Soviet strategic arsenal . It would provide a real deterrent to a potential U.S. attack against the Soviet Union .
 Fidel Castro was looking for a way to defend his island nation from an attack by the U.S. Ever since the failed Bay of Pigs invasion in 1961, Castro felt a second attack was inevitable .
 He approved of Khrushchev’s plan to place missiles on the island . Consequently, he approved of the plan to put missiles there .
 In the summer of 1962 the Soviet Union worked quickly and secretly to build its missile installations in Cuba . The Soviet Union secretly built the installations in Cuban territory .
 Early the next day, President John Kennedy was informed of the missile installations . President Kennedy was told of the installation of the missiles .
 Kennedy immediately organized the EX-COMM, a group of his twelve most important advisors to handle the crisis . Kennedy organized the group of advisors to deal with the situation .
 Kennedy concluded to impose a naval quarantine around Cuba . After seven days of guarded and intense debate within the upper echelons of government, Kennedy concluded .
 He wished to prevent the arrival of more Soviet offensive weapons on the island . The island was invaded by the Soviet Union in 1941 .
 On October 22, Fidel Castro announced the discovery of the missile installations to the United Nations the public and his decision to quarantine the island . Fidel Castro at the 22, Kennedy announced his quarantine .
 Any nuclear missile launched from Cuba would be regarded as an attack on the U.S. by the Soviet Union . President Reagan demanded that the Soviets remove all of their offensive weapons from Cuba . He also demanded that all of the weapons removed from Cuba be removed .
 During the public phase of the Crisis, tensions began to build on both sides . During the crisis, tensions between the two sides were high .
 Kennedy ordered low-level reconnaissance missions once every two hours . Kennedy eventually ordered missions once a two-hour mission .
 On the 25th Kennedy pulled the quarantine line back and raised military readiness to DEFCON 2 . On the 26th Kennedy raised the quarantine lines back . Kennedy also raised the military readiness level to 2 .
 On 26th EX-COMM heard from Khrushchev in an impassioned letter . Then on the 26th ex-comm heard from him in a letter . The letter was signed by the then-Krushchev .
 He proposed removing Soviet missiles and personnel if the U.S. would guarantee not to invade Cuba . He proposed removal of Soviet missiles if the United States would guarantee against invading Cuba .
 Khrushchev demanded the removal of U.S. missiles in Turkey in exchange for Soviet missiles in Cuba . A U-2 was shot down over Cuba and a second letter was sent from EX-COMM . The letter was signed by the Soviet Union in response to a U-
 Attorney General Robert Kennedy suggested ignoring the second letter . Robert Kennedy contacted Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin to tell him of the agreement with the first . The first letter was written by the Soviet ambassador .
 Khrushchev announced in October that he would dismantle the installations and return the missiles to the Soviet Union . He expressed his trust that the United States would not invade Cuba . Tensions finally began to ease on October 28 when he announced he would return them .
 Kennedy had repeatedly spoken of the missile gap between the U.S. and Soviet Union . During his presidential campaign, Kennedy had spoken of a missile gap .
 Despite being briefed by the Pentagon that the U.S. had more missiles than the Soviets, Kennedy maintained his claim that the United States had less . Kennedy claimed that the Soviets had more than any other nation .
 In the summer of 1961 Khrushchev applied pressure to Berlin and eventually built a wall surrounding West Berlin . The wall was built by the Soviet Union in 1961 .
 In response, the Kennedy Administration felt it necessary to reveal to Khrushchev that there was in fact no missile gap . The Kennedy Administration revealed the gap in missile range .
 Khrushchev had always known the U.S. had more missiles but now he knew that the Americans knew . Khrushchevski had always always known that the United States has more missiles .
 Khrushchev also knew that Soviet missiles were only powerful enough to launch against Europe but United States missiles were capable of striking the entire Soviet Union . U.S. missiles were able to strike against Europe, but could also strike the whole Soviet Union, he said .
 Cuba was only 90 miles off the coast of Florida but the 60 mile difference was “nothing for a missile,” Khrushchev said . Cuba was just 90 miles from the coast, but the difference is ‘nothing” for missiles .
 The second of the two major causes was Cuba’s fear of invasion from the United States . Since Fidel Castro was aware of several United States attempts to oust him .
 First, was the failed Bay of Pigs invasion by CIA-backed Cuban exiles in 1961 . Second, was a failed invasion of Cuba by Cuban ex-Cuban ex-Cuba rebels .
 Armed Forces conducted a mock invasion of a Caribbean island to overthrow a fictitious dictator whose name, Ortsac, was Castro spelled backwards . The fictional dictator's name was Castro, spelled backwards.
 The mock invasion and invasion plan was devised to keep Castro nervous . It was designed to keep him nervous . The plan was intended to keep the Castro regime at bay .
 CIA had also been running covert operations throughout Cuba trying to damage the Castro government . CIA also ran covert operations in Cuba to damage government .
 Castro convinced the United States was serious about invading Cuba . Castro was convinced that the U.S. would invade Cuba .
 In April 1962, Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev conceived the idea of placing intermediate-range missiles in Cuba . “Why shouldn’t the Soviet Union have the right to do the same as America?” -Nikita .
 A deployment in Cuba would double the Soviet strategic arsenal . It would provide a real deterrent to a potential U.S. attack against the Soviet Union or Cuba .
 Khrushchev promoted the KGB station chief in Cuba Alexander Alexeev to Ambassador to negotiate for Castro’s approval of the plan . The plan was approved by the Soviet Union in 1959 .
 Castro did not openly reject the idea at first, but instead he gave it serious consideration . Castro: "I don't think it's a good idea. It's a dream"
 Castro accepted Khrushchev’s offer, believing it better to risk a great crisis than wait impotently for an invasion . Castro: "It's better than waiting impotlessly for a crisis than risking an invasion"
 The U.S. monitored increased shipping activity to Cuba . Rumors began to circulate in Washington about the increased activity .
 Central Intelligence Agency Director John McCone sent a memo to President Nixon on August 10, 1962 . McCone said he believed the Soviets had medium-range ballistic missiles in Cuba .
 A U-2 reconnaissance flight over Cuba revealed the presence of SA-2 Castro and SAM sites . On the 29th, a was clearly a close relationship between U.2 and Cuban forces .
 Kennedy announced on September 4 the presence of Soviet defensive missiles in Cuba . Kennedy announced that their were no offensive weapons . Kennedy said that the missiles were only defensive missiles .
 On the same day, Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin assured Attorney General Robert Kennedy that no offensive missiles would be placed in Cuba . On the day of the attack, the Soviet ambassador told Robert Kennedy he would not place any offensive missiles in Cuba.
 Kennedy ordered another U-2 flight over Cuba on October 9 . Under increasing pressure from Congressmen and intelligence officers, Kennedy ordered the flight .
 When he landed in Florida, a one-star general was there to receive the film . The film was shot in Florida .
 The National Photographic Interpretation Center found what they thought were more surface-to-air missile sites . After analyzing the pictures from the Heyser flight, the center found the sites of the missiles .
 Closer inspection revealed six much larger missiles — each 60 to 65 feet long . The missiles are each 60-to-65 feet long, each with a diameter of 65 feet .
 President Barack Obama has been photographed in a rare photo . The photo was taken at the centre of the White House in Washington DC .
 President Kennedy was informed of the missiles in Cuba during his breakfast . He was in his pajamas when he was informed .
 U.S. president did not react, but it was now clear that for months the Soviets had purposely been deceiving the American president . President George W. Bush had not reacted, but the Soviets were deceiving him .
 Kennedy immediately took charge and scheduled two meetings for that morning . Kennedy was the first to take charge of the White House .
 President Obama hand-picked a group of trusted government officials to advise him on the crisis . He hand-picks a team of trusted officials to help him deal with the situation .
 The assembled group was later referred to as the Executive Committee of the National Security Council or EX-COMM . Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara outlined three possible courses of action for the United States to take against Cuba and the Soviet Union .
 EX-COMM worked from the premise that the missile warheads were not yet in Cuba and not attatched to the missiles . The mission was based on the assumption that the missiles were not in Cuba, not attached to them .
 The goal of any action they proposed was to stop the warheads from reaching Cuba or to prevent the missiles from becomming fully operational . A majority of the discussion that first day revolved around option number three and how the Soviets would respond .
 EXCOMM didn’t know that the Soviet’s did indeed have nuclear warheads on the island . ExCOMM also knew that the Soviets had nuclear warheads .
 EX-COMM expected Khrushchev to retaliate against U.S. action . Ex-Comm expected no matter what action was taken by the U.K. No matter what happened, ExCOMM said . Excomm expected a retaliatory response . ExCOMm expected
 In order to maintain secrecy, Kennedy followed his planned schedule . Wednesday, October 17, was Kennedy's first day in office .
 The Soviets didn't know the American’s knew of the missiles in Cuba . As of yet, the Soviets didn’t know the U.S. knew of Cuba .
 If the Soviets found out, they might hide the missiles or launch them if they were ready . The Soviets might hide them or launch missiles if they are ready .
 Kennedy broke off no public engagements for the next four days . Kennedy was forced to stay away from public engagements .
 Kennedy was in a good mood during the speech, but as soon as he entered his car to return to Washington he became serious . Kennedy became serious as he left the stage and returned to his car .
 Robert Kennedy and Theodore Sorensen met the President at the airport and filled him in on what he had missed during that day’s deliberations . Robert Kennedy: "The President missed the most important moments of the day"
 Joint Chiefs of Staff and especially the Air Force strongly argued for an air strike . Ex-COMM discussed the possibility of a strike in Syria .
 Before the Air Force was done, they had planned a massive air attack that would have wiped Cuba off the planet’s surface . Cuba was wiped off the surface of the planet by the attack .
 After another U-2 flight on the night of the 17th, the military discovered intermediate range SS-5 nuclear missiles . The U.S. military discovered the missiles after another U.2 flight .
 EX-COMM wasn’t sure if Gromyko knew of the missiles or if he knew that the Americans knew, consequently Kennedy decided not to confront the minister on the issue . Kennedy decided to not confront the foreign minister .
 The meeting began with a polite exchange over minor world events but soon shifted to Cuba . Cuba was the focus of the meeting, but the focus soon turned to Cuba.
 Gromyko read a statement to Kennedy saying that Soviet aid was “solely for the purpose of contributing to the defense capabilities of Cuba and to the development of its peaceful democracy”
 Kennedy re-read a statement he had made on September 4 saying the U.S. would not tolerate offensive weapons in Cuba . Kennedy read the statement in response to a request from the Cuban president .
 Gromyko must have wondered why Kennedy was reading him the statement, but when he later reported to Khrushchev he said all was well with the Americans . The statement was read out by Kennedy, who was in the midst of the war .
 EX-COMM was preparing to meet just one floor below the State Department . The State Department was preparing for the ball at the time .
 A majority opinion had been reached on recommending a blockade . During the discussion a majority of the majority of opinion was reached .
 Those with an opposing view continued to dissent but the majority group wanted to head to the White House to inform the president . Those with the opposing view continue to dissent .
 Nine members of the CIA squeezed into Robert Kennedy’s limousine for the short drive . Instead of attracting attention by arriving in a convoy of official black cars, Edwin Martin walked the few blocks, and the rest of the rest .
 At the White House, Kennedy liked the idea of the blockade because it provided the Soviets a way out of the crisis . At the time, Kennedy was the president of the United States .
 Kennedy met with the Joint Chiefs before leaving for a campaign trip to the Midwest . The Joint Chiefs promoted the idea of air strikes .
 Attorney General Kennedy asked brother to continue EX-COMM meetings . Attorney General to draw up full plans for both scenarios .
 The president chose not to cancel and close advisor this trip because he wanted to maintain secrecy . He chose to travel with close advisor because of the secrecy surrounding the trip .
 EX-COMM met to discuss the two speeches being prepared . Kennedy still gone on the campaign trip . President may have a cold tomorrow .
 Robert Kennedy called the President to say that he had to come back to Washington . Robert Kennedy had to return to Washington to meet with the President . Kennedy was in the middle of the process .
 The President was reluctant to do so but he and Robert felt there should be a final consensus . The President and his family were reluctant to make a final decision .
 He canceled his trip by saying that he had an ‘upper respiratory infection,” he returned to Washington .
 Kennedy met with his top advisors to further discuss missiles in Cuba . Kennedy met on the 21st October 21 to discuss the missiles .
 General Walter Sweeney, the head of Strategic Air Command, asked if an air strike could destroy all the missiles . He asked General Sweeney if he could destroy the missiles in a strike . General Sweeney said an air attack could destroy missiles .
 The General replied that they could take out all the missiles they knew about . The General said they could kill them if they knew what they knew .
 Kennedy asked the general how many casualties, civilian and military, would occur . Kennedy then asked him how many civilian casualties would be . Kennedy: "I'm sure there will be lots of casualties"
 This suggestion, made by George Ball, Under Secretary of State, was an important one . This suggestion was made by Under Secretary Ball, George Ball .
 A quarantine is merely an attempt to keep something unwanted out of a particular area . A quarantine, on the other hand, is merely a quarantine . The quarantine is a quarantine, a quarantine of a person in a certain area .
 The U.S. could have its blockade but the international community would not consider it an act of war . In sum, the United States could have a blockade but it would not be considered a war .
 Later in the day, the press contacted Kennedy wanting to know who came up with the idea of a blockade about the situation in Cuba . Secretary of State John Kerry was asked to explain the idea .
 The press knew that there were offensive which help prevent a weapons in Cuba and that Kennedy was preparing a plan to deal with military confrontation the threat . The press also knew that .
 Another U-2 flight that day revealed bombers and Migs being assembled and cruise missile sites being built on Cuba’s northern shore . Another U.2 flight later revealed bombers, Migs and missiles being assembled .
 The State Department informed American allies around the world of Kennedy’s decision . The State Dept. informed the U.S. of Kennedy's decision .
 U.S. Senate leaders called to Washington for a special briefing . United States Senate leaders were called to D.C. for the briefing . The briefing was a special meeting of the Senate leaders .
 Many wanted an air strike . Many doubted the effectiveness of a quarantine . Many wanted air strikes .
 In Guantanamo Bay, three Marine battalions brought in to reinforce the base . Military dependents were evacuated from the base in Guantanamo Bay .
 Military alert was raised to DEFCON 3 and instructions were given to be ready to launch missiles within minutes of the Presidents speech . The President's speech was the first time President Obama had made a direct threat to North Korea .
 At 7:00m., jet fighters took off from bases in Florida and headed south towards Cuba . At 7.00m, precisely as Kennedy was beginning his speech, jet fighters take off .
 For the next seventeen minutes, Americans and citizens around the world sat glued to their TV sets listening to the American President . For the rest of the time, Americans were watching the President speak .
 A strict quarantine of all military equipment under shipment to Cuba is being initiated . First, to halt this offensive build up, the Cuban government is to halt the offensive build-up .
 I have directed the continued and increased close surveillance and it’s military build up. Second, I have ordered the continued . increased close . surveillance and increased military build-up, says President Obama .
 It shall be the policy of this nation to regard any nuclear missile launched from Cuba against any nation in the Western Hemisphere as an attack by the Soviet Union on the United States, requiring a full retaliatory response . The U.S. will respond to any missile launched by Cuba from Cuba
 Khrushchev’s first response was to instruct the ships on their way to Cuba not to stop . The ships were ordered to stay off the coast of Cuba, but were not stopped .
 Castro mobilized all of Cuba’s military forces in response to Kennedy's speech . Castro mobilized Cuba's military forces to respond to the Kennedy speech . Cuban President Castro was assassinated in 1968 .
 The Cuban’s, however, were not surprised by Kennedy, for the United States had constantly threatened them . The United States has constantly threatened the Cuban's, says Cuban President Kennedy .
 Cuban’s had been living under a constant fear of invasion . Ever since the Bay of Pigs, eighteen months earlier, the Cuban's had been under constant threat of invasion.
 Kennedy ordered six Crusader jets to fly a low level reconnaissance mission . Tuesday, October 23, was the 23rd anniversary of the 9/11 attack .
 The Organization of American States unanimously approved of the quarantine against Cuba . On the same day, the OAS voted unanimously to quarantine Cuba .
 These countries realized that they were also threatened by the missiles in Cuba . These countries are also aware of the threat posed by Cuban missiles .
 Kennedy signed the actual Proclamation of Interdiction in the early evening . With the backing of the Western Hemisphere, Kennedy signed a Proclamation .
 Robert Kennedy sent Robert Kennedy to the Soviet embassy to talk with Ambassador Dobrynin . President Kennedy was in the midst of a crisis in the Soviet Union .
 Robert Kennedy chastises the Soviet ambassador for lying to the U.S. about placing missiles in Cuba . Robert Kennedy arrived at the embassy and proceeded to chastise the Russian ambassador .
 He responded, that as far as he new, their were no offensive weapons there . He said the U.S. did not have any offensive weapons .
 Dobrynin wrote a message summarizing the meeting to be cabled to Khrushchev . Shortly afterward, Dobrynins wrote a note to be sent back to the Soviet Union .
 Dobrynin had to call a telegraph station in Washington, which sent a bike messenger to pick up the cable . Communications were still at an infant stage then, communications were still infant stage .
 Dobrynin recalls urging the messenger to travel back to the station with the utmost speed . Dobrynins: "I'm sure he'll be able to get back in time for the next few days"
 EX-COMM convened at 10:00m. , the exact time the blockade began . Dobrynin a important secret go between in the crisis . On the 24th October 24, Dobryn was a secret go-between .
 The order given to the American ships was to first communicate with the Soviet vessels; then if they did not stop, the American’s were to fire across their bow, and, finally, if they still didn’t stop, they were instructed to blow off the rudder
 Two of the major concerns during the EX-COMM meeting were the Soviet submarines accompanying the vessels . Khrushchev had not had enough time to instruct the ship captains .
 At 10:25 EX-COMM received a message that the Soviet ships were turning back . Ex-COMCOMM was informed that Soviet ships had turned back . The Soviet ships turned back at 10:30 .
 Military alert raised to DEFCON 2, the highest level ever in U.S. history . Military alert also raised to highest level in United States history . DeFCON is the highest military alert level ever .
 The notification, sent round the world from Strategic Air Command headquarters, was purposely left uncoded to let the Soviets know just how serious the U.S. was . The notification was sent around the world .
 We will then be forced on our part to take the measures we consider necessary and adequate to protect our rights. We will be forced to take on our own part, says the minister .
 Tensions continued to build on Thursday with no resolution appearing any closer at hand . President Kennedy: "We can’t negotiate with a gun at our head... we will have to do it ourselves"
 He suggested the Soviets stop shipping offensive weapons to Cuba for two or three weeks and in exchange the Americans would suspend the quarantine for the same length of time . The Americans would also suspend a quarantine in Cuba for same time .
 On the 25th Kennedy politely turned down the offer because it allowed the Soviets to continue preparing the missiles that were already in Cuba . Kennedy turned it down because of the fact that the Soviets had already prepared the missiles .
 Khrushchev received another correspondence from Kennedy which restated the United States’s position . The U.S. responded by sending a statement of support .
 When asked directly about the missiles, Soviet Ambassador Zorin refused to comment . The Soviet Ambassador refused to answer questions .
 Stevenson showed the reconnaissance photos of missile sites . Stevenson showed them reconnaissance photos .
 Photographs show the Soviet presence of Soviet troops in Cuba . Their effect was stunning, the photographs were unmistakable evidence .
 Lippman suggested a “faceand shows the world the evidence of the saving” missile exchange . Lippmann suggested a . “Face and shows the . world”
 The Soviets would remove their missiles military build-up in from Cuba and the Americans would remove them from TurCuba key . The Soviets and the U.S. would remove all their military build up from Cuba .
 EX-COMM had already begun to consider this option and was exploring the political consequences . Days before, EXCOMM was already considering this option .
 Some government officials in the U.S. and Soviet Union mistakenly interpreted Lippman’s article as a trial balloon floated by the Kennedy administration . The article was published in the Soviet Union in 1968 .
 The Soviet tanker Bucharest approached the quarantine line and was let through because there was no reason to believe it carried contra-band cargo . Bucharest was a Soviet ship bound for the Soviet Union .
 President Kennedy had chosen the Marcula to be the first ship to be boarded by quarantine forces . The aircraft carrier USS Kennedy boarded the Lebanese freighter .
 USS Kennedy radioed the Marcula that night to state it would be boarded the following morning . The USS Kennedy reported it was boarded the next morning . USS Kennedy said it would board the next day .
 U.S. quarantine forces boarded the Marcula in the early morning of Friday, October 26 .
 Kennedy said quarantine alone could not force the Soviet government to remove offensive weapons from Cuba . Kennedy said he believed quarantine alone would not force Russia to remove its weapons .
 A CIA report from that morning stated that there was no halt in progress in the development of the missile sites . Another reconnaissance flight revealed that the Soviets were also attempting to camouflage the missiles .
 He also agreed to increase the frequency of low-level flights over Cuba from twice per day to once every two hours . He agreed to enhance pressure by increasing the frequency to once a two hours per day .
 At lunch time on the 26th, Aleksandr Fomin, known to be the KGB station chief in Washington, requested a meeting with ABC News correspondent John Scali . Fomin requested the meeting with Scali, who was known as Fomin's station chief .
 At the Occidental Restaurant in Washington Fomin hinted that there might be a resolution . Fomin: "There's a resolution. There's nothing to do"
 Fomin proposed dismantling of Soviet bases under U.N. supervision in exchange for a public pledge from the United States not to invade Cuba . Fomin proposes dismantling of bases under United Nations supervision .
 After lunch Scali went directly to the State Department to inform Roger Hilsman of the meeting . Scali then went to the White House, where he met with President Obama .
 Since Fomin was a high ranking officer, the U.S. assumed the proposal was an official one from Khrushchev . The United States assumed that Fomin's proposal was a proposal from the Soviet leader .
 Recent accounts from the Soviet side suggest that Fomin’s proposal was not in fact authorized by Moscow . Recent accounts suggest that the Soviet government did not approve of Fomin's proposal .
 Khrushchev's letter to Kennedy was the most important occurrence on the 26th . Fomin's message to Scali was not Fomin’s message, but a letter from Kennedy to Kennedy . The most important thing on that day was the letter from Fomin to Kennedy,
 The letter was clearly an impassioned appeal, written by Khrushchev himself, to resolve the crisis . It was clearly written by the former leader of the Soviet Union in a letter to the Kremlin .
 Khrushchev proposed removing his missiles if Kennedy would publicly announce never to invade Cuba . Kennedy would have to say never would invade Cuba in order to remove missiles from Cuba . The missiles were removed in exchange for an agreement to remove the missiles .
 You and I should not now pull on the ends of the rope in which you have tied a knot of war, because the harder you and I pull, the tighter the knot will become . The harder the two pull the end of the knot, the harder the harder they pull the knot
 A time may come when the knot is tied so tight that the person who tied it is no longer capable of untying it, then the knot will have to be cut .
 "What that would mean I need not explain to you, because you yourself understand what dread forces our two countries possess," he said . "You yourself understand perfectly what dread force our two nations possess"
 I propose we, for our part, will declare that our ships bound for Cuba are not carrying any armaments . I propose that we declare that we will not carry armaments on our ships .
 You will declare that the U.S. will not invade Cuba with its troops and will not support any other forces which might intend to invade Cuba . The United States will not intervene in Cuba, says President Obama .
 President Obama has been criticized for not sending troops to Cuba . He says the Cuban government should be allowed to leave the island nation .
 Later that night, unknown to EX-COMM, Robert Kennedy again went to the Soviet Embassy to meet with Ambassador Dobrynin . Robert Kennedy's visit to the embassy was the first time he had met with the Soviet ambassador .
 Dobrynin claimed Soviet missiles in Cuba were justified because of U.S. missiles in Turkey . Kennedy offered to introduce Turkish missiles into a potential settlement .
 Attorney General reportedly left the room to call his brother . Then, he reportedly called his brother to say he was going to call him back .
 Anatoly Dobrynin again cabled the Kremlin . After the meeting, he cabled a Kremlin .
 Saturday, October 27, was the worst day of the crisis . “I thought I might never live to see another Saturday night.” Secretary of Defense, Robert McNamara . Saturday was the night of the war .
 A U-2 on a “routine air sampling mission” over western Alaska picked the wrong star to navigate by and flew off course into Soviet airspace . The U.2 was on a routine sampling mission over Alaska .
 When he realized his mistake, the pilot immediately radioed the for help . He radioed for help when he realized it was a mistake .
 The operator was able to give him directions to turn his plane onto the right course . The plane was flying through the air at the time .
 The Soviets detected the U-2 and scrambled MiG fighters to intercept the plane . By that time, however, the Soviets had detected the plane and scrambled the MiG .
 The Americans scrambled their F-102 fighters to provide cover for the U-2 . The U.2 was shot down by the U.S. Air Force in Afghanistan in 2009 .
 The F-102s were armed with nuclear tipped air-to-air missiles . They had nuclear tipped missiles that could be used to shoot down aircraft .
 The U-2 left Soviet air space in time and two fighter groups never met . Fortunately, the U.2 was able to evade the Soviet fighters .
 The Soviets, he feared, could have interpreted the flight as a reconnaissance mission precluding a nuclear strike . He feared the Soviets may have interpreted it as an attempt to prevent a strike .
 Next, news reached EX-COMM that a U-2 had been shot down over Cuba . Secretary of Debeen was shot down in Cuba .
 Major Rudolph Anderson’s spy plane was hit by a surface-to-air missile and crashed in the jungle . Anderson's spy plane crashed in eastern jungle after being hit by the missile .
 McNamara a key dove iin the crisis dispite EX-COMM interpreted the action as a planned escalation of the situbeing a military leader . ation by the Kremlin . McNamara was key dove in the crisis .
 The order to launch the missile, however, did not come from Moscow . McNamara has publically stated that not . He has said the order did come from Russia .
 He doesn't believe who gave the command . Rather, it was a Soviet commander in Cuba he doesn't not believe who did .
 Khrushchev now worried that he had lost in the use of nuclear weapons dispite of the control of his forces . The Soviet Union was losing control of its nuclear weapons .
 US’s policy to use EX-COMM had previously decided that if an American reconthem in the event of a naissance plane was downed, the Air Force would retaliate by bomb major war ing the offending site . The Air Force previously decided to retaliate by bombing major war
 Joint Chiefs pressed for permission to bomb Cuba, pressed even harder . Now that it had happened, Joint Chiefs press even harder for bombing Cuba . Joint Chiefs had been pressing for a bombing of Cuba .
 You’re going to lose airplanes and will be shooting up Cuba quit a bit, he says . "You’ve got to lose planes," he says of Cuba . "I’m not going to be able to shoot up Cuba, I’ll be shooting
 General Taylor insists that no “later than Monday morning, the 29th” the United States should strike Cuba . General Taylor insisted that the U.S. should strike the island .
 The next event was a low-level reconnaissance mission flown by six F8U-1P Crusader jets . The mission was part of a long day for the U.S. Air Force .
 Two of the jets aborted the mission early due to mechanical problems, but the remaining four continued on their course . The mission was aborted by mechanical problems .
 Cuban ground forces shot at the planes with anti-aircraft guns and small arms . The fighters passed over the San Cristóbal and Sagua la Grande missile sites, Cuban forces say .
 One plane was hit by a strong Hawk 37mm shell but, fortunately, it returned safely . General Maxwell Taylor was hit with a strong 37mm .
 Castro lost his nerve and ordered his troops to fire at American airby avocated using craft . Earlier in morning, throughout the crisis Castro ordered troops to shoot at U.S. aircraft .
 Castro believed to be only 24 to 72 hours the missiles from away . Castro believed the American’s were gaining valuable in either air strikes or an invasion to remove formation .
 At 11:03m. Fourth, a second letter from Khrushchev arrived over a White House ticker . The letter was sent over to the White House .
 Some members of EX-COMM speculated that hardliners had pressured Khrushchev to take a more aggressive position . Some members speculate that hardline hardliners were behind the decision to take the lead .
 The letter was also publicly broadcast in order to reduce communication delays . The broadcast also raised the stakes .
 You say that this disturbs you because it is ninety miles by sea from the coast of the United States of America . You say it is because it's ninety miles away from the U.S.
 Too much information on the crisis had already been leaked to the press, too much of it had been leaked . Too much of the crisis was already known to the media .
 Kennedy feared having someone go public with the Turkey proposal because it could potentially ruin his career . Kennedy feared that someone would have to go public about the proposal because of its potential impact .
 If the U.S. buckled under pressure and removed its missiles from Turkey, the whole alliance could falter . If the United States buckled, it could lead to the collapse of the NATO alliance . The United States is under pressure to remove the missiles .
 A political enemy would have a field day holding Kennedy responsible for the Turkey proposal . Kennedy would not be the only person to blame for the proposal .
 The President suggested a Turkeyfor-Cuba missile trade trade in an EX-COMM meeting . President Obama was cautious in suggesting the idea of a trade deal .
 Most people will regard this as not an unreasonable proposal, I’ll just tell you that. He’s got us in a pretty good spot here, because most people will . Most people would regard this proposal as not unreasonable, he says .
 We can’t very well invade Cuba with all it’s toll when we could have gotten the missiles out by making a deal on the same missiles in Turkey . The U.S. could have made a deal with Turkey to get the missiles .
 If that’s part of the record I don’t see how we’ll have a very good war. I’m not sure how we will be able to have a good war, he says .
 Kennedy was frustrated even more by the fact that he had wanted to remove the old, unreliable Jupiter missiles months before the crisis . Kennedy wanted the missiles removed from the Jupiter missiles .
 The strategic value of the missiles in Cuba was immensely larger than the strategic value in Turkey, CNN's John Sutter says . Sutter: "The strategic value" in Cuba is "immensely larger than in Turkey"
 Khrushchev wanted to make a public display of having the Jupiters removed . The Jupits were removed from the Soviet Union in order to keep them in place .
 Fearing political pressure at home, he couldn’t give in on the question of Jupiter missiles in Turkey . Fears political pressure from home .
 A long-shot, but it might work suggested Soviet specialist Llewellyn Thompson . Llewyn Thompson: 'It's a long shot, but might work'
 President had Robert ▲ Theodore Sorenson Kennedy draft a response . The President had a response to the letter written by Robert ▼ Theodore Kennedy .
 The President informed them of the Attorney General’s meeting with Ambassador Dobrynin on the previous evening . He asked for more suggestions on how to use this precious channel of communication .
 The group agreed to have the Attorney General meet with Dobrynin again to orally reinforce the proposal . The Attorney General is expected to meet again to discuss the issue .
 Secretary Rusk suggested that Robert Kennedy propose a secret deal on the Jupiter missiles in Turkey . Rusk also suggested that . Robert Kennedy proposed a secret . deal with Turkey .
 At 7:45 that evening, Dobrynin came to the Justice Department to meet with the Attorney General . The meeting took place in Washington, DC .
 Kennedy handed him a copy of the reply to Khrushchev’s letter and then informed him of the secret deal . Kennedy handed the letter to the Soviet Union leader and told him the deal .
 He gave assurances that the United States would quietly remove the Jupiters a few months after the crisis . But he warned they could not be part of a public deal .
 Dobrynin cabled Khrushchev to tell him of the proposal and that the Attorney General had imposed a deadline for a response . The Attorney General imposed a response to the proposal .
 At the request of Secretary Rusk, John Scali met once again with Aleksandar Fomin . Fomin is a member of the Council of Azerbaijan .
 Rusk wanted Scali to find out why Khrushchev had suddenly introduced the Jupiter missiles into the deal . Scali wanted to know why the missiles had suddenly been added to the Soviet Union's plans .
 When Scali met Fomin in an empty ballroom at the Statler Hotel, he exploded . Fomin: "When Scali meets Fomin, he explodes. He exploded"
 You would agree to remove these weapon systems from Cuba under appropriate United Nations observation and supervision; and undertake, with suitable safe-guards, to halt the further introduction of such weapon systems .
 The U.N. has pledged to remove promptly the quarantine measures now in effect and give assurances against the invasion of Cuba . The Cuban government would agree—upon the establishment of adequate arrangements through the United Nations, it would agree .
 In case Khrushchev did not accept the terms of the agreement, Kennedy and Rusk drew up a contingency plan for publicly announcing a Turkey-for-Cuba missile trade . The plan was drawn up in case the deal fell through, but was never implemented .
 Rusk dictated a statement to Cordier that called for an open missile trade . Rusk called for a trade deal with the U.S. ally . Cordier was killed by a missile attack in 2010 .
 Cordier was supposed to deliver the statement to Secretary General U Thant, who would in turn make it public . If he received the correct signal from Washington, Cordier would deliver it to the Secretary General of the U.N. Cordier .
 McGeorge Bundy likened the evening of the 27th to a tight chess match . Bundy later likened the night to a close chess match with Bundy . Bundy: "It was a tight match. It was like a chess match" Bundy said .
 Khrushchev met with a circle of advisers outside of Moscow on October 28, 1962 . He was the leader of the Soviet Union during the Cold War .
 During the night he had received statements from both Dobrynin and Fomin, so he was aware how serious the crisis had become . He was aware of how serious it had become, he said .
 A general entered and read a statement he had just received that Kennedy was going to make an address to the nation at 5:00m. Kennedy was due to give an address at 5.00m . Kennedy was the first president to address the nation since 1964 .
 The address address could be the announcement that an invasion is already underway . That address may be the address of the White House .
 Khrushchev was not prepared to start a war, therefore he and his advisors drafted a letter with the utmost urgency . The letter was drafted by the Soviet Union in order to avoid a war .
 The letter was rushed at full speed to the broadcasting station . Upon completion, the letter was sent to the radio station .
 The Soviet Government has issued a new order on the dismantling of the weapons which you describe as “offensive,” and their crating . In order to complete with greater speed the liquidation of the conflict... the Soviet Government... has issued new order .
 Most were relieved, but others dubbed the announcement a ploy by Khrushchev to buy more time . Joint Chiefs dubbed it a ploy, especially the Joint Chiefs .
 Ambassador Dobrynin arrived at the Justice Department to extend Khrushchev’s best wishes the Attorney General and the President . Ambassador Dobynin: "Krushchev's best wishes were extended at Justice Department"
 In the afternoon Dean Rusk held a press conference and cautioned against gloating over the Soviet decision . Rusk cautioned against 'gloating' over the decision .
 Khrushchev had not had time to inform his ally of the decision . Castro learned about the agreement over the radio over the weekend .
 Crisis tensions eased on Sunday, October 28, but the ordeal was not yet over . “What do you mean that we should have started a war over them?” - Premier Khrushchev .
 The two superpowers still had to hammer out the terms of a formal agreement . They still have yet to agree to a formal deal .
 Castro tried to halt the removal and inspection of the missiles during the negotiations . Castro felt betrayed by Khrushchev and tried to stop the removal of missiles .
 Castro backed down with the help of the U.N. and the two sides reached an agreement . Castro's government eventually backed down and the agreement was reached .
 A United Nations inspection team was assigned to monitor the removal of the missiles and the demolition of the missile bases in Cuba . A U.N. inspection team has been assigned to oversee the removal .
 The missiles were sent back on the decks of the ships so that U.S. reconnaissance planes could count the missiles and make sure that all had been removed from the ships .
 The Soviets display IL-28 “Beagle” medium-range bombers . One stumbling block of the agreement was the removal of the bombers . The Soviets displayed the IL-27 “beagle’s” bombers .
 EX-COMM had decided to let this minor issue slide during previous negotiations . Aware of the larger problem theremoved on deck .
 With that statement, the United States was able to successfully argue for the removal of the bombers . The U.S. successfully argued that the bombers should be removed .
 Robert McNamara claims the world was one step away from nuclear war . “Having come so close to the edge, we must make it our business not to pass this way again”
 The military didn't know then that they had grossly underestimated Soviet and Cuban force strength . What the military didn’t know then was that they were underestimating Soviet forces .
 Military intelligence calculated 10,000 Soviet troops on the island plus an additional 100,000 Cubans . The island was invaded by the Soviet Union in the 1980s .
 The Soviets had 43,000 combat-ready soldiers and Castro had mobilized 270,000 Cubans to fight . The Soviets were fighting in Cuba, but Castro was mobilizing 270,00 Cubans .
 Plans for U.S. invasion called for a first day air strike consisting of 1080 sorties and an amphibious landing of 180,000 troops . Plans for the American invasion included a first-day air strike and a land-on-the-air landing .
 Those troops would have been surprised by the strength of the resistance the found on the island . The island nation is home to the largest island in the world .
 Had Kennedy gone ahead with the invasion, casualties on both sides would have been much higher .
 EX-COMM was unaware of the tactical nuclear weapons stationed along Cuba’s shore . Furthermore, the Cuban government was not aware of the nuclear weapons .
 Khrushchev had also given standing order to his generals that if he couldn’t be reached in the event of an invasion, they had the authority to launch the battlefield nuclear weapons . If he couldn't be reached, the generals had the power to launch them .
 If Kennedy had invaded, the outnumbered Soviets would have used their nuclear weapons and then Kennedy would have had no choice but to retaliate with American nuclear devices . If the Soviets had used their weapons, the U.S. would have been outnumbered .
 It could take up to seven hours to transmit a message from one capitol to the other . It is possible to send a message within seven hours .
 Khrushchev agrees to pull out his missiles, writes a letter, but it is delayed in transit in transit . The letter is sent to the Soviet Union, but is not expected to arrive . It is the first time the U.S. has pulled out of the Cold War .
 Kennedy orders the invasion because Khrushchev took too long to reply . In the time it takes for the letter to reach Washington, Kennedy ordered the invasion . Kennedy then orders the attack .
 Once an invasion had started, it would be nearly impossible for the U.S. to pull out . The United States could not pull out of Iraq .
 Neither side wanted to risk starting another nuclear war over poor communications . The U.S. and South Korea have been at odds for decades over the years .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev signed an agreement to ban nuclear testing in the atmosphere . Nine months after the crisis ended, the agreement was signed by Kennedy and his Soviet Union .
 This marked the beginning of what seemed to be a new willingness to cooperate and communicate, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 President Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas, Texas, on November 22nd, 1963 . President Kennedy died on November 25th, 1963, in Dallas .
 Khrushchev was removed from office by communist hard liners . Eleven months later he was removed by hard-liners . The war of the Cold War ended in 1953 .
 One can't help but wonder what would have happened if these two men had stayed in power . One can’t help .
 Perhaps the same two people who brought us so close to nuclear war, now changed by that experience, could have brought us far from it . Perhaps, perhaps, they could have changed the course of history .
 Robert Kennedy, the Attorney General and the Presidents brother, played a large role in the crisis . Robert Kennedy's brother, Robert Kennedy was President Kennedy's Attorney General .
 His memoirs were important because it gave a high level first hand account of what was going on . His memoir was important because he gave a first-hand account .
 This letter is important to our project because it gave us direct access to what Khrushchev had said . It was the turning point in the crisis so it was essential to have. This letter was important to the project because of its importance to its project .
 This article gave us an idea of what Khrushchev was thinking and doing during the crisis . It also gave us a glimpse of what he was doing in the aftermath of the war .
 This program contained recently released tapes of the meeting had with Senate leaders on October 22, 1962 . The tapes were released in 1962 .
 This program was aired after the fall of the Soviet Union and the opening of Cuba . It was aired in the 1980s and '90s .
 It contained never before seen interviews and was also able to show what the Soviets and Cubans were doing during the crisis . The film was able to also show what was happening in Cuba .
 This video was very important because it contained live interviews with Robert McNamara, Dean Rusk, Theodore Sorenson, Pierre Salinger, Sergei Khrushchev, and Fidel Castro, among others . This video contains live interviews .
 This allowed us to get direct quotes from high level officials which would have been nearly impossible otherwise . We are happy to reveal that we have been able to get the quotes from top level officials .
 It contains everything mentioned about the NBC video but offered a slightly different perspective and showed different video segments . The NBC video was released in March 2013 .
 We were also able to get live footage from the time of the crisis which we used in our site . We also got live footage of the incident which we were able to use .
 Scali, John, I Was the Secret Go-Between in the Cuban Crisis, Family Weekly, October 25, 1964 . Family Weekly: Scali was the secret go-between in Cuba .
 He maintained close contacts with many leaders in Washington including some from the Kremlin .
 This article gave us some further insight into the minute details of the compromise . This article has been amended to clarify that the agreement was reached in the summer .
 Grolier's Multimedia Encyclopedia, 1979 Grolier’s Multimedia Encyclopaedia, is published by Thomas Y Crowell Publishers, 1979 .
 It also helped clarify some vague sections and motivations of the crisis . The crisis has also helped clear up some vague parts of the government .
 This book just like the others contained good information and further increased our knowledge of the subject matter . Simon & Schuster, 1992 .