 Russia is warning the U.S. that the relationship between the two nations is “on the verge of a breach” A chilling line from a superpower that recalls the harrowing days in October 1962 when the Cold War almost went nuclear .
 Soviet Premier Krushchev responded to Kennedy’s disastrous failure in the Bay of Pigs invasion to tackle the Castro regime the year before with a secret agreement to build up a nuclear tactical arsenal .
 U.S. intelligence, through flyover surveillance, found evidence of the buildup of Soviet war infrastructure in Cuba . Soviet IL–28 bombers were among those built in Cuba, according to the State Department .
 "The Navy Moves on 25 Red Ships," as our colleagues back then offered up localized coverage . "Evacuees, Baby Arrive in Boston" as families of service members arrive . On Oct. 10, the Navy moves on 25 ships .
 A new news ticker breathlessly briefed every development in the crisis gripping the nation . “Russia alerted its military forces and those of the Warsaw pact nations,” only making the third bullet point of the bullet point .
 Cuban Prime Minister Fidel Castro replied to President Kennedy’s naval blockade over Cuban radio and television, October 23, 1962 . Fidel Castro was the prime minister of Cuba . President Kennedy's naval blockade was a response to a request for Cuban television and radio .
 Some Red Ships Alter Course; Blockade Test Still Awaited,” Herald readers experienced some whiplash . On Oct. 10, under the block headline, the headline of “Some Red ships Alter Course’s Alter Course .”
 President John F Kennedy, right, confers with his brother Attorney General Robert F Kennedy at the White House in Washington, D.C., on Oct. 1962 . The buildup of military tensions between the U.S. and the Soviet Union that became Cuban missile crisis later that month .
 The meeting was part of a series of talks during their summit meetings in Vienna .
 The exhibit opens Friday, Oct., 2012, to recount the showdown with the Soviet Union . The exhibit will be on display until October 31 .
 The Soviet ship presumably carries a cargo of missiles being withdrawn from Cuba . The ship is believed to be carrying the missiles .
 Flint McColgan is the police and courts reporter for the Boston Herald .
 He previously worked covering politics in Pennsylvania and breaking news in North Dakota . He also covered politics and government in Pennsylvania .
 Before journalism, he supported himself as an occasionally successful roving pool player in the midwest and southwest .
 We reserve the right at all times to remove any information or materials that are unlawful, threatening, abusive, libelous, defamatory, obscene, vulgar, pornographic, profane, indecent or otherwise objectionable to us, and to disclose .