 Contents of this publication are not copyrighted and items contained herein may be reprinted . Items contained in this publication may not be reprinted.
 Citation of the DEPARTMENT OF State BULLETIN as the source will be appreciated . Citation should be appreciated by the Department of State .
 The BULLETIN includes selected press releases on foreign policy . It includes statements and addresses made by the President and by the Secretery of State and other officers .
 Information is included concerning treaties and international agreements to which the U.S. is or may become a party . Information is also included concerning international agreements and treaties of general international interest .
 Publications of the Department, U.N. documents, and legislative material in the field of international relations are listed .
 African nationalism is a force of great significance in world affairs today . African nationalism has great significance today, writes CNN.com's John Defterios .
 The number of independent African nations has grown from 10 to 2% during 1960 alone . Many territories are still moving toward nationhood .
 Africa will play a permanent significant role in world affairs from now on, says President Obama . African nations will play major role in the world affairs, he says . Africa will be a major part of the world's future, says Obama .
 Dramatic developments on the continent of Africa startle us daily in the headlines . The continent's most populous countries are in the middle of the world .
 With the bewildering rapidity of events in Africa it is difficult to maintain perspective . It's difficult to keep perspective on the situation in Africa, says Nelson Mandela .
 It would be worth while, therefore, to begin our discussion with a short review of the characteristics of African nationalism before considering its current development .
 I know I will have your understanding if, in order to encompass topics of this magnitude and complexity, I sometimes employ generalizations which though useful in this context might not stand up under all circumstances . I know it will be difficult to understand if you understand this .
 1960s and 1960s nationalist movements, and of internal influences uniquely African. African nationalism . December 26, 1960 .
 The first of these external influences would of course be 19th century European colonialism, which brought with it Christianity and the revolutionary ideals of the 18th century, those in which our own origins are rooted .
 African nationalism today has embraced much of the best of our Revolution. African nationalism is embraced by many African nationalists today, writes Nelson Mandela . Mandela: "African nationalism is a very important part of our revolution"
 As important as any other factor underlying the nationalist movements of this century, is the hope for an end to subsistence living . The African freedom drive is characteristic of Africa's freedom drive, he says .
 This hope has been inspired by the technological revolution which promises mass improvement of living conditions everywhere . This hope is based on the hope of the technology revolution that promises mass improvements everywhere .
 The development of the scientific method and many of the basic discoveries which have led to this revolution had their origin in the 17th and 18th centuries . The United States’ unique contributions to develop methods of production and distribution which have made possible the improvement of living conditions on an almost limitless
 World War IT left with dependent peoples a vivid picture of the ruin and waste of modern war . These same techniques have unfortunately been employed to destructive ends, and World War I left .
 From this war emerged a new world power division between the United States and the U.S.R. which has impressed the leaders of new nations . From this world power .
 New nations everywhere seek to avoid the disaster of anew war . Consequently new nations everywhere are seeking to avoid war .
 They feel that to maintain a position independent of either competing power is to reduce the likelihood of their involvement in any war growing out of the principal power division . They say to maintain independent of any competing power would reduce the chance of any war .
 African nationalism is influenced, like other similar movements, by contemporary socialist thought . African nationalism was influenced by contemporary socialism .
 African leaders feel with some justice holds promise of more efficient use of limited human and natural resources . Its application in Africa varies from central economic planning to one-party system which exploits communal structure of tribal society .
 Africans share with other nationalists the drive for the most rapid development of their resources, but other nationalist movements have not been characterized by the pace of change which appears uniquely African .
 In other areas of the world nationalist movements developed over a longer period of time . In other countries nationalist movements have developed over longer periods of time.
 African nations exist today apparently in spite of atomized tribal societies which in many cases still make up their base . Regional Cooperation in Africa is a form of cooperation between African nations .
 Inhabited territorial boundaries were drawn without special regard for ethnic and linguistic considerations . They exist in spite of inherited territorial boundaries .
 African nationalist leaders’ predisposition toward regional international cooperation is traceable to their efforts to overcome the divisive effects of these numerous ethnic and linguistic units . Perhaps the African nationalist leader’s predisposition to regional cooperation is tracedable to his efforts .
 The arbitrary national borders which often divide tribal units between two nations often cause confusion and differences . Regional cooperation tends to overcome regional cooperation, says the BBC .
 The holding of the All-African Peoples Conference in Accra in December 1958 has demonstrated African belief in the regional approach to their struggle for independence .
 The Ghana-Guinea Union was proclaimed in November 1958, to which it would appear President Nkrumah would filiate the newly established Republic of Mali, to judge by his recent remarks .
 A similar though less formal | administrative arrangement exists between Gabon, Congo , the Central African Republic, and Chad . A similar but less formal arrangement exists .
 Yegional cooperation has great potential value for the development of Africa and should be encouraged where it is desired by all concerned and where it will in fact provide for more wed utilization of resources .
 The Conference of Independent African States has given indications of a desire to grapple responsibly with the kind of . problems in the economic realm for which regional organizations are particularly useful . ouraal experience in the Organization of American States suggests that their value from the security . view is also great .
 The development of regional institutions based on principles consistent with the United Nations Charter is i valuable in the resolution of regional disagree ments . Finally, the development of a regional institution based on the U.N. Charter is a valuable tool in resolving regional disagreements .
 African nationalist leaders have demotstrated in assuming the burdens of statehood . It is still possible to get eralize about the strong sense of responsibility . African nationalism has demotmented in assuming statehood, writes Roland Roland .
 The great majority have rejected extremes and estab, lished governments reasonably responsive to the will of the people, says Labour leader David Cameron .
 The UK has matured rapidly in both political and economic realms . The country's economy has grown rapidly in recent years . It has also matured rapidly as a result of the rise of global wealth .
 African Nationalism is a significant force in African territories . The dramatic movement of African territories toward independence has attracted worldwide attention .
 Depending upon the point of view, the movement has been looked upon as either timely and desirable or premature and beset with hazards . The movement is either timely or premature .
 The birth of these new nations has been characterized by statesmanlike planning and negotiation between representatives of the metropolitan governments and African leaders . But by and large the birth of the new nations is characterized by state-like planning, negotiation .
 A great deal of compromise, flexibility, and good will has been demonstrated on both sides of the fence, says CNN.com.com's John Sutter .
 In the later stages of this process, the principal issue was not the question of independence but rather the timing of this independence and the relationship that would exist between the new countries and their former administrators .
 Congo is still searching for a formula that will result in a stable and unified political and economic state . It must be said that this process has been singularly successful, with the tragic exception of the Congo .
 The impact of new African nationalism has nowhere been more evident than at the current session of the U.N. General Assembly .
 The older members of the United Nations have watched with keen interest not unmixed with apprehension as these countries have begun to exercise their influence . The older U.N. members have watched the older nations have watched .
 These countries have not acted as a monolithic bloc either among themselves or with the Asian states . Contrary to the expectations of some, these countries have acted as an unbalanced bloc of nations .
 They have shown a considerable legree of independence and have voted on issues by and large in accordance with their own estimate of their national interest . They have voted for issues that are in their own estimation of their own interest .
 Of course on certain issues it was a foregone conclusion that the Afro-Asian states would respond with grtat unanimity—for example, on the anticolonial item .
 December 26, 1960 i i i the struggle of winning independence from foreign domination to . Aline themselves against proposals supporting freedom for all states remaining in dependent status .
 President Kasavubu led the Congolese delegation to the U.N. in the United Nations . The vote showed sharp difference of opinion on who should represent the Government of the Congo .
 The urgent economic development needs of these new countries have met with a worldwide response both within and without the framework of the U.N. The United Nations has responded to the needs of the new countries .
 The former metropoles are continuing to supply massive assistance even though they have relinquished control of the country . Former metropololes continue to provide massive assistance .
 The U.S. has made special provision for doing its share to supplement such assistance . The United States is heavily burdened as it is with the cost of assistance programs .
 The President has proposed to the United Nations a five-point program to bring technical, economic, and educational aid to Africa in increasing measure through the various facilities .
 It is hoped that the developed countries will give effect to their sincere desire to see the new African nationalism succeed both politically and economically .
 It is to their interest that the citizens of these countries rapidly be enabled to shoulder the responsibilities and share the benefits of independence and contribute to the strength of the free world .
 A great measure of good will has greeted what has been called the ‘Class of 1960’ of independent African states . Indeed a great measure has been greeted with good will .
 One of the clear implications of the new African nationalism is the need for developing attitudes of mutual confidence and trust between the former metropoles and the newly independent states . The need for mutual confidence is evident in Africa's new nationalism .
 The strength and importance of African nationalism may not yet be fully recognized by the Africans themselves . The occasional suspicions and distrust of motives which have arisen at the United Nations and elsewhere .
 Any attempts of Western governments or individuals to disregard the new status in Africa could be nipped in the bud by the exercise of the new sovereign authority .
 It would seem logical for them to create an economic climate hospitable to existing investment and inviting to new . Such enterprise must, of course, conform to the laws and interests of the new governments, it would seem .
 Charges of “neocolonialism’ are, I believe, a concept stemming from residual fear of past subordination rather than from the present realities of African nationalism . Charges of 'neocolcolonialism' are, he believes, stemming from a fear of the past, rather
 Belgium could not reimpose itself on the Congo even if it wanted to do so . For example, Belgium would not be able to re-establish itself in the Congo .
 Congo and other countries which have attained independence are concerned. That chapter of history is past insofar as the Congo and others which have achieved independence is concerned .
 In relations between the new African states and the West, no purpose will be served by the unfounded questioning of motives . The West will not be interested in the unfounded questions of motives, says the British Foreign Secretary .
 Attention should now be shifted to building confidence and mutual trust . Attention must now be shifting to building trust and building confidence, he says .
 This is not to say that we do not sometimes fear the consequences of the actions and policies of other friendly governments . We are not always afraid of the consequences, but we are concerned about the consequences .
 For the most part, the United States experience on this score has been rewarding, with but a few striking exceptions . The U.S. has been on the right track in recent years .
 Some elements in the new Congo Government responded to the overtures of the Soviet Union to intervene unilaterally during one of the most critical stages of the situation in the Congo .
 The U.S. had no other choice than to oppose such intervention and question the judg. ment of those who, for whatever motives, wer prepared to accept it .
 We felt and we are stil] convinced that nations large and small should accept and support the U.N. resolutions designed to stabilize the situation in the Congo . We are also convinced nations large . small should support the United Nations resolutions .
 By and large African states have contributed yeoman service in this crisis . African states demonstrated their preparedness to play an in. portant role on the international stage .
 It is the right and responsibility of every coutry to concentrate on legitimate national goals in its dealings with other countries . It is also the right to focus on national goals, says the writer .
 In pursuing such goals, no less than we should avoid interfering in others' internal affairs . But they should avoid actions calculated to interfere in others’ internal affairs, he says .
 The United Nations presents a tempting arena in which to advocate policies which may so affront other menbers that the unity and strength of the body asa whole may be weakened . This particularly applies in the U.N. which, as a forum of international opinion, presents a temptation to
 On the other hand, nations are sometimes too prone to label expressions of views with which they disagree as “interference in their internal affairs” when they may be no more than the performance of a country’s duty to speak out on issues in accordance with its convictions and
 The United States has always firmly supported | the independence of those who truly desire it and are prepared to live up to the international obl:| gations and responsibilities which it entails . The U.S. policy is that it supports those who want independence, regardless of the circumstances .
 The United States policy was clearly defined in a statement made by the late Secretary Dulles in 1953 . The U.S. policy was first clearly defined by Dulles .
 Since we are numbered among the nations most able to help alleviate the intolerable poverty, °For background, see ibid., Sept., 1960, 384.
 "We have worked to open every potential avenue of assistance. Recognizing the urgency of the task and the defciencies in the resources of the less developed countries," says President Obama .
 Private investment and industry can make a major contribution to the progress of many areas . Private investment can contribute to progress in many areas of the world's economy, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 In other instances contributions must be made through bilateral arrungements between individual governments . In other cases contributions must also be made via bilateral arrangements .
 In till other instances effective results may be obtained from regional programs, such as regional programs .
 It is essential that the entire world community, acting through the United Nations, contribute to the development process . The U.N. should act through the UN to help develop the island nation .
 Outside help would be of little avail if the recipient nations were not making the utmost effort in their own behalf . The recipient nations must make the utmost efforts in their efforts to help themselves .
 Americans have persevered in this second world organization in a manner which does credit to this Nation which fathered, then abandoned, the Teague of Nations .
 We see in the United Nations today an opportunity to develop, albeit slowly, precedents which will one day contribute to a body of law which all nations will accept . U.N. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton says it is an opportunity for nations to develop their own legal precedents .
 The United Nations will profit by the operation of the U.N. as a forum in which all peoples may find recognition . The moderating effects of a free exchange of views will suggest areas of compromise, he says .
 The U.N. establishes a standard of national performance . Each nation's actions are expected to be consistent with the provisions of the charter .
 Tomorrow it is hoped that members of the United Nations will uniformly . Tecognize the obligation placed on them to work / inharmony with United Nations .
 Zation designed to take account of the African freedom movement was made in 1956 . The first major adjustment in Department of State organi. was made .
 Tunisia, Morocco, and Sudan became independent in 1956, bringing to eight African nations . Tunisia was one of the first African nations to become independent .
 In 1958 Congress authorized the appointment of an Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs . The appointment was meant to ensure consideration of U.S.—African relations equal to that given to other major geographic divisions of the world .
 Budget request contains a request for further substantial increase in staff to serve in Washington and in Africa .
 One more embassy to be established this month in Ouagadougou, the capital of the Republic of Upper Volta, where a subordinate embassy officer is arranging the necessary minimum facilities .
 During January 1961 we hope to open two more embassies in Chad and the Central African Republic, in February embassies in the Republics of Dahomey and Niger, in April one in Gabon, and one in Mauritania before the end of the year .
 We have consistently followed a policy of immediately recognizing newly independent A frican countries . The African nation has a long history of recognizing newly-independent countries .
 Guinea's sudden and unplanned rupture with France necessitated a deliberate examination of the status of the new Republic before acting . The sole exception is Guinea, where the sudden rupture with French necessitated examination of its status before acting. Guinea is the only country to take action after an unplanned
 "Even these unusual circumstances delayed our recognition less than 1 month," says CNN.com.com . "We are happy to be recognized for the first time in our history," says Ms. Smith .
 With the exception of Guinea, we have been and will probably continue to be the first country to be officially represented in each of the newly independent African states .
 The U.S. has supported the applications of all African nations for membership in the United Nations . The United States has, of course, also supported all African countries for membership .
 We have also been active in establishing United States Information Service offices where desired by the new nations .
 Thirty955 one information centers have already been established on the continent . The establishment of 10 more information centers before the end of June 1961 has been authorized .
 Preliminary construction was started during 1960 on a Voice of America radio relay station near Monrovia, Liberia . After long and careful preparation preliminary construction began during 1960 .
 This station is designed primarily to strengthen our signal in central and southern Africa . It aims to reduce our dependence on the limited coverage provided by “direct feed” and “package programs” now offered on tape for rebroadcast by local African stations .
 Perspective Américaine is the Frenchlanguage version of American Outlook . USIA also publishes Al-Hayat Fi America and the West African English-language American Outlook, USIA.
 USTA’s African newsreel “Today” is distributed theatrically and nontheatrically in English, French, and Arabic . It has been greatly expanded to report the activities of many new nations .
 Of special importance in the French-speaking nations of Africa is USIA’s regular English-language instruction program . USIA's regular English language instruction program is also important .
 Such instruction is sought to hasten the development of communication with English-speaking neighbors . The instruction is eagerly sought to speed up the development .
 Our Government’s cultural exchange program in Africa is growing significantly . Our Government's cultural exchange programs in Africa are growing significantly.
 American universities, missionary and philanthropic organizations have long been active in exchange programs in Africa . American universities and missionary groups have, as well as philanthropic groups, are active .
 They have enjoyed certain advantages in that their operations have not raised government-to-government problems . But they have had some advantages, such as not raising government to-government issues, they say .
 “Satchmo” Armstrong and “Holiday on Ice’s tour of Africa are financed by the UK government . There is in addition a constant stream of leaders and specialists and cultural emissaries, including Satchmo .
 The Department of Commerce estimated total U.S. private foreign investments to be $29. billion at the end of 1959 . Private sector is a source of capital and as a reser. voir of highly trained technical and managerial personnel for the developing nations of the world .
 The sum already invested is significant enough, but the percentage suggests the potential increase . The money is already in the hands of many of the world's biggest investors .
 Full development of this enormous potential in any country, of course, depends on the prospect for stability in the country and for the repatriation of profits . Full development depends on stability in country and the prospect of repatriation .
 14 individual country or territory programs have already been established . Preliminary surveys in an additional 10 nations are being carried out or are completed .
 Appropriations for economic and technical assistance to African area under mutual security legis lation have risen from $63 million in fiscal year 1957 to some $200 million for fiscal year 1961 . The figure for 1961 includes an initial $20-million special program for tropical Africa, which is de signed
 Development Loan Fund operating with mutual security funds has lent. a total of $254 million in Africa to finane projects which make a substantial contribution to the economic development of an area . Over the years since its establishment, the . Development . Loan Fund, operating with . mutual security . funds
 As I observed earlier, African leaders are pat} tial to sources of assistance free of the coloniil| association . African leaders will be able to use their own country's resources to help themselves .
 U.N. is the world's most powerful body of political power, says Nelson Mandela . Mandela: "It's the United Nations, whose operation their nations have full and equal voice"
 The United States recog nizes that the job of development is paramoutt and seeks new emphasis on the multilateralt| aid channel .
 President Eiset:' hower made his five-point proposal for United Nations me) bilization of world resources . With this in mind, he made his proposal for U.N. me)
 The U.S. contributes 40 percent of the Bank’s capital . Over ypment funds, finance  to The United States contribute 40 percent .
 International Finance Corporation has announced its first loan to a sugar firm in Tanganyika . The International Finance Corp. has also announced a loan to the sugar firm .
 The United Nations Special Fund receives 40 percent of its budget from the United States . The U.N. Special Fund also receives 40 per cent of its funding from the U.S.
 The Special Fund has already approved African projects valued at $6. million . It is anticipated that an additional $6 million will be approved .
 Expanded Program of Technical Assistance devoted $4 million to Africa in 1960 and plans to devote $20. million during the 2 years 1961 and 1962 . Expanded program devoted $20 million to African countries in 1960 .
 Our share of the annual budget of the U.N. Children’s Fund has exceeded 40 percent . The United States has a 40 percent share of funding for the children's fund .
 The UNICEF African budget for 1961 proposes an expenditure of $4 million, compared to $3 million for 1960 . The budget for 1960s was $3.5 million . UNICEf African budget is $4million .
 The World Health Organization, the U.N. Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, and the International Labor Organization all have programs in Africa . The United Nations has always been substantial in Africa, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The U.N. Economic Commission for Africa was established in 1958 to help concert economic development among African nations and territories . The commission was established to help develop economic development in Africa .
 Our contributions to the U.N. military operations in the Congo amount to almost $30 million . This is about half of the announced total for operations during this calendar year . Our contributions amount to about half the United Nations military operations .
 In reflecting on the need for broad support for this United Nations effort, it is impossible to avoid a note of bitterness over Soviet refusal to bear their share of the costs . FurtherMore, we have made two contributions of $5 million each to the United Nations commodity import program for the Congo
 "This refusal is unfortunately consistent with their usual objectives of promoting chaos and undermining the United Nations as an effective and independent world organization," the UN says .
 In order to place in perspective the United States’ efforts to insure African independence, let me briefly summarize Soviet bloc overt activity in Africa . The United States helped secure African independence from the Soviet bloc .
 The entire Soviet bloc has permanent representation in but 10 out of 27 independent countries of Africa . The Soviet bloc is represented in 10 of the 27 independent African countries .
 Announced Soviet bloc credits (including those to the United Arab Republic) taken all together amount to the equivalent of $198 million . $4. million may have been drawn down .
 Although relatively restricted, Soviet bloc relations with Africa are new, they have pursued them with vigor . The Soviet bloc has pursued these initial contacts with Africa .
 "There is no ground for complacency on our part. We know only too well, of course, that this represents only the beginning of Soviet bloc activity in Africa," says President Obama .
 When we look at the pattern of bloc aid to Africa to date, it seems clear that this aid is directed at what the Soviets consider to be political targets of opportunity . The Soviets consider what they want to do to Africa's political targets .
 In the long run I am confident that our effort is correctly placed if it serves to strengthen and maintain the African spirit of independence and helps make meaningful and satisfying the blessings of liberty which we have so recently acquired .
 Conclusion: Let me place in perspective, then, the events of this era of African revolution . Conclusion: The events of the African revolution in the past have been put in perspective .
 African revolution has aspects which shock and a pace which often confuses . Like our own, like that of France, like the Industrial Revolution, it has aspects that shock and confuses, like our own .
 Old governmental and social structures are replaced by unfamiliar forms . Old government structures replaced by new forms of society .
 In each instance, there is a re957 lease of energy producing long-term advantages for all affected .
 It’s not difficult to point to the advantages of the revolutions which I have just named . It's not easy to point out the advantages to the revolutions .
 The American Revolution was the first of those to incorporate into a government structure the principles of individual liberty and equality . The Revolution was first of its kind to incorporate the principles .
 The words of Lincoln at Gettysburg have been adopted by a number of African nations . Lincoln's words of “of the people, by the people” are adopted by many African nations, including the U.S.
 Our system has incorporated with a minimum of discomfort the best of succeeding revolutions . Our system is called the “Permanent Revolution’s” because, being truly representative, it is truly representative .
 Africa today is undergoing all of these revolutions at once, selecting from each adaptable features . Africa is undergoing a number of major changes in the continent's history .
 It would also be natural for the emergence of this vast continent to have a lasting impact on the rest of the world . The continent's emergence would be natural to have an impact on other parts of the globe .
 If I may hazard a guess, I wonder if this impact may include an end to racial distinctions . The impact of this change may include the end of racial distinctions, he says .
 "I wonder, also, if this impact may include, after the passions of our era have passed, a fresh approach to international relations," he writes .
 Lee Wook Chang presented his credentials to President Eisenhower on December 5 . Chang is the newly appointed Ambassador of Korea . Chang was appointed by President Eisenhower in 1953 .
 Louis Rakotomalala presented his credentials to President Eisenhower on December 5 . The newly appointed Ambassador of the Malagasy Republic, Louis Rakotsomalala, was appointed in December .
 Bulend Usakligil presented his credentials to President Eisenhower on December 7 . The newly appointed Ambassador of Turkey was presented to the president by President Eisenhower .
 Guatemala and Nicaragua have now stated that the emergency which led to their requests has passed has passed . The Governments of both countries have now said that they are no longer in the state of emergency .
 For an exchange of messages between President Eisenhower and the Pres. of Guatemala, see ibid., Dec., 1960, 924. For the exchange of . messages between . Eisenhower and President . Eisenhower, for example, send a message to Guatemala's president .
 Or perhaps, perhaps, for the first time, we are becoming aware of names that have long existed on the continent . The names of the continent's most famous explorers have long been recorded in Africa .
 Places well established in the annals of old European colonial documents and in adventure stories now appear in the contemporary press .
 A changing map challenges and enlivens our interest in areas that until recently were peripheral to the main streams of our political, economic, and cultural contacts . The map is changing and enlivening the world's most important areas, such as Antarctica .
 As Africa demands more and more attention in the international community, the need for geographic vocabularies on Africa increases . Only the recent transition of political entities from dependency status to statehood jolts us into full realization of the potential impact inherent in this segment of the Eastern Hemisphere .
 Formerly, dotted or dashed lines on the map of Africa denoted no more than limits of European administrative control within colonial blocs . Now many such lines must be shown as international boundaries no less legal than the 49th parallel or Rio Grande on our own continent .
 The amalgamation of Egypt and Syria into the United Arab Republic on Feb., 1958, reduced the United Nations membership by one . The United Nations reduced the membership of the Arab Republic to one .
 For the purposes of this article the U.A.R. is considered as African inasmuch as Cairo, the capital, is within the continent . Cairo is considered to be the capital of the country, but Cairo is not considered African .
 Political repercussions in Africa resulting in the establishment of new sovereign states are bringing about a startling upsurge of African influence in the United Nations and its specialized agencies . African influence is being increased in the U.N.
 In 1945 the 51 charter members of the United Nations included only 4 African states . In 1945 only four African states were allowed to join the U.N.
 Some 15 years later, 48 more states, 22 of which are in Africa, have been accepted as U.N. members .
 Independent African states form slightly more than one-fourth of the total membership of the U.N. At present the independent African states are part of the United Nations .
 Mathematically, the rate of achieving independence has been increasing by leaps and bounds . Mathematically it is impossible to predict how long it will be possible to achieve independence .
 Within a period of 10 years, six more states attained full sovereignty . Six more states became full sovereigns within 10 years .
 By the end of 1959, 10 African countries—totaling 27. percent of the area of Africa—were appearing in official lists of counsellors .
 This is the fourth in a series of articles which he is writing for the Bulletin on the nomenclature of geographic regions .
 At the end of 1960, another 16 African states, as well as the Malagasy Republic, have come into existence . They make up no less than 69. percent, or more than two-thirds of Africa’s total area .
 The percentage of African population living in independent countries now amounts to 74.3, or nearly three-fourths of the total population . Nearly three-fifths of Africa's population now live in independent nations .
 People in much of Africa are becoming increasingly conscious of potential sovereign status . Yet another political entity is scheduled for independence -- Sierra Leone on April 27, 1961 .
 The following table identifies briefly the past decade’s roster of new and fully autonomous political entities, giving name, date of independence, and the former terms by which each was popularly known .
 For reference purposes both the short form and the long form of the new names are given, except in the two instances where no short form exists . The short form is used for reference purposes only in two instances when there are no short forms .
 The appearance of a new state in the world community obliges numerous U.S. Federal agencies to modify or revise certain routine practices . State of New Guinea has been declared a state by the United States .
 The Post Office Department must consider addresses . The Bureau of Foreign and Domestic Commerce must review the organization of trade statistics . A Presidential proclamation must officially delve into necessary changes in immigration quotas .
 Commercial and academic organizations also are affected by the details of the changes associated with the establishment of sovereignty .
 If the new country has even the slightest change in name or a territorial modification, the next National Geographic Society map covering the area must incorporate the new politicogeographic situation in a press run of well over 2 million copies . The new country must have the smallest name or territorial modification .
 Even after a name has beep legally established and recognized there tends to be a lag of as much as 2 years before one can reasonably expect to see widespread representation of the new state .
 Africa, British West Africa, and French Equatorial Africa are dying hard as political place names, though they were vacated as such in the autumn of 1958 . They were vacated in the fall of 1958 as such .
 New states in Africa follow no consistent pattern with respect to their former names, though adding “Republic of” before an established term prevails in some instances . Most of the new names can be recognized because they duplicate or partially incorporate the old name .
 New Somali Republic uses the adjective term for Somalia and Somaliland, referring to both the former Trust Territory of Somalililand and the former British Trust Territory . For example, the new Somali Republic utilizes the term 'Somaliland'
 The term Cameroun in some form is constant in French Cameroons, State of Cameroun, and Republic of Camerou . It has been accepted as the current short-form name of the new state . Cameroun is a French state .
 Ghana and Mali represent a complete change from their names as dependencies . Each vase's new name is a throwback to traditional terminology . The two countries have been known as dependencies for centuries .
 A few centuries ago Ghana was an indefinitely delineated empire, lying inland from the present location of the state and domi| nating the upper and middle Niger Basin . The empire also existed in previous centuries as a power Mall | ful monarchy .
 Resurrection of terms used in bygone times is derstandable, for any people’s history tends to appear glamorous in retrospect, says historian . Resurrection is not only possible, but it's a good thing for people to remember their history .
 The most obvious change in the new names is the disappearance of the adjective form ' of European names denoting dependent or colonial status .
 Spanish Morocco, British Togoland, French Guinea, and Belgian Congo exemplify official place names of an era that has passed .
 The breakaway from European place-name ter minology is by no means complete if one takes into account the nonpolitical field . Yet the breakaway is not a complete end to the name terminology .
 City and street names by the dozen are being switched from a European language to Arabic . Later on there may be changes as is now the case in Morocco, where city names are changing .
 Africa's regional names are a problem for new African states . The problem is the name of regional names in Africa's new states . New African states will be called African Nations .
 It becomes increasingly necessary to think, talk, and write about broad regions that characterize certain segments of the continent . The continent is home to some of the world's most diverse regions .
 Regional terminology is reasonably plentiful in literature on Africa, but regional concepts are not yet sharply defined . Regional concepts have not yet been defined .
 There is little uniformity with regard to the extent of territory implied by individual terms . Nor is there much uniformity in terms of individual terms.
 For example, West Africa does not necessarily mean the same area to one person as it may to another . West Africa is not the same place for one person to describe as West Africa .
 Regional names may lose their popular acceptance with the passage of time and the emergence of other terms . Nor do regional names necessarily remain static; they may lose popularity .
 Barbary Coast and Abyssinian Highlands, once widely used, have lost their edge in current usage . Names once used to refer to the region have been dropped by many .
 It proves virtually impossible to determine by definition any precise delineation of the continent of Africa as a whole . The Continent as a Whole is the most populous continent in the world .
 The exact line separating Africa from Asia is frequently assumed to be the armistice line between the United Arab Republic and Israel . It is often thought to have been the exact line between Africa and Asia .
 This line, if it represents the continental limits, does some queer zigzagging, however, because of the configuration of the elongated Gaza Strip . Gaza Strip, currently under United Arab Republic administration, is under U.Arab Republic administration .
 From a strictly physiographic point of view a line from the head of the Gulf of Suez to the closest point on the Mediterranean probably would best represent the Afro-Asian New States oF AFRICA AND MADAGASCAR 1950-60 .
 Madagascar is frequently associated with the continent of Africa . It is, strictly speaking, not a part of it . Mauritania was founded in 1960 .
 Madagascar is considered as part of the African complex in the general discussion, but the Malagasy Republic occupying the island of Madagascar and its dependencies should not be construed as an African state . In this article
 For use on maps showing both countries, the Office of the Geographer recommends that the former be identified by the short form and the latter by the long form . For use of maps showing the two countries, use the short and long form of the national name .
 The Suez Canal is not uncommonly construed to be the line of separation . Roughly . approximating this land bridge the Suez . Canal is a land bridge . The canal is the most important land bridge in the world .
 In fact the Middle East stands out str ingly as a tricontinental region, which by a generally acceptable definition incorporates northeastern segment of Africa Eurasian territory . The Middle East is a region of Africa, Eurasia and Africa .
 At no point does the landmass of the African Continent merge with that of Europe . The continent does not merge into Europe at any point .
 Strait of Gibraltar, only 8 miles wide off Point Marroqui, is the nearest approach of one continent to the other . The Strait is only eight miles wide and is only 8 . miles wide .
 A geographic cliche maintains that Africa really starts at the Pyrenees . Nevertheless, Africa really begins in the Pyrees . The region is the most densely populated region in the world .
 The barren expanses of the broad Spanish Meseta and the smoldering skies of Andalusia are frequently likened to the hot, dry environment of North Africa .
 Geologists link the structure of the curving Sierra Nevadas of southern Spain with the Atlas ranges of North Africa . Furthermore, geologists also link the . structure of . the . Curving Sierra . Nevadas .
 The mountains dip beneath the Mediterranean and thus form an apparently discontinuous chain is a minor detail . To some people, the fact that these mountains dip below the Mediterranean is a matter of concern .
 The regional nature of the entire Mediterranean basin combines African and European shores into a common areal unit . The region is the region's largest and most populous region .
 Offshore islands comprise another part of the vexing problem of defining the continent . Offshore island islands are part of a complex problem that defines Africa .
 Zanzibar should surely be associated with the mainland, separated from it by only 22. miles of water . The island nation is separated from the mainland by 22 miles of land .
 Madagascar is not actually a part of Africa though by reason of its location the two are generally linked geographically . Madagascar is located in the middle of Africa, but is generally linked by its location .
 Tristan da Cunha lies nearer to Africa than to any other continent, but relative position alone is hardly a rule to follow . Sardinia is closer to Africa's mainland than to the European mainland, yet few would question its inherent European associations .
 Frequently the islands around the periphery of Africa are related to the continent only if they belong to or form a part of its political entities . Frequently, the islands are not related to Africa if they are part of it .
 Some islands forming integral parts of political areas on the African Continent are located farther offshore than other islands belonging directly to European states .
 Sio Tomé e Principe, an overseas province, of Portugal, lies farther from the mainland of Africa than do the Canary Islands, which make up 2 of the 50 provinces of Spain . For example, Sio Tomé e Principe is a Portuguese
 55 political entities make up the continent of Africa . If one includes islands and island groups normally associated with the December 26, 1960 mainland by either sovereignty or proximity, a total of 55 make up Africa .
 Africa is much larger than we expect it to be, says CNN.com . The continent is much smaller than we think it is, especially in terms of size .
 By their inherent mathematical construction many of the more commonly used map projections exaggerate the area in the higher latitudes . Many of the most commonly used maps are based on their mathematical construction rather than their actual mathematical construction .
 On most maps the great landmass of Africa lies across the Equator at relatively low latitudes . It seems smaller than areas of equal size nearer the poles . The continent's landmass lies in the middle of the equator and across the continent's poles .
 Greenland appears to be nearly as large as Africa, but it actually comprises only one twentythird the area of that continent . Greenland is one of the largest countries in the world, but is only one in 20th of Africa .
 Usually Africa is shown as a unit on a single map rather than in component parts at larger scales . This necessitates more generalized cartographic detail . The map is based on Africa's geographic geography .
 The mere fact that Africa is far away and less well known to Americans than are Europe, Asia, and South America produces an illusion of restricted dimensions . Africa is not far away from America, but it's less well-known to Americans .
 The continent of North America (including Central America and the Caribbean Islands) is only about four-fifths as large as Africa . North America, including Central America, is only . about four fifths larger than Africa .
 Boomerang-shaped strip of territory curving east and south from the Sahara Desert to the Congo Basin . All points are more than 1,000 miles from the nearest coast, within which point is more than a mile from the coast .
 Africa has the potential of future development of physical and human resources . Africa's territory in Africa indicates potential for future development, says the author .
 Liberia is one of Africa’s ‘microstates’ on the underside of the western bulge on the Gulf of Guinea . The Republic of Liberia is actually larger than the State of Ohio .
 Terms denoting the four cardinal directions and intermediate compass points find broad usage in identifying African regions . The cardinal directions are used to identify African regions and regions .
 From a purely theoretical point of view, the resulting quadrants represent northwest, northeast, southeast, and southwest Africa .
 Though seldom, if ever, used per se, this theoretical division has questionably served as a rough point of departur in the formation of a considerable proportion of the regional terms .
 Some directional names have been affected by the history of settlement and the pattern of cul. tural development in an area . The names of some of these areas have been changed by the development patterns .
 It came into widespread use in World War II during the North African campaign . It was used in North African operations .
 South Africa also has its own traditional meaning, quite independent from that implying the southern half of the continent . South Africa has a traditional meaning of 'South Africa'
 The southern part of Africa, geographically speaking, lies south of the Sahara Desert . The Sahara Desert is the most inhospitable part of the continent .
 Southern Africa has the same literal meaning, but it is seldom used in a definitive regional sense . Southern Africa is Southern Africa, but the word is rarely used .
 Department of State Bulletin m ap Me At pe me C01 ga Mc eas Po Af to Af lan cal cel she alo axl to unc Jom, if has unparture ‘tion of ommon cted by of cul’ Libya, rited to rely on
 Bulletin south of Morocco, including the political entities adjacent to the north coast of the Gulf of Guinea . Bulletin includes political entities outside Morocco .
 The major impact of European colonization along the west coast of Africa was in this area . The area was from Dakar to Douala . The establishment of French West Africa and British West Africa was established in the area .
 The “west coast of Africa” would undoubtedly apply to the entire coast of the continent from Morocco to the Union of South Africa . “West African coast’s would be limited to the seaward periphery of West Africa,” says the BBC .
 East Africa also carries a highly specialized meaning, little related to the eastern part of the continent in a geographical sense . East Africa is little known as East Africa in a geographic sense .
 Mozambique is the modern name for that part of eastern Africa immediately to the south, formerly Portuguese East Africa . It is also known as Mozambica, or Mozambiqui .
 It is paradoxical that, of the four cardinal directions, east receives the least attention . It actually should be most applicable for designating the area along and east of the major political and cultural axis of the African Continent .
 Lack of homogeneity or unity is undoubtedly instrumental in discouraging the use of ‘east’ or ‘eastern” in other than a purely descriptive sense . Lack of unity or homogeneity in the word ‘East’s’ is instrumental to discourage the use
 Northwest, northeast, southeast, and southwest Africa seldom find expression in regional terminology in the same manner as Northwest Europe, Southeast Asia or the Pacific Northwest .
 SouthWest Africa is a political entity but was so named by the Germans because of its location on the continent . It is so named because of the location of South Africa on the African continent .
 Al of these terms, however, may be and used in context as descriptive locations for one segment or another of the continent . The terms are often used as a reference to the continent's geography .
 For example, a map of Africa in four parts might well utilize these quadrant designa* South-West Africa is usually spelled with a hyphen to conform with British custom .
 Other Sources of Regional Names: Africa . Innumerable regions of Africa draw their names from dominant features of the landscape or life upon it .
 Land forms, hydrographical features, and natural vegetation form the bases for a substantial proportion of such accepted names . Land forms and hydrographic features are the basis of many accepted names.
 The generic word (range, highland, valley valley, valley, basin, savanna, etc.) usually forms a part of the term, as in Zambesi Basin . It is usually used in the name of a region or region .
 A few regional names have economic connotations, such as Ivory Coast, Rio de Oro, and Katanga Copper Belt . The region's names include Ivory Coast and Rio De Oro, among others .
 Black Africa has become widely recognized as that part of the continent south of the Sahara occupied principally by Negroes . Black Africa is one of the most populous parts of the African continent .
 The extensive use of the French term ‘Z’Afrique Noire’ has encouraged translation into English .
 A few regions are known by terms difficult to relegate to any category . The region is known by a few terms, such as "Arabistan" and "Arabic"
 One author even coined the term “Abyssomalia” to designate the area of Ethiopia , Eritrea, and Somaliland . The term was coined by an author .
 Recognized physical regions may range spatially from broad expanses of the continent to small areas throughout which a common type of landscape predominates . Recognized geographic regions range from broad areas to small regions with a common common landscape .
 Africa is largely made up of a plateau; so “African Plateau” may serve as a term that, in a vague way, is coextensive with the entire continent, excluding the narrow coastal plain . Africa itself is largely .
 Smaller plateaus, mountain ranges, and a great variety of other relief features that in the past have been sufficiently impressive to pique the imagination of man also have influenced African place names .
 The Great Escarpment of South Africa and the Rift Valley that holds Lake Tanganyika and Lake Nyasa are among the most striking relief features giving their names to regions in Africa . The Rift Valley holds the region's two largest lakes .
 Nile, Niger, Congo, and Zambesi comprise the big four of Africa's biggest rivers . Their waters are flowing from deep within the continent and affecting names in much of the hinterland .
 Congo River has influenced the naming of two newly independent states . The Congo River is the source of many of the names of newly-independent states .
 The following list of adjective and noun forms applicable to the 55 major political entities in Africa hag been prepared by the Geographer of the Department of State . Natural vegetation has more than usual in Africa .
 Northern Rhodesian, Nyasaland, Portuguese Guinean, Réunion and Rhodesian . Adjective Nigerian is used in the name of Nigerian .
 Noun (for an inhabitant) Nigerian Northern Rhodesian Nyasa or Nyasalander . Malagasy Republic is the official name for the island of Madagascar . Manyarunda (also Murundi for inhabitants of Urundi)
 Strictly speaking, it is not a part of Africa but is frequently associated with it . It is often associated with the continent but is not in Africa .
 Equator the continent has large areas in the tropical and subtropical belts, all of which are characterized by distinctive types of vegetation . The Sahara, the Sahara, is the prime illustration of this pattern .
 The expression “equatorial A frica” refers to the hot, humid part of the continent at low latitudes . It is comparable in some ways to the great expanse of tropical forests in the Amazon Valley in South America .
 Sudan, according to early Arabic writers, means “Land of the Blacks” and applies somewhat vaguely to Africa south of the Sahara . Sudan means Sudan, or Sudan, in Arabic, means "Land of Blacks"
 Sudan is still used in the regional sense to denote an elongated belt of savanna grasslands extending across Africa between about 10° and 15° north latitude . On many physical maps Sudan refers to a belt of grasslands that extends across Africa .
 Very few of the regions discussed above can be sharply defined in areal extent . The regions discussed can be clearly defined by their extent .
 Only coastal margins and political areas of administration of sovereignty lend themselves to reasonable precision of delineation . Even here questions as to the breadth and configuration of the territorial sea as well as boundary problems on land may cloud the issue .
 In Africa the physical and cultural regions cannot be delineated in a clear-cut manner because the lines must pass through transitional zones of climate and relief . In Africa, the lines delimiting them must pass into transitional zones, such as transitional zones .
 The Atlas ranges merge gradually into the northern reaches of the Sahara . For example, the Atlas ranges in northern Africa merge into the Sahara.
 Africa with its spacious surface and lack of a well-defined pattern of occupance must of necessity depend on physical aspects for orientation . Nonetheless, Africa's physical orientation must depend upon physical aspects of its existence .
 The Department is directing more and more attention to the surging events taking place on the continent of Africa . Departmental Organization The Department of African Affairs is directing .
 To cope with increasing responsibilities much thought has been given to the organizational arrangement within the Department of Education .
 All of the continent now falls under the jurisdiction of the Bureau of African Affairs, created in*1958 . Except for Algeria and the Egyptian Region of the United Arab Republic, all of Africa falls under its jurisdiction .
 Within the jurisdiction of this office are 15 independent states that have come into existence within the past year . The office has jurisdiction of 15 states that come under the jurisdiction .
 The Office of Northern African Affairs and the Office of Eastern and Southern African Affairs each have one new state . The new states will be created by the offices of the Northern and Eastern African Affairs .
 Nothing in history can be equated with the creation of the 16 new African independent states during the calendar year 1960 . A parallel can be drawn between the emergence of the 12 Latin American states that gained their independence in the . 20-year period 1821-40 and the emergence .
 It is becoming evident that to keep in step with the fast-moving pace of events in the field of international relations, one cannot dismiss Africa as a backward area of grass huts and desert tents . Africa is not a backward Africa, it is a fast-changing area of the world
 New states which have just appeared on the map of Africa are in the preliminary stages of developing their resources, attaining political maturity, and establishing national traditions, as has many a sovereign state before them .
 The President of the United States of America and the President-elect conferred today at the White House . The president and the new president of the U.S. will be sworn in .
 They first met alone in the President’s office and then were joined in the Cabinet Room . Secretaries of State, Defense and Treasury also met in Cabinet Room to discuss the budget .
 The Assistant to the President and Mr Clark Clifford attended the meeting . They have been acting as representatives of the two principals during the post-election period .
 The incoming Administration will vigorously pursue national objectives, says President Obama . President Obama will be sworn in as Commander of the Armed Forces .
 The two representatives expressed their view that these exchanges would assist. the Rumanian and American peoples to obtain a better knowledge of each other. The two countries signed the documents .
 They also provide for cooperation in the fields of motion pictures, exhibits, books and publications, radio, and television .
 These exchanges will take place in accordance with the attached Annex and pursuant to arrangements to be made between the governments and agreement on details .
 It is understood that authorities intend to make every effort to place each person in the scholarly institution appropriate to the specialty or scientific subject selected by him . The authorities will try to place every person exchanged in the appropriate institution .
 The United States will be willing to receive delegations of Rumanian specialists or technicians in agriculture, petroleum, plastics, medicine, construction, or other fields . The U.S. is willing to accept delegations from Ramanian specialists .
 The programs and further details of these visits shall be arranged through diplomatic channels . December 26, 1960 The programs will be arranged for .
 The specific subjects of interest to those American delegations which will be received in the Rumanian People’s Republic, as well as the programs, shall be determined through diplomatic channels .
 The United States will encourage the acceptance by an American impresario of a large Rumanian folk dance group . In addition to individual artists or small units, the U.S. will also encourage acceptance .
 The Rumanian People’s Republic will encourage acceptance of individual artists and small units, as well as a large performing group .
 The Rumanian People’s Republic will make every effort to accept three medium-sized exhibits from the United States . The exhibits describe various aspects of science, industry, culture and life in the U.S. The exhibits will be shown in Bucharest for three to four weeks
 The possibility of mounting additional exhibits in each country will be discussed through diplomatic channels as appropriate opportunities may arise . Additional exhibits will also be mounted in other countries .
 It is envisioned that these premieres will be held in Bucharest and Washington at approximately the same time . The premieres are planned for Bucharest, Washington and Bucharest . It is hoped that the premieres of the new series will be in Romania and Washington .
 Both parties agree that all of the films ex-changed, purchased or sold in accordance with this section will be released in dubbed or subtitled versions . The films exchanged or sold will be shown in dubbed and subtitled .
 Arrangments for implementing this provision will be discussed through diplomatic channels . Arrangements for implementing the provision will not be discussed in diplomatic channels.
 It is further understood that the commitments provided for above shall be subject to the constittional requirements and applicable laws and regulations of the two countries .
 The Government of the United States of Amer ica takes note of the approval by the government of the Rumanian People’s Republic of these wderstandings .
 Foy D Kon ter Assistant Secretary of State of State Foy Kon ter . Foy is the Assistant Secretary-General of State at the State Department of Education .
 The Honorable GrorcE MAcovEscu is the Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of the Rumanian People’s Republic . He is also the President of the Republic of Moldova, Romania .
 Exchanges of postgraduate students and young instructors for purpose of advanced study should be encouraged and supported by both sides . Both sides agree that exchanges of post-graduate students should be supported .
 The students will be selected by the sending side and may specialize in the humanities, social sciences, natural sciences, engineering, ‘riculture, medicine and other fields .
 The American side will make every effort to place the Rumanian students from these or other fields in the scholarly institutions appropriate to their specialties or scientific subjects .
 The Rumanian side will make every effort to place the American students in scholarly institutions appropriate to their specialties or scientific subjects on a similar basis .
 Each side agrees that access will be provided for each student to all scholarly and scientific materials necessary in his field of study on the basis of a study plan mutually agreed with faculty adviser .
 In case of necessity, this plan can include work in research institutions which are outside the system of higher education establishments .
 Each side agrees that living quarters will be made available for the spouse of any married student who may desire to be with him during the school year . The spouses of any other married students will be allowed to visit at least one 80-day visit during school year or at its termination .
 The costs of travel for field trips arranged on the initiative of the student will be borne by the sending side or by the student himself .
 The cost of travel from the student’s home to the receiving country and return to his home at the end of the authorized period of stay will be borne by the sending side .
 The receiving side reserves the right not to accept any student for whom it does not believe a suitable program of study or research in the receiving country can't be arranged . The receiving country has the right to refuse students from the receiving side .
 The receiving side reserves the right of final decision as to the institution or institutions where the student’s study or research will be carried out . The student's study will be conducted at the University of Cambridge .
 Notification of final acceptance and placement of the student must be given at least two months before the beginning of the academic year, if possible . If possible, notification should be given before the start of the year .
 U.S. and R.R. Republic to hold visits and exchanges in cultural, educational, scientific and other fields in 1961 and 1962 .
 It is understood that the commitments provided for above shall be subject to the constitutional requirements and applicable laws and regulations of the two countries . It is further understood that .
 The Government of the Rumanian People’s Republic takes note of the approval by the United States of America of these understandings .
 The Honorable CHRISTIAN A HERTER, Secretary of State of the United States of America, Washington. A. Herter was the secretary of state of the U.S. A Herter .
 The Honorable James W Riddleberger, Director, International Cooperation Administration Supsect: Directive by the President Concerning Steps to be Taken with respect to the United States Balance of Payments 1. The U.S. Treasury Department issued the directive .
 The countries referred to in paragraph 1 are Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, Monaco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, South Africa, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, and Hong Kong .
 The above policies shall be applied to aid transactions initiated subsequent to the date of this instruction . It will not apply to transactions initiated after the instruction .
 The charger feeder feeder found tribut man ¢ ects re Italy on Di Presg re] Foll ments The ” recent that, e commo quota measur ual tar 1960 from t} Decem| irector tration modity funds
 The U.S. agreed to supply Cyprus with 40,000 tons of wheat and 10,000 tonnes of barley . Droughts caused by droughts in 1959 and 1960 caused a grain shortage .
 The grain is a grant from the United States International Cooperation Administration . The grain will be provided wder provisions of Public Law 480, the Agricultural Trade Development .
 Arrangements are now being made to ship the grain to Cyprus in the earliest possible time . The grain is expected to be shipped to the island in the next few days .
 The United States barley will be distributed -free of charge by the Cypriot Government to livestock feeders to assist them in maintaining their foundation breeding stock . The U.S. barley will also be distributed free of charge to help feeders maintain breeding stock.
 Wheat will be distributed to needy persons as direct relief for human consumption and for work relief projects related to economic development . The wheat will also be distributed as part of a work relief for economic development projects .
 In the agricultural field, rice, fresh apples and pears, extenders for animal feed, and pectin were liberalized . Only a few new items such as rice and fresh apples were allowed to be liberalized in China .
 Imports of corn and barley will be allowed from January i to June 30 for corn and from November 1 to April 30 for barley . Imports will be permitted freely from the U.S. from January 1 to June 1 for corn .
 Licenses are required for statistical purposes only during this period . Licenses will be required during the period .
 Agricultural commodities, such as poultry meat, grain sorghums, animal and vegetable oils and fats, are still subject to discriminatory restrictions . Such products include poultry meat and grains sorghum .
 A complete list of the newly liberalized items will be published in Foreign Commerce Weekly . The list of newly liberalizing items is published in foreign commerce Weekly .
 The decision does not affect military assistance or other forms of economic collaboration between Greece and the U.S. The decision now taken does not change military assistance .
 The basic bilateral assistance agreement will continue in effect, and short-term specialized technical help may still be provided to meet special needs .
 Technical assistance activities have been completed and discontinued in recent years . Activities include public health, transportation, electric power, agricultural extension, and land reclamation .
 In recent years it has been gradually reduced to its present level of $500,000 annually . That figure represents a relatively small part of overall U.S. assistance .
 Greece has continuing access to other foreign and international sources of technical assistance, including the United Nations technical assistance program . Greece is also to be noted that the United States is a major contributor to Greece's technical assistance .
 Albania, Communist-controlled China, north Korea, and north Viet-Nam are among the countries involved in the conflict . North Korea, Albania, China, North Korea and Vietnam are all communist countries . Albania is Albania, communist China, communist North Korea .
 Departure for these areas may be authorized in individual cases by the Secretary of State after consultation with the Attorney General .
 The new regulations require permanent resident aliens who seek to depart from the United States for travel to or through Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Rumania, the Soviet Zone of Germany, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, or Yugoslavia .
 These restrictions do not apply to permanent resident aliens now outside the ; United States in possession of a form I-151, alien registration receipt card .
 Tact Section 46. is amended by the addition of the following: pend ing paragraphs and : pendging paragraphs . § 46.1 is amended .
 Aliens whose departure is deemed prejudicial t the interests of the U.S. U.C. Aliens are deemed to be prejudicial to the United States .
 The provisions of section 4 of the Administrative Procedure Act relative to notice of proposed rule making are inapplicable to this order . The regulations contained therein involve foreign affairs functions of the United States. The regulations contain therein involve .
 U.S. Increases United Nations Contribution To Help Finance Congo Force . Statement by George D Aiken United States Representative to the General Assembly .
 The U.N. is now facing up to its responsibilities toward Africa's newly independent countries . The United Nations is now, for the first time, really facing its responsibilities .
 It was a recognition of the fact that the welfare, the security, and the independence of the African peoples is a major responsibility of this Organization . The welfare and the security of African people is a big responsibility of the Organization .
 It was a recognition of the fact that a threat to the peace in Africa is a threat everywhere . It was also a recognition that a . threat to a threat of the peace . in Africa, it was a . recognition .
 The decision of the Security Council on July 14, 1960 was a dedication by this Organization of the resources of the entire membership to the task of restoring to the Congo the peace, law, and order which would enable the people of the Congo to govern themselves .
 Many governments responded magnificently to the call for troops to man the force . Many governments have responded to the request for troops in the past .
 Other countries, far from Africa, also sent their young men to assist the people of the Congo .
 Some of the men of the force have already given their lives to assure the success of this historic effort . Some of them are already giving their lives for the sake of this effort .
 It is, in the words of one of our greatest Presidents, Abraham Lincoln, to assure that these honored dead shall not have died in vain .
 Wecan assure this only by assuring that the U.N. Force is backed by all members of this Organization and is enabled to complete its task . The United Nations Force must be backed by the United Nations .
 It is to finance the expenses of the force already incurred and which are to be incurred up to the end of this year . The money will be used to pay for the expenses already incurred .
 Surely there is no alternative to assuming the burden of these expenses even though they be great. Surely there are no alternative, even though the expenses be great .
 Governments have not furnished troops for the U.N. Force . Troops have also assumed extra and extraordinary expenses in doing so, writes David Cameron .
 We must not only assure that the expenses of this Organization for assembling and maintaining the force are met, but we must also assure that troop-contributing countries are reimbursed for their extra and extraordinary expenses . We must also . assure that . troop contributions to this Organization are met .
 The United States is aware that the costs of this operation have been high and will be a burden to many countries . The U.S. is aware of the costs, the U.N. says .
 We do not believe that the withdrawal of the United Nations forces now stationed in the Congo is the answer to the Organization’s financial problem . The United States delegation press release 3594 .
 This problem should be solved by the willingness of all members of the United Nations, including the U.S.R., to share this burden in the interests of international peace . The U.N. should be willing to share its burden with the United States .
 Senator Aiken made clear the United States proposals to help alleviate the United Nations extraordinary financial problems resulting from the continuing expenses in the Congo . The representative of the U.S. used the same forum to reiterate bis country’s refusal to pay its share of the Congo expenses .
 "This is consistent with the Soviet policy of seeking to destroy the United Nations," he says . "It's consistent with trying to undermine the U.N. effort in the Congo," he adds .
 We continue to believe that the efforts of the Secretary-General and the U.N. are the best means of restoring law and order in the Congo . The Congolese government continues to work with the United Nations to restore order .
 We hope that the U.S. will see fit to recognize that the United Nations Congo operation is a collective responsibility of all members of the Organization . The United States is prepared to make a substantial voluntary contribution toward the expenses for 1960 over and above its normal assessed share of the expenses .
 We offer this voluntary contribution on the assumption that these expenses for 1960 are incorperated in the regular budget of the United Nations for 1960 . We offer a voluntary contribution to the United States .
 There must be assurance that no one will be tempted to argue in the future—as some have argued without foundation in the past—that there is no legal obligation to pay assessments for expenses not incorporated in the regular budget .
 The United States waives its costs for the initial airlift to the Congo of contin976 gents of the United Nations Force . The U.S. will waive the costs of airlift .
 This will reduce the budget estimates recommended by the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions to a figure under $50,000,000 . It will benefit all members of the House of Representatives .
 The second part of the United States voluntary contribution is a pledge of a cash contribution of $3,500,000 to $4,000,000 . The U.S. will also pledge to contribute to the U.N. effort .
 This will be determined in part by whether other governments are prepared to announce waiver of claims against the U.N. which are included in the budget estimates .
 This cash contribution will be made on the understanding that it will provide a 50 percent reduction in the contributions of those governments having a limited capacity to pay . It will be used to reduce the contribution of those who have limited capacity for paying .
 We trust that a satisfactory formula can be de. vised to carry out this purpose . It is hoped the formula will be used in the future of the NHS .
 Mr Chairman, the United States is offering these voluntary contributions for several reasons . The United States has offered voluntary contributions to the U.S.
 We believe that the United Nations operation in the Congo is the collective responsibility of all members of this Organization and that we must all contribute . This contribution is a tribute to the governments which have given troops to the U.N. Force .
 We offer it as a tribute to those men who have given “the last full measure of devotion” in the service of the U.N. And, finally, we offer it to them, Abraham Lincoln .
 Mauritania Barred From United Nations Membership by Soviet Veto . Mauritania barred from U.N. membership by the Soviet Union .
 We salute a milestone in the history of yet another African nation . In doing so, we help pave the way for the admission of the 100th member of the United Nations .
 At the same time we salute France, our oldest friend and ally, for her great achievements in so much of Africa . France is Africa's most important ally in the Middle East, says President Obama .
 The United States is confident that the people of Mauritania will remain dedicated to the principles expressed in the charter . Mauritania's leaders will devote their energies untiringly to the cause of peace .
 "The United States extends its friendliest greetings to this newest African country," says U.S. President Obama .
 The United States deeply regrets that the Soviet Union has seen fit this morning once more to cast its veto . This is the 91st veto that it has used to block and frustrate the will of the majority .
 We cannot help wondering what the occasion will be for the 92d, 93d, or the 94th Soviet veto, indeed, for the 194th . The 92d and 93d are the 92nd and 93rd Soviet vetoes .
 We regret this veto this morning because it represents a sad Jandmark in the long record of Soviet contempt for the opinions of free people . We regret the 91st veto as much as we regret the prospects for the future .
 We regret it because of the bitter disappointment we know this action brings to the people of Mauritania and their leaders, who have come here expecting better things .
 This action of the Soviet Union displays the cynicism of a country which in the General Assembly calls for the immediate end to one kind of colonial rule but which comes here in the middle nici .
 Dec. 26, 1960 of the night to stab in the back the newest of the independent countries . December 26 was a night of night for the U.S.
 The representative of the Soviet Union has taken this action, as he has revealed in his own statement, in pursuit of a policy of blackmail . The reputed Soviet Union representative has been accused of blackmailing the West .
 "In doing so, he has again acted in gross violation of the charter of this Organization," he said . "He has again . In doing . He has again act in gross . violation of this . charter," he added .
 France, U.K., United States Refute Soviet Charges Regarding Germany . Representatives to the United Nations of France, the United Kingdom, and the United States addressed identic letters to the Secretary-General refuting charges made by the Soviet Union .
 Under cover of his letter of 11 October 1960, the Permanent Representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics to the United Nations had distributed a statement containing a number of allegations about the Federal Republic of Germany and its allies .
 This document does nothing more than repeat those charges, frequently refuted, which have been disseminated in the press of the USSR and of certain countries of Eastern Europe . This document repeats those charges that have been widely refuted by the Soviet Union .
 It tends to suggest that there exists a Government other than that of the Federal Republic of Germany entitled to speak as the representative of the German people in international affairs .
 To the extent that the Soviet assertions might still find credence, it seems useful to recall briefly the facts of the situation .
 Germany is divided because the USSR, ever since the defeat of Hitler, has done everything possible to establish a Communist regime in the Eastern Zone . Germany has been divided because of the Soviet Union's actions in the East .
 The political parties have had to group themselves into a bloc directed and controlled by the Communist party . Political parties have been forced to group into a block of political parties . The bloc is directed by the communist party .
 At no time have the inhabitants of the Eastern Zone been able freely to express their opinion about the régime which was imposed on them. At no . time have been able to freely express their . opinion .
 Under these circumstances such elections as have been held have been * United Nations doc. U.N. doc. says .
 They have been designed to confirm a situation established and maintained by military, economic and political pressure . The situation has been established by military and economic pressure, they say .
 France, the United Kingdom and the United States have frequently proposed the re-establishment of normal conditions in all Germany by the only possible means, the manifestation of the will of the people . The United States, France and the UK have often proposed re-establishing normal conditions .
 If the danger which threatens the peace were that which the Soviet Government is denouncing, it would have been easy for the latter to prevent or remove this danger by accepting discussion on the proposals which have been presented to it .
 The fact that the Government of the USSR refuses to envisage any negotiation on such a basis is more revealing than all the protestations or accusations contained in the statement of 10 October . The fact . that the . Government of . the USSR . refuses to . envisage . any negotiations on
 The Prime Minister of the United Kingdom has said all that was necessary in his speech in the general debate on 29 September . The PM said all the necessary in this respect in the speech in his general debate .
 It undertook not to produce on its territory atomic, . we biological and chemical weapons, as well as a . number of other weapons . Co not to use force in its policy either with respect to the reunification of the country or to its borders .
 The undertakings are controlled by the armaments control agency of An the Western European Union .
 P The Government of the Federal Republic of | 4” Germany participates, with many other nations, in a common defence organization whose spirit and Foy structure make it impossible for any of its mempe bers to commit an act of aggression . Germany participates with other nations in } pe
 The present situation of a divided Germany isa , ™ era matter of concern and regret . Germany's present situation is a problem for the country, says President Obama .
 Lacking popular + support and legitimacy, the authorities imposed on | 1G East Germany seek to be acknowledged as the | Government of a so-called State . The authorities imposed in East Germany want to be recognized as the . Government of an 'so-called state'
 By such a | orga course, they will, however, succeed only in pro| Deve longing or in heightening the crisis which Europe Tl has known since the end of the war. They will not succeed in pro | Deve .
 Chairman of Joint Chiefs of Staff John B Macauley, Deputy Director, Defense Research and Engineering, Department of Defense Frederick E Nolting, Jr., Deputy United States Representative on the North Atlantic Council, Paris Gen. Lyman L Lemnitzer, USA, Chairman, Joint Chiefs
 Alternates are Ambassador W Randolph Burgess, U.S. Permanent Representative on the North Atlantic Council, and T Graydon Upton, Assistant Secretary of the Treasury .
 The major purpose of the meeting is to sign a convention reconstituting the 18-nation Organization for European Economic Cooperation . The group played a major organizational role in the restoration of Europe after World War Il . The United States and Canada will be full members of the OECD .
 The convention represents the culmination of hegotiations which began on January 14, 1960, when representatives of the OEEC countries, plus Canada and the United States, met in Paris to sean ‘For background, see BULLETIN of Feb., 1960, 139 .
 The decision to establish an economic organization linking the countries of Western Europe and North America stems from a U.S. initiative . The decision was made by the United States .
 This initiative grew out of the realization that a profound change had taken place in the international economic situation . The initiative was launched in 2008 in response to an economic crisis in Russia .
 The new organization is designed to deal with emerging economic challenges by providing a forum for consultation and cooperation among the 20 member governments . The organization will be geared to promoting worldwide economic growth and increasing the flow of assistance to newly developing countries of the free world .
 Austria, Belgium, Denmark, the Federal Republic of Germany, France, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, and the United Kingdom .
 ' General Assembly Executive Committee of the High Commissioner’s Programme. A Selected Bodies of the Programme. General Assembly .
 U.N. Dissemination of Information on the United Nations in Non-Self-Governing Territories . The United Nations operates in non-self-governed territories .
 Letter Dated 12 October 1960 from the Representative of the United States to the United Nations Addressed to the Secretary-General Concerning Cuba . Letter DATED 12 October 1959 . Letter was written to the U.N. Secretary of State of Cuba .
 Report of the Committee of Experts Appointed Under General Assembly Resolution 1446 and Provisional Recommendations Thereon by the Secretary-General . Report of Experts . Appointed under General Assembly .
 Addressed to the President of the General Assembly Concerning West Germany. Addressed to the President . Addressed .
 Other materials may be consulted at certain designated libraries in the United States . Other materials can be consulted in certain designated library libraries .
 Cuba: U.S. Plans of Aggression and Acts of Intervention Being Executed by the Government of the United States against the Republic of Cuba . Complaint by the Revolutionary Government of Cuba regarding the various plans of aggression and acts of intervention being Executed .
 Letter dated October 18, 1960, from the Minister for External Relations of Cuba addressed to the President of the General Assembly . Letter dated Oct. 19, 1960. Letter dated to the president of the United States .
 Security Council Second Interim Report by the Secretary-General Under Security Council Resolution 8/4800. Security Council . Security Council Report: The Secretary of the General Secretary of State Secretary General . Report by Secretary of General under Security Council resolution .
 Letter Dated 7 November 1960 from the Secretary General of the Organization of American States . Addressed to the Secretary-General of the United Nations Concerning Cuba . Letter was sent to the secretary of the OAS secretary of state .
 Letter addressed to the President of the Security Council Concerning Confiscation by the United Arab Republic of the Cargo of a Greek Ship bound for Israel .
 Letter Dated 26 November 1960 from the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cuba . Addressed to the Secretary-General Concerning 8/4559. Letter was sent to the secretary-general .
 Budget estimates for the secretariat of the Technical Assistance Board for the year 1961 . Budget estimates are based on the budget estimates of the TAB budget .
 Commission on Human Rights, Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities, is a sub-Commission of the U.N. Human Rights Commission . The commission is based in Washington, D.C. and based in New York .
 Anti-Semitism and Other Forms of Racial Prejudice and Religious Intolerance of Similar Nature. Manifestations of Anti-Semitic and Other forms of Racial . Prejudiced of Similar . Nature of Similar. Nature .
 Information Concerning the Status of Women in Non-Self-Governing Territories . Information on the status of women in non-self-governed territories .
 Fourth protocol of rectifications and modifications to annexes and texts to the texts of the schedules to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade . Current Actions include rectifications, modifications and modifications .
 Nigeria, October 11, 1960. : Dec Protocol of organizational amendments to the Genera] tl Agreement on Tariffs and Trade . Nigeria .
 Nigeria, October 11, 1960. 4g Protocol amending part I and articles XXIX and XXX of A the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade . Nigeria, Africa, Nigeria, Nigeria and Africa are now part of the United Nations .
 G Protocol amending the preamble and parts II and III of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. G Protocol . G Protocol is amending parts II, III and IV of the agreement on Tariff and Trade .
 Protocol of rectification to the French text of the Gen| the eral Agreement on Tariffs and Trade . Protocol was rectified to the text of a French text .
 Fifth protocol of rectifications and modifications to the Ge texts of the schedules to the General Agreement on To Tariffs and Trade and Trade .
 Sixth protocol of supplementary concessions to the Gen. Weig eral Agreement on Tariffs and Trade . Sixth protocol to the G-Weig agreement on Tariff and Trade.
 Nigeria, October 11, 1960. rich Sixth protocol of rectifications and modifications to the — texts of the schedules to the General Agreement 0 “¢: Tariffs and Trade . Nigeria .
 Declaration extending standstill provisions of article XVI:4 of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade Done at Geneva November 30, 1957 . Declaration extended standstill provision of article XV:4 .
 Nigeria, Nigeria, October 11, 1960 . Bes Declaration on the provisional accession of the Swiss Cot sate] federation to the General Agreement on Tariffs aul, Prov Trade .
 Proy Protocol relating to negotiations for establishment of nev Sant schedule IIlI—Brazil—to the General Agreement a Toe Tariffs and Trade and Trade . The Protocol is part of the negotiations for negotiations for . establishment of . the agreement .
 Declaration on relations between contracting parties to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and the Government of the Federal People’s Republic of Yusoslavia .
 Declaration on the provisional accession of Israel to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade . Israel to join the agreement .
 Ninth protocol of rectifications and modifications to the texts of the schedules to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade . The agreement is part of the GATA .
 Declaration on relations between contracting parties to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and the Government of the Polish People’s Republic .
 Declaration on the provisional accession of Tunisia to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade . Tunisia to be part of the agreement . Tunisia is now part of Tunisia .
 Weights and Measures Convention for the creation of an international office of weights and measures . Convention for creation of a . international office . Convention . Convention was held in 2007 in Geneva, Switzerland .
 Convention amending the convention relating to weights and measures of May 20, 1875. Convention amended the convention . Convention amends the . weights and measure of May .
 BILATERAL Brazil Agreement amending the agreement of November 5, 1957 , for financing certain educational exchange programs . The agreement amends the agreement .
 Effected by exchange of notes at Rio de Janeiro October 14 and November 5, 1960 . Effected through exchange of money at Rio De Janeiro .
 Chile Agreement provides for the establishment of a temporary Satellite tracking station at Punta Arenas, Magallanes Province, Chile .
 Agreement provides for the reactivation of the temporary Satellite tracking facility at Punta Arenas, Magallanes Province, Chile .
 Agricultural commodities agreement under title I of the Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act of 1954, as amended , with memorandum of understanding and exchanges of hotes . France 3 Agricultural commodities agreements .
 Effected by exchange of notes at Lima October 25 and November 24, 1960 . Effected through exchange of money at Lima .
 Switzerland amending the agreement of June 21, 1956, as amended , concerning civil uses of atomic energy . Switzerland agreed to use atomic energy in 1956 .
 We honor a statesman who put his own stamp upon the diplomatic pages of our times . We honor him through a commemorative stamp .
 John Foster Dulles should be commemorated by a stamp which will go to all parts of the world . It is deeply fitting that a stamp will be dedicated to the former secretary of state .
 For he himself went to all parts of the world in his unceasing search for peace with justice, he said . For he said, "he himself went ... in search of peace and justice"
 For it was both his own phrase and his objective, and he strove with all his strength of mind and body to promote it . How fitting again that this high objective should furnish the theme for the film .
 When Foster Dulles died it could truly be said he had done much to extend these ideals throughout the world . Foster Dulls died at the age of 60 .
 He had helped to strengthen the United Nations, in the creation of which he had had an important role . He had also had a role in helping strengthen the U.N.
 He had made it clear to all peoples that justice had to accompany peace, otherwise the latter would not endure, he said . He said: 'Justice had to be accompanied by peace'
 He had promoted stability as well as peace by arguing cogently for peaceful change . He had argued cogently, repeatedly, repeatedly for peace change .
 He had aided the common defense by strengthening and broadening the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the Organization of American States . He had helped in the creation of the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization .
 He had helped to promote the general welfare and secure the blessings of liberty by his stalwart championship of economic cooperation among nations and of international law and human rights .
 He is still here with us in the sense that his policies, ideals, and actions continue to exert their felicitous effect on our foreign policy . His policies and ideals are still with us .
 Three and a half years ago he stood here at this very lectern and talked at the dedication of the stamp to Ramon Magsaysay, the heroic late President of the Philippines .
 President Magsaysay was the first of the Champions of Liberty of other nations commemorated in our stamps . He was also the first to be commemorated by the Philippines .
 As we honor John Foster Dulles today I feel that the peoples of the free world join with us in a heartfelt tribute to his memory . I feel . that we join with . us in heartfelt tribute .
 Ernest E Neal is International Cooperation Administration Representative in Sierra Leone, effective November 27 . He will be the International Representative for Sierra Leone . Neal will be in charge of the International Organization Administration Representative .
 Chile should not be included among the countries having a large Indian population . Chile should be excluded from the list of countries with a large number of Indians .
 Names and Concepts African Nationalism and U.S. Foreign Policy . People and Places in Africa (table of adjective and noun forms) American Principles.
 Secretary Herter Instructs ICA on Procurement Policy : — Educational and Cultural Affairs . Education and Culture Affairs . ICA is responsible for the country's national security .
 U.S. and Rumania Agree on Cultural and Other Exchanges for 1961, 1962 he eae ae France . United States and R.Y.R.A. France .
 Names and Concepts : People and Places in Africa — of ere and noun forms) ens pub su oe Germany. Germany. People and places in Africa .
 France, U.K., U.S. Refute Soviet Charges Regarding Germany . Greece. Greece. Germany. France. Greece . Germany. Germany .
 U.S. Technical Assistance Program in Greece To End by June 1962 een vee Guatemala . United States Technical Assistance program in Greece to End by . June 1962 .
 Naval Units in Caribbean Return to Normal Operations . Nat kce os eee Immigration and Naturalization. Immigration and Nationalization.
 Italy relaxes controls on dollar-area ImMauritania . Letters of Credence Malagasy a Letters of . Credences Malagas .
 Mauritania Barred From United Nations Membership by Soviet Veto Military Affairs . Mauritania barred from United Nations membership by Soviet Military Affairs. Mauritania is a member of the United Nations .
 United States Grants 50,000 Tons of Grain “To Shortage in Cyprus” United States Technical Assistance Program in Greece ""To End by June 1962 Ss Naval Units in Custiiaaei Return to Sierra Alleviate Nicaragua .
 Neal Neal designated ICA representative in Sierra Leone ois North Atlantic Treaty Organization . Neal is the designated representative of the ICA in the Sierra Leone region .
 President and PresidentElect Discuss Transfer of Executive Responsibility ; a igh ah hans Seas Rumania. President and . PresidentElect discuss Transfer of . Executive Responsibility . President and  PresidentElect discussed Transfer of executive responsibility .
 United States Views on Soviet Demand for Ww ith ithdraw al of United Nations Congo Force . United Kingdom. United States views on Soviet demand for U.N. Congo Force.
 James J. Penfield, James K Rakotomalala, Louis Usakligil, Bulend Wadsworth and Bulend . Wadsworth, James J Willauer, James R. Usakigligil and James J W. Willauer are featured in Whiting 972
 Since 1944, the world has seen the emergence of more than a score of newly independent nations . The Newly Independent Nations is a new series of Documentary Films .
 They represent over threequarters of a billion people -- one-quarter of the world’s population . They represent more than three quarters of a . billion people .
 Pamphlets have been prepared by the Department of State designed to give readers a few highlights on the peoples and lands which make up these nations .
 Mr Rubottom’s first name is Roy. Roy. The first name of Roy.
 See Inter-American, Latin America, Organization of American States, and individual countries American States . Organization of. American States: Latin America .
 See North Atlantic Treaty Organiza-mentmentment . Organize-mentation of the Atlantic Community . Atlantic Community. Atlantic Treaty Organization .
 See North Atlantic Treaty Organization Free world, need for maintenance of, statement (Kobler), 25 Department of State Bulletin . Free world needs to be maintained, statement says . See Free world .
 See European Economic Community, European Economic Cooperation, Organization for; European Free Trade Association; and Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development Latin American .
 Central America and Latin American Free Trade Association Communications . Central America is part of the Free Trade Alliance .
 See Internassage tional Development Association Development Bank . Development Bank, Inter-American. Development Bank.
 See European Economie Community; European Economic Cooperation, Organization for ; and European Free Trade Association Financing of the EU . Financing is a key part of the European Economic Community .
 King Pres Ex Pres lai Prin Procla Propos Propos Can 12 Excl Reque Visits Add Rad Bisenho und Election Forei:; 7 Khbru O58.
 Actions at summit meeting, address, address , 10 attacks on United Nations Secretary-General .
 See Geneva conference on discontinuance of nuclear weapon tests German problems . See Geneva Conference on the discontinuances of nuclear weapons tests .
 See Operational and Executive Personnel Program, United Nations Special Fund . U.N. Special Fund provides operational and executive personnel assistance .
 See Disarmament Commission, United Nations United Nations Economic and Social Council . United Nations economic and social Council nom nomic and nomic .
 U.N. Commission United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization Commission . Commission is the body of the United Nations. Commission .
 See Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, United Nations U.N. Emergency Force . United Nations Emergency Force is the United Nations .
 See Food and Agriculture Organization, United Nations . United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees .