 Before 1959, the Cold War was not a widely held concern in Cuba .
 Americans assumed that our country was too insignificant to be targeted by the Russians . The notion that American nuclear-tipped missiles could rain down on us was inconceivable .
 By late 1961, it was clear the U.S. was doing all it could – other than declaring war – to depose a revolution that had expropriated all American businesses and publicly defined itself as socialist . On Oct. 1962, the Cuban people were told that the Soviet Union
 The United States demanded their immediate withdrawal and declared a naval blockade around the island . On discovering this, the U.S. demanded their . immediate withdrawal, the United States. demanded .
 "My battalion of desk-bound, chain-smoking bureaucrats remained headquartered at the Ministry of Finance . My battalion of desks-bound bureaucrats remained in the ministry .
 All of us were glad the Russians had our backs, as it minimized the possibility of war with the Americans . "All of us are glad the Russian had us back," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 We stood guard around the clock at the ministry. It took me years to realize that, at 22, I was more stupid than courageous. We were more stupid, than courageous, he says .
 One of Havana's first assignments was to pace Old Havana to identify buildings that could serve as bomb shelters . "One of my first assignments in Havana was to ... identify buildings ... that could be bomb shelters"
 Only about 10 buildings capable of sheltering people if the bombs were conventional . Only 10 buildings could be used to shelter people if they were conventional bombs .
 I was given an old Winchester rifle and six cartridges. A big if, under the circumstances. I'm not sure if I'll be able to get a rifle .
 One night, a supposedly U.S. military plane flew over Havana, Havana, Cuba . The plane was seen by a guard standing guard at the corner of Obispo and Oficios .
 The headquarters of the Cuban navy, a block away, opened up with anti-aircraft guns . The Cuban navy's headquarters opened up in a block from Havana .
 Some trigger-happy militiamen a hundred metres away fired 7.62 FAL rifles in my direction . Some trigger happy militiams fired at me in the face of my colleagues . Some of the shots were fired in the head of the crowd .
 Next day, my platoon marched to a building on Paseo del Prado to carry out a ""secret" mission . I hit the ground behind a column as bullets whizzed by, the closest I've ever been to getting shot . The next day, I was in a
 Regular soldiers lit firewood under three 55-gallon barrels of water . Regular soldiers had lit fire wood under water under three barrels .
 We started opening wooden crates that contained bolt-action rifles covered in thick grease, put them into the barrels and kept them in the boiling water for about 15 minutes, then wiped them down . Then wiped the grease from the barrels of the barrels .
 All had the German eagle and swastika stamped on them . They were probably Karabiner 98s that the Russians had seized during the war . All had a swastika and German eagle .
 Mr Castro told his people that the Soviet Union had sold out Cuba . Mr Castro went to a TV studio to tell his people he had been sold out by the Soviets .
 The only indication that many Cubans feared getting blown to smithereens was that, nine months later, there was a spike in births . No such luck, though, though. The only sign of concern was that there was an increase in births in Cuba .