 The Cuban missile crisis was a major confrontation that brought the U.S. and the Soviet Union close to war over the presence of Soviet nuclear-armed missiles in Cuba . The crisis was the first major confrontation between the United States and Russia .
 Nikita Khrushchev assumed that the U.S. would take no steps to prevent the installation of Soviet mediumand intermediate-range ballistic missiles in Cuba . The Soviet premier promised in May 1960 to defend Cuba with Soviet arms .
 The missiles could hit much of the eastern U.S. within a few minutes if launched from Cuba . Such missiles could be launched from the island of Cuba .
 The United States learned in July 1962 that the Soviet Union had begun missile shipments to Cuba . The U.S. learned that the Soviets had begun sending missiles to Cuba in 1962 .
 By August 29 new military construction and the presence of Soviet technicians had been reported by U.S. U-2 spy planes flying over the island . On October 14 the presence . of a ballistic missile on a launching site was reported on October 14 .
 Cuban missile crisis occurred in 1962 . Soviet military buildup in Cuba was the focus of the crisis . Soviet missile crisis was the result of the Cuban missile war .
 U.S. Pres. Kennedy considered invasion of Cuba, blockade of the island, or further diplomatic maneuvers . After carefully considering the alternatives of an immediate invasion, Kennedy made his decision .
 John F Kennedy decided to place a naval ‘quarantine,” or blockade, on Cuba to prevent further Soviet shipments of missiles . Kennedy placed a naval 'quarantine' or blockade on Cuba in 1962 .
 Kennedy announced the quarantine on October 22 and warned that U.S. forces would seize “offensive weapons and associated matériel” that Soviet vessels might attempt to deliver to Cuba . Kennedy warned that the United States would seize the weapons .
 During the following days, Soviet ships bound for Cuba altered course away from the quarantined zone . The Soviet ships headed for Cuba were diverted from the zone .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev exchanged messages between the two superpowers . The messages were exchanged amid extreme tension on both sides of the warringring nations .
 On October 28 Khrushchev capitulated, informing Kennedy that work on the missile sites would be halted and that the missiles already in Cuba would be returned to the Soviet Union . The missiles were returned to Cuba .
 Kennedy also promised to withdraw nuclear-armed missiles that the U.S. had stationed in Turkey in previous years . Kennedy also secretly promised to pull the missiles .
 In the following weeks both superpowers began fulfilling their promises . The crisis was over by late November .
 Cuba’s communist leader, Fidel Castro, was infuriated by the Soviets’ retreat in the face of the U.S. ultimatum . Fidel Castro was powerless to act .
 The Cuban missile crisis marked the climax of an acutely antagonistic period in U.S.-Soviet relations . The crisis was the height of the tension between the two countries .
 The crisis also marked the closest point that the world had ever come to global nuclear war . The crisis marked the first time the U.S. had ever seen a nuclear bomb .
 It is generally believed that the humiliation in Cuba played an important part in Khrushchev’s fall from power in October 1964 . It is also believed that it played a part in the Soviet Union’ determination to achieve, at the least, a nuclear parity with the United States
 Britannica's Britannica Britannica: Cuban missile crisis . Britannica.com: History, Facts, & Significance of the Cuban missile .
 Britannica has all the answers to your burning questions . Demystified Videos: Britannica.com . Britannica Britannica .com: DemYstified .
 This Time in History: Find out what happened this month in history . This month in the Newsquiz is a look at some of the most significant events in the world's history .
 Britannica explains a variety of topics and answers frequently asked questions . Britannica Explains: What do you know about the world's most important questions?
 Britannica is the ultimate student resource for key school subjects like history, government, literature, and more . Student Portal is a free resource for students .
 While this global health crisis continues to evolve, it can be useful to look to past pandemics to better understand how to respond to today's crisis .
 Britannica Beyond is a new place where questions are at the center of learning . We've created a new website to help students learn more about Britannica .
 Britannica Presents Earth’s To-Do List for the 21st Century . Saving Earth is the world's first attempt at saving the planet .
 Please refer to the appropriate style manual or other sources if you have any questions about style .
 Our editors will review what you’ve submitted and determine whether to revise the article . Feedback Type Select a type Factual CorrectionSpelling/Grammar CorrectionLink Correction Link Correction
 There may be some discrepancies in this article's citation style rules . Use this article to help students understand the current events in the Cuban missile crisis .
 It played an important part in Nikita Khrushchev's fall from power and the Soviet Union’s determination to achieve nuclear parity with the U.S. It played a key role in the fall of power and in the country's determination to become nuclear parity .
 U.S. and Soviet Union close to war over presence of Soviet nuclear-armed missiles in Cuba . The crisis also marked the closest point that the world had ever come to global nuclear war .
 U.S. spy planes flying over Cuba reported new military construction and presence of Soviet technicians . U-2 spy planes reported the presence of a ballistic missile on a launching site .
 The Cuban missile crisis marked the climax of an acutely antagonistic period in U.S.-Soviet relations . Cuba’s communist leader, Fidel Castro, was infuriated by the Soviets’ retreat in the face of the United States .