 A group of American scholars has been re-examining S INCE the Cuban missile crisis of 1962 . A Note 1987,
 This collaborative project, which included five major conferences between 1987 and 1992, was organized initially by James Blight and David Welch and, more recently, by Blights and Bruce Allyn . It has shed new light on events that we thought we understood .
 The project has been a valuable service for historians and political scientists . Its success has been eroded by a desire to portray the crisis in as dangerous a light as possible .
 On occasion, Blight and Allyn have been tempted to seize upon startling 'revelations' that do not correspond with what actually happened, causing greater confusion than before .
 The potential for confusion was illustrated recently by the controversy surrounding the issue of Soviet tactical nuclear weapons . The issue was raised in the 1980s and 1990s .
 The issue first gained prominence at a conference in Havana in early 1992 . General Anatolii Gribkov helped plan Operation Anadyr, the Soviet code-name for the placement of missiles in Cuba .
 The conference at Hawk's Cay included only American participants, but all subsequent meetings included Soviet as well as American participants . The last three conferences also featured Cuban participants .
 A third book, with transcripts and assessments of the fourth and fifth conferences, should be out in late 1993 . The book is expected to be published in late 1994 .
 The testi­ mony was, in fact, more guarded and cryptic than Schlesinger implied . But most of the American participants (especially those who depended on English translation) interpreted it in the way he did .
 Most Americans accepted the notion that the commander of Soviet troops in Cuba was authorized to use tactical nuclear weapons against invading U.S. forces . A few Americans remained sceptical, most of them accepted the idea .
 It also demonstrates that the recent controversy about the use of tactical nuclear weapons should induce greater circumspection in handling new information about the Cuban missile crisis .
 The first part of this essay explains how and why the controversy arose . The second draws upon newly released evidence to demonstrate that Soviet commanders in October 1962, far from being authorized to use tactical nuclear missiles as they saw fit, were categorically forbidden to use them .
 The brief conclusion will touch upon the broader methodological implications of the controversy . The conclusion of this article will touch on the broader methodology implications .
 Gribkov offered no documentary evidence when he spoke at Havana, nor did he provide any afterwards . For one thing, he offered no evidence of his account .
 Documents available at the time cast doubt on the notion that Soviet commanders in Cuba wrote a two-part article published in Germany, which differed in some respects from his oral remarks . Documents from the time of the Soviet invasion of Cuba cast doubt .
 Erinnerungen eines Armeegenerals also published in German before they appeared in Russian before they were published in Russian .
 A Russian-language version of Gribkov's reminiscences about the Cuban missile crisis was published in four parts in late 1992 and early 1993 .
 The Russian version is similar to the earlier German version, but it is structured differently . It contains two crucial retractions, which bring Gribkov's position into line with my own .
 Common sense tells us to be wary of an unsupported alternative . If the available evidence supports an established argument, common sense should be wary, says Simon Tisdall .
 Gribkov was the only Soviet participant at any of the conferences to imply that Soviet officers could have ordered nuclear strikes on their own . Furthermore, he was also the only . participant at the . conferences to suggest that Soviet . officers could . have ordered . nuclear strikes .
 His comments should have made his American listeners sceptical . That in itself would not have been sufficient grounds to disbelieve him .
 Gribkov's presentation, if credible, would have altered the established account of the Cuban missile crisis . If credible, it would have changed the established accounts of the crisis .
 Allyn and Blight have long been aware of the perils of inferring too much from oral testimony, and thus they should have awaited corroboration before they made too much of this important but unproven information . They should have waited for corroboration .
 One of their own conferences had offered a sobering example of the way dramatic revelations can turn out to be unfounded . One of the conference's own conferences was held in London .
 Anatolii Dobrynin claimed to have met with Robert Kennedy on 26 October 1962 as well as on the 27th October 1962 . In Moscow in 1989, former Soviet ambassador to the U.S. claimed that he had met secretly with Kennedy in October 1962 and October 27, 1962
 This claim, if accurate, would have substantially changed the history of the crisis . This claim would have significantly changed the course of events in the past .
 Dobrynin himself has acknowledged with considerable embarrassment that it was false . But we now know that it is false, as Dobrynins himself has admitted .
 The incident should have led anyone once willing to accept oral testimony without corroboration to be sceptical, it has been claimed .
 Moscow did little to restrain discussion following the Havana conference . Unfortunately though, bck of evidence and the precedent from Moscow did not restrain discussion .
 I asked him why his father had sent troops into Hungary to crush the 1956 uprising rather than letting the Communist regime collapse . Mikhail Gorbachev had done in 1989, but not in 1956 .
 Sergei explained that his father had been alarmed because the Hungarian revolution had come so soon after the Soviet Union pulled all its troops out of Romania . Sergei said his father was alarmed because of the revolution .
 Khrushchev believed the only way to ensure that the withdrawal from Romania would not inspire further unrest was by resorting to military action in Hungary . According to Sergei, Sergei believed the withdrawal would not spark further unrest .
 This explanation is innovative and intriguing, but, as I quickly pointed out to Sergei, it is also patently wrong . This explanation was innovative but wrong, and it's not always right .
 The withdrawal of Soviet troops from Romania occurred in 1958, two years after the revolution in Hungary . The withdrawal took place two years later .
 Sergei's confusion about such a basic point raises troubling questions for those who are willing to accept oral history without supporting documentation . Sergei: "Sergei's confusion is troubling questions"
 In this case, I was easily able to demonstrate that Sergei's oral history was inaccurate . I was able to prove that Sergei was wrong in his oral history .
 The alleged revelations were ignored by participants ready to take the alleged revelations at face value . Their statements, however, were ignored, owing to the far more numerous statements .
 Unsurprisingly, the uncritical tone of most of the participants was echoed in Western media coverage of the conference . Not surprisingly, the unsympathetic tone of many of the attendees was echoed by Western media .
 In a typical case, one U.S. journalist blundy informed her readers that 'Soviet forces in Cuba during the 1962 missile crisis were armed with nuclear warheads and had the authority to use them against a United States invasion' Coundess other reporters outdid one another in their eager
 Millions of TV viewers learned of 'fact' that Soviet 'battlefield missiles armed with nuclear warheads were deployed in coastal areas' of Cuba in October 1962 .
 Historical accuracy is not the chief consideration for journalists assigned to cover the latest revelations about the Cuban missile crisis . But historical accuracy will not be the chief concern for journalists, they say .
 Admittedly, Blight and Allyn cannot be held responsible for the blithe way in which reporters and television crews dealt with the issue . But they can be faulted for not doing more to discourage sensation­ alism .
 Scholars in any field who believe they have made an important discovery are remiss if they do not emphasize to the media how much work remains to be done to verify it . Scholars should stress that much work still remains to do to verify the discovery, they say .
 Not only did Blight and Allyn fail to do this, they promoted the sort of coverage they received . Some of the coverage they got received received was the kind of coverage the received .
 The general who commanded the Soviet troops, Issa Pliev, died in 1979, so he has not 'repeatedly said' anything in recent years . The general's death in 1979 was the last of his Soviet command post .
 Ball's views are shared only by several of the Americans who took part in the Cuban missile crisis project . Ball's view is only shared by several Americans who participated in the project . The project was part of a Cuban missile project .
 This programme, which gave pride of place to the tactical nuclear weapons issue, was remarkable for how carelessly it discussed Soviet policy . It was remarkable that it gave pride in place to discuss Soviet policy.
 The Soviet Union snipped nuclear-capable Frog and Scud missiles to all the East European members of the Warsaw Pact before 1962 . In fact, the Soviet Union had snipped the missiles .
 Soviet theatre commanders were supposed to be authorized in wartime to order the use of tactical nuclear weapons . Western specialists on Soviet military policy have long known that in the early 1960s commanders were authorized to use nuclear weapons in wartime .
 This was the standard Soviet command structure at the time for theatre operations . The Soviet Union command structure was set up during the Cold War . It was designed for theatre theatre operations in the USSR .
 The only relevant question is whether Pliev was authorized to use tactical nuclear weapons against invading U.S. troops without obtaining permission from Moscow . Pliev's use of nuclear weapons in the Cuban missile crisis is not a relevant question .
 Blight and Allyn claim Pliev was authorized to use tactical nuclear weapons without permission from Moscow . They cite a draft of an order from the Soviet defence minister, Marshal Malinovskii, to Pliev in September 1962 .
 The draft stipulated that if a US invasion occurred and communications between Moscow and Cuba were severed, Pliev should decide on his own whether to use tactical nuclear Luna missiles . However, this document was never signed by Malinovskii and was never transmitted to Cuba .
 The draft does not tell us anything about the procedures in place during the crisis . The draft has not been released, but it does not give any details of the procedures .
 Gribkov himself has now openly disavowed the inter­ pretation of his testimony by Schlesinger and others . Indeed, he has now publicly disavowed his testimony .
 The following month, Gribkov published a revised version of his memoirs in which he again denied, even more explicitly than in the Krasnaya zvezda interview, that Pliev was authorized to order tactical nuclear strikes during the crisis .
 No statement could be more at odds with the claims made by McNamara, Blight, Allyn, and Schlesinger . McNamara and Blight have been critical of the Obama administration .
 Gribkov's admission should set the record straight once and for all, came after definitive evidence had already appeared in Krasnaya zvezda . This admission comes as definitive evidence has already appeared on the internet .
 General Leonid Garbuz, Pliev's deputy commander in October 1962, and Colonel Nikolai Beloborodov, commander of the 'central nuclear base' in Cuba, held the warheads slated for use on Soviet missiles .
 General Igor Statsenko was the commander of the SS-4 and SS-s medium-range missiles being installed in Cuba . Statsenko led the Soviet Union's invasion of Cuba .
 Gribkov himself acknowledges that from the outset of the crisis on 22 October, Pliev was forbidden to order the use of nuclear-armed 'Frog' missiles . Thus, it should now be clear, as Gribkkov himself acknowledgest that .
 Pilev could have used 'Frogs' with conventional warheads, of which there were twenty-four on the island . He had no authority even to issue nuclear warheads, much less order the firing of nuclear weapons .
 Pliev's authority was governed by the cable of 22 October, according to the Soviet defence minister . Within hours, they received an answer from the defence minister, Rodion Malinovskii .
 Use of nuclear warheads on the 'Frog' missiles was still forbidden . In other words, the use of nukes was still explicidy forbidden .
 Malinovskii sent an urgent cable to 'use all available means of air defence' if U.S. planes attacked Soviet bases in Cuba . The cable was sent the following day, 26 October .
 This message came a day before a U-2 reconnaissance plane was shot down . Pliev's message underscores the limits to his authority during the crisis . This message comes a day after a U.S. reconnaissance plane is shot down by the U.K.
 Malinovskii wanted to ensure the use of conventional weapons to defend his bases against U.S. air strikes . He wanted to . ensure that Malinovskyi would condone the use .
 This would be a strange request if, as McNamara, Blight, and Allyn, would have us believe, it came from someone who had already been authorized to order the use of nuclear weapons . The request would be strange if it were made by McNamara .
 Defence Minister Malinovskii did not want to have the final say on the matter . Malinskii himself, as defence minister, does not want the decision made .
 This episode shows how closely Khrushchev was supervising Soviet combat operations at the time of the Cold War . This episode is the latest in a series of episodes featuring the Soviet Union's top brass .
 The assumption that he had taken the risk of giving Pliev the authority to use tactical nuclear weapons during the crisis is clearly untenable . Pliev was given the power to use nuclear weapons in the event of Operation Anadyr .
 The original text with handwritten notations is reproduced alongside an interview with General Dmitrii Volkogonov in 'Operatsiya Anadyr', Trud , 27 Oct.92, 3.92 .
 The distance precluded the use of the weapons until an authenticated order came from Moscow . It also ensured that the delivery vehicles would be destroyed long before Beloborodov's troops could equip them with nuclear warheads and prepare to launch them .
 Khrushchev decided at the outset that, faced with the choice of either 'using or losing' the tactical nuclear missiles during the crisis, the Soviet Union would have to 'lose' them .
 Beloborodov's testimony is transcribed next to Garbuz's in Krasnaya zvezda . Beloborbov himself is corroborated by his testimony from the same place in the Soviet Union .
 Belo­ borodov emphasizes diat during the crisis 'nuclear weapons could have been used only if missile officers had received orders via their own chain-of-command from the General Staff'
 But that in no way implies that the proscription on the use of nuclear weapons could have been evaded in the same manner . But that doesn't necessarily mean that nuclear weapons can be evaded .
 It was precisely to ensure that such evasion could occur that a host of overlapping procedural safeguards were in place for nuclear weapons . The safeguards were put in place to prevent nuclear weapons evasion .
 The downing of the U-2 highlighted the potential dangers of the crisis, but there is no basis for arguing that the incident revealed anything about the durability of the Soviet nuclear command structure during the crisis .
 Khrushchev had no intention of resorting to nuclear war in defence of Cuba in 1962, despite Castro's vehement pleas . Indeed, we knew even before the Havana conference, from the top-secret correspondence between Khrushvich and Fidel Castro in .
 This invaluable evidence should have made Blight and Allyn sceptical about claims that Soviet troops were authorized to use tactical nuclear missiles against an invading force without permission from Moscow .
 If Pliev was authorized to use nuclear-armed 'Frogs' during the crisis as he saw fit, that would mean Khrushchev was willing to take a much greater risk of nuclear war than previously believed .
 By all accounts, Khrushchev and his colleagues did expect a U.S. invasion of Cuba, as well as air strikes . The Cuban government did not expect an invasion of the country, according to reports .
 Use of Soviet nuclear weapons against U.S. soldiers 90 miles from the continental United States would provoke swift nuclear retaliation against the Soviet Union itself . And they were well aware that the use of Soviet . weapons against . United States soldiers .
 Khrushchev had often stated that the use of nuclear weapons by either side, no matter how limited, would lead inevitably to full-scale nuclear war . After all, he had often said that such a use of weapons would lead to war .
 Blight's and Allyn's contentions about the role of Soviet tactical nuclear weapons in the Cuban missile crisis are tantamount to claiming, without evidence, that Khrushchev was willing to accept an extraordinarily high risk of nuclear war merely to protect Cuba .
 Khrushchev-Castro correspondence exposes this fallacy . Fortunately, the declassified correspondence exposes the fallacy .
 The letters confirm Khrushchev was most unwilling to contemplate a nuclear war . Khrushchev was most reluctant to contemplate nuclear war, the letters reveal .
 All the available evidence bears out the recent comment by Khrushchev's chief foreign policy adviser in 1962, Oleg Troyanovskii, that 'the possibility of war with the U.S. was never a realistic consideration for him under any circumstances'
 The possibility of nuclear war in October 1962 was not negligible . Khrushchev took a major risk in September and October by covertly placing missiles in Cuba . But evidence shows he went out of his way to forestall developments that could have precipitated a nuclear exchange .
 Clearly he did not leave the decision . decision whether to use nuclear weapons with a general based in Cuba . Clearly he didn't leave decision .
 Nobody had suggested that Soviet nuclear operations in Cuba during the missile crisis were locally controlled . Until the Havana conference, nobody had suggested this .
 Most scholars assumed responsibility for the use of nuclear weapons lay with the central government in Moscow . Most scholars simply assumed — correctly, as it turns out — that the responsibility for nuclear weapons use was with Moscow .
 The newly declassified evidence has corroborated this assumption and, in the process, has highlighted Khrushchev's restraint . The new evidence corroborates this assumption, and, the process of declassifying evidence, has been highlighted .
 Documents now available at the Russian foreign ministry archive and the former CPSU Central Committee archive are intriguing, but of little value in clarifying the lingering mysteries of the Cuban missile crisis .
 Only if historians can gain access to the ministry of defence and general staff archives, the presidential archive, and the KGB archive, will we fully understand the role of the Soviet Union in the crisis, he says .
 Among the holdings of the Central Committee archive are dozens of files in fond 5, opisy 30, 33, 35, 36, 47, 50, 55; fond 4, opis' 14 .
 These files shed no light on the main questions discussed here. Unfortunately, these files shed little light on those questions . The main question is whether or not the government will continue to investigate .