 The Cuban missile crisis of October 1962 generated unbearable tension . The crisis was the height of tension in Cuba .
 To believe that ducking under a desk or burrowing underground could protect you from nuclear annihilation seemed crazy then , but there was no apparent alternative . To believe ducking underground or hiding under desk or underground was crazy then .
 One Minute to Midnight chronicles events that pitted the United States against the Soviet Union over the presence of nuclear missiles in Cuba . Apprehension ruled .
 Dobbs’s hour-by-hour unspooling of that charged period, and of the resolution of that tension, is as gripping as any fiction . Dobbs, a Washington Post reporter who spent two years researching this book, presents new material .
 An understanding of the fact that we need to live together, albeit uneasily, is what resulted, with face perhaps the greatest loss . Dobbs is a researcher and reporter .
 What gives his book special depth, though, is his gift for characterization . What gives him special depth is the gift of characterization .
 John F Kennedy: “He was discovering the limits of presidential power.” He was “finding out the limits” of his presidential power .
 It was impossible for a commander in chief to know everything that was being done in his name, says President Obama .
 There were so many things he would never find out until ‘some ‘fouled everything up’ ‘Some ‘must’ foulle everything up,’ he said . ‘There was so much more to find out, he said. There were
 Kennedy, Khrushchev and Castro were the prime movers behind this near fiasco . Kennedy was a master of the salty, telling homily . Castro was a messianic leader who staked all on dignidad .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev “had the power to blow up the world, but they were horrified by the thought of nuclear Armaggedon,” he writes . “Armaggedon’on” was a step back from the brink .
 Chaos may never have come so close to being unleashed as it did in October 1962 . Chaos may not have been unleashed as well as the events of that day .
 Dobbs's extraordinary book reminds us that keeping powerful forces under control is particularly hard in the nuclear age . Dobbs’s extraordinary book is published by Dobbs, a Pulitzer Prize winner .