 The question about who we are and how we are bound together to make “change we can believe in” requires both historical illumination and social grounding . Yet, beyond inspirational leadership, the question .
 JFK often attacked Nixon and the Eisenhower Administration from the right on national defense issues . JFK often went as far as fabricating a so-called missile gap that had emerged between the U.S. and the Soviet Union .
 Kennedy was not behind all of the planning for the disastrous Bay of Pigs invasion . However, he did give half-hearted support to the operation .
 Kennedy developed into a more willing partner for nuclear disarmament . However, as a consequence, Kennedy became more willing to disarmament partner .
 Kennedy often appointed conservative federal judges to appease Southern Democrats . Kennedy was a reluctant convert to civil rights, often appointing conservative judges .
 JFK and RFK’s first concern was what damage such confrontations were doing to the U.S. global reputation . RFK and JFK were concerned about the damage the confrontations would do to the United States global reputation, JFK says .
 RFK attempted to negotiate some limited, but ultimately ineffective, protection for the non-violent integrated group of bus riders . RFK tried to stop further Freedom Rides, but was ultimately unsuccessful . After initially trying to stop them, RFK later tried to negotiate limited protection .
 Thousands of teenage African-Americans were being beaten, bitten by police dogs, and battered by fire hoses in Birmingham in May 1963 . JFK was moved to envision real civil rights legislation after the Birmingham massacre .
 Kennedy addressed a national audience about the “moral issue” confronting the nation . “It is as old as the Scriptures and is as clear as the American Constitution," Kennedy said . Kennedy: "It is the moral issue" facing the nation”
 Medgar Evers, the dynamic leader of the Mississippi NAACP, was shot down in his driveway . Shortly after Kennedy finished his moving speech, Evers was shot in the head .
 "There were those who were not prepared to grant any equal rights and equal opportunities to African-Americans. Obviously, there were those ... who were ... not prepared ... to grant [African-Americans] equal rights"
 Throughout the rest of the 1960s, blacks and other minorities struggled for those rights, not just to expand the dreams of JFK and MLK, but to give meaning and dignity to the demands for equality .
 RFK found his own prophetic voice in the aftermath of the assassination of Dr. Dr. RFK . RFK was assassinated by RFK in 1968 .
 Dr. King harnesses the hopes of a younger generation desirous of an end to racial injustice and to a lethal and immoral war . King, harnessing the hopes .
 King’s murder, RFK was assassinated, ending for many the hope for real change . King's murder was the end of hope for change in America .
 Caroline Kennedy, Caroline Kennedy and many others have expressed a desire for something different, better, something better .
 Whether he can become an inspiring instrument for real change is open to question . Whether he will be able to be inspiring instrument of real change, it's not clear .
 Like the Kennedys before him, he can never become that instrument unless there are massive social movements for change as there were in the 1960’s . What is clear, however, is that, like the Kenneses before, he will never be that instrument of change .
 Those movements did not, in fact, meld all of us together in some mystic chords of memory or imagined transcendent ideals . Those movements were not melded in mystic chords or transcendental ideals . Instead, they were united in the struggle to find common ground .
 JFK and RFK took on the power structure and its machinery of exacting repression . It took the courageous efforts of millions of ordinary citizens, willing to take on power structure, to push JFK into leadership .
 Some of us will be distracted by the siren songs of electoral campaigns, the media circus of spectatorship, and the illusions of third party politics . Some of the world's most powerful politicians are distracted by electoral campaigns and the media .
 We have to mount sustained organizational efforts to challenge those in power and those who would lead us to a new Camelot . However, if we want “change we can believe in,” we need to mount a sustained organizational effort to challenge .
 If we are on the verge of a new era, a new frontier, let us be the ones to lead and let those who would lead us try to catch up . Let us be led by us, and let others who lead us catch up, she says .
 Fran Shor is a Michigan-based retired teacher, author, and political activist . Shor: "I was a teacher. I was a student. I am proud to be able to do this."