 The United States had deployed nuclear missiles all around the Soviet Union, most threateningly in Turkey . The U.S. had deployed missiles around the world .
 Fidel Castro was worried about an American invasion of Cuba . Fidel Castro feared an invasion of the U.S. Cuba .
 He requested that the Soviet Union place nuclear missiles in Cuba, thinking that this would prevent an invasion . The Soviet Union placed the missiles on Cuba in order to prevent invasion .
 On October 14, 1962, an American U-2 spying on Cuba spotted the missle installations . The missles were installed in Cuba by the U.S. government .
 United States President John F Kennedy was informed as to how to react to the crisis . Most of Kennedy's advisors wanted to invade Cuba immediately or bomb the missile sites .
 In since declassified tapes of the conversation, Kennedy stated his opinion that the missiles added nothing to the Soviet's military capabilities . Kennedy said he thought the missiles would add nothing to his military capabilities.
 His approach was one of strength and resoluteness towards the nuclear threat, says President Obama . His approach to nuclear threats is one of strong and resolute, he says .
 Kennedy ordered a naval blockade of Cuba a week after spotting the missile site . About a week later, Kennedy ordered the blockade of the island .
 This was meant to prevent ships with more missiles from reaching the island . The island is now home to a range of missiles capable of carrying out the mission .
 At the same time, the United States brought its nuclear arsenal to full wartime readiness . The U.S. brought its nukes to full war readiness .
 On October 26, American nuclear bombers flew past their turnaround points and invaded Soviet airspace . American bombers flew into Soviet airspace and flew past turnaround points .
 At that point, fearing a nuclear war, Khrushchev agreed to remove the missiles . The missiles were removed from the Soviet Union in the 1960s .
 The U.S. promised not to invade Cuba and removed some of its missiles from Turkey . In return, the United States agreed to remove missiles from Cuba and remove some of the missiles .
 The Soviets placed short range nuclear missles in Cuba that probably would have been used on the invaders to defend the island . The missles were probably used to defend Cuba from the invaders .
 Kennedy had promised that a nuclear attack from Cuba would be interpreted by the USSR, meaning that such a Cuban attack would have lead to full-scale nuclear war . Kennedy had said that such an attack would lead to a nuclear war in Cuba .
 Continued use of this site constitutes acceptance of the terms and policies contained herein . Use of the site includes the content content of this article to help users with reading comprehension and vocabulary .