 Intelligence Wing Strategic Air Command Offutt Air Force Base, Nebraska May 1984 m JHCLASSIFI tu K# 3 3 FOREWORD Project Project .
 Captain Sandy' Laubenthal wrote a story of intelligence work never before told . The Air Force-wide program meant an opportunity to write a story about intelligence work .
 It is -certainly time that a story of this .magnitude be told . It is a remarkable story truly crediting the outstanding work of SAC Intelligence officers, NCOs, and airmen stationed at Offutt some twenty years ago .
 Project Warrior provides the perfect framework for this splendid effort by Captain Laubenthal . Fortunately for all, all of us, we can't wait to see the video .
 Cross-trained into the Intelligence career field and became editor of the SAC Intelligence Quarterly . Then, believing that it might be even more interesting to do all-source intelligence analysis, he cross-trained himself into Intelligence career .
 'I didn't really believe it, but I was curious enough to go to the SAC Office of History' 'I looked at a monograph on the Cuban missile crisis which a SAC historian had written in 1963'
 The 544th's own microfilmed history for October 1962 was microfiled in October 1962 . Still curious, I looked at the 544's microfilm history .
 It certainly gave an impression of intense activity, but again it told me nothing recognizable about the oral tradition . The oral tradition is a form of oral culture, but it's not recognizable in the modern world .
 There is plenty of evidence that something of significance had been going on at the 544th at that time . Nevertheless there was plenty of . evidence that . something of significant had been . going on . at the time .
 The 544th had woiTan Air Force Outstanding Unit Award for the period 1 September 30 November 1962 . The wing had been extraordinarily busy during that period .
 The citation credited the 544th with providing technical intelligence support to all levels of the United States Air Force and' other Government Agencies . The citation stated, ""The support rendered was of great benefit to the Nation and is a standing tribute"
 I decided to look for this one and write it as an article for the SAC Intelligence Quarterly . Having some experience in finding lost stories, I looked at this one .
 A good deal had been P^^jshed about the intelligence aspects of the Cuban missile crisis; » n J ty c °""P"" ing that with material in the archives, I hoped to reconstruct the story of the role of SAC Intelligence .
 The SAC archives contained a collection of special Cuban missile crisis histories prepared by various SAC units . The archives included a special history of the Cuban missile crises .
 The rest of the intelligence story proved extremely elusive, ir> spite of fascinating hints that I found here and there .
 Someone had put together, apparently from corporate memory, three paragraphs which mentioned U-2s, It Gen Eugene F Tighe, Jr., and a briefing which lie apparently gave . It was a lie .
 It was vague and rather confusingly stated, but I was able to glean a little more information for the article . I hope to find out more about the project .
 General Tighe has retired from his position as Director of the Defense Intelligence Agency . He was still a DIA consultant, but he is still a consultant .
 I was concerned, at that point, because I had no DIA sources for the DIA part of the story . "I was concerned," he says. "I had no . DIA . sources"
 SAC sent a preliminary version of the article to DIA for whatever light they could shed . With the assistance of the DIA representative, SAC had been talking to the . DIA historian .
 "I hoped very much that General Tighe, as a person who knew something about the story, would look at .it. I hoped very . much that . general Tighe would look into . it, he said .
 When the article came back, it was covered. with penciled notes from General Tighe, including one piece of information which surprised me very much. When I read the article, I found it was very interesting. It was covered with pencils from Tighe .
 "His comments created enough interest in the wing and in SAC Intelligence to make it possible for me to do what I wanted to do," he says . "He's not the only person to be able to do that," he adds .
 Retired Maj Gen James C Enney and retired Col Norman E Shaw, who had both been in SAC Intelligence at the time, talked to CNN about their experiences .
 "Things had begun to fall into place as soon as I sawGeneral Tighe's notes," says Drexler . "Things were already falling into place," he says .
 By moving medium-range and intermediate range ballistic missiles into Cuba, the Soviets could hope to achieve their first genuine first-strike capability •; against the United States .
 BMEWSJ and strikeSAC bomber bases and U.S. missiles with minimal warning . StrikeSAC bases and missile bases were attacked by the Soviets in the 1960s .
 The United States discovered this -deployment - before the missiles were operational . The U.S. discovered this before the launch of the missiles .
 For 13 days in October 1962, the United States and the Soviet Union stood in mutual confrontation . Then the Soviets backed off, and the world drew back from the brink of nuclear war . The U.S. and the Soviets stood back from brink of war .
 Over 21 years, much of the historical evidence has disappeared; and -even today, some still has not been released at the SECRET level . Some of the evidence has not yet been released .
 The role of SAC intelligence in the Cuban missile crisis is difficult to explain . But by examining the published sources and comparing them with the archives of the SAC and the recollections of some of the major par• ticipants, it is possible to reconstruct a fairly clear picture of
 The chain of events that finally precipitated the crisis is usually traced back to the visit of Soviet First Deputy Premier Anastas Mikoyan to Cuba in February 1960 .
 The visit resulted in the first Cuban-Soviet economic arrangements . Castro may have raised the question of arms as well as the issue of arms .
 Five inches worth of reports on missiles in Cuba in 1959 alone . Staff of CIA professionals continued to collect, collate, and compare .
 At first Cuba was essentially a side issue since it was not a strategic target . The primary orientation of SAC Intelligence was toward the Single Integrated Operational Plan . Cuba was a key part of the plan .
 The Cuban situation was monitored, like anything else that might eventually become a serious problem . Nevertheless, the Cuban situation is monitored, it was monitored .
 SAC's Commander in Chief at that time, Gen Thomas S Power, was keenly interested in intelligence . It was not unusual for him to pore over photo mosaics of Soviet Union, looking for missile sites with magnifying glass .
 His Director of Intelligence, Brig Gen Robert N Smith, had held that position since 1955 . Smith laid some of the groundwork for the establishment of the Joint Strategic Target Planning Staff . The Joint Strategic Targ Planning Staff was activated at Offutt AFB in I960 .
 Most of the work on Cuba was-done by the 544th Reconnaissance Technical Group . George J Keegan, Jr.,** did not yet consider Cuba a strategic problem,** did .
 In Cuba the aircrat t w ere usually .. derated and assembled in open areas, where aerial photography could confirm their identify . In Cuba, aircrats are usually assembled in an open area, and are often derated .
 The immediate pretext was supplied by a series of demonstrations iS Cuba fueled by discontent over a slackening economy . Cuba's economy has been hit hard by an economic slump .
 Agency, SAC Intelligence, and others wanted to be first to find out what was going on, about anything including Cuba . Everyone wanted to know what was happening in Cuba .
 General Power liked to be able to pick up a ""hot line" and tell Gen. Curtis E LeMay,~who was then Chief of Staff of the Air Force, that his photo interpreters or all-source analysts had found something new . General Power would tell Gen Curtis E
 General LeMay would then pass the word to Secretary of Defense Robert S McNamara . McNamara had a contest going with Dean Rusk, the Secretary of State . The secretary of state and secretary of defense would also be in the contest .
 On a more serious level, General Smith was becoming more concerned about . General Smith became increasingly concerned about his son's death .
 Cuba could become a 'spoiler' in terms of the whole strategic situation, says author . Cuba's location could be a "spoiler" in the strategic situation . He felt that with only minimal warning the command and control system would be at risk .
 By the early summer of 1962, the Pis and all-source analysts, as well as the ELINT specialists in the Defense Analysis Center, had increased their efforts .
 In May 1962 the 55th Strategic Reconnaissance Wing had flown two higher headquartersdirected ELINT missions in the Caribbean area .
 ELINT data was, as always, forwarded to Offutt, where it was processed by the 544th . Offutt also processed by Offutt .
 The intelligence gained from these missions may have contributed to General Smith's increased concern, he says .
 Pis of the Research Center began to study the tracker film from the U-2 missions . Pis began to watch the tracker films from the missions . The tracker film was taken from the two missions .
 tracker film was processed first and then correlated with the main camera film to determine the location of whatever had been imaged by the main, camera . The tracker film is processed before being correlated with main camera footage .
 The quality of the tracker film was variable; but when the resolution was exceptionally good, it was sometimes possible to identify objects along the route which, had not been imaged .
 Research Center could get tracker film sooner than it could get main camera film, which might arrive weeks after the mission . Also, the Research Center may get tracker camera film sooner .
 All-source intelligence--ref ugee and agent reports, communications intelligence, and the like--had begun to highlight certain areas as centers of unusual activity .
 The Pis looked closely at these areas on the tracker film and had enlargements made of areas they were interested in . The Pis had enlarges made of these areas .
 It was thus that, perhaps in late June 1962, they saw the first positive evidence that the human reports of ""rockets""-in the sense of surface-to-air missiles .--were apparently true, or about to be .
 SA-2S were going to be installed in Cuba . It would be about mon ac nth between the time the ground scars first appeared and the installation of equipment .
 A briefing on the SAM discovery was prepared for pre-sentation Yn Washington . The SAM discovery is the first of its kind in the world .
 General Power took General Smith and Colonel Tighe to the capital and introduced them to the -audiences - . General Power was a sponsor of the photo interpretation .
 Colonel Tighe, who was the ""outside briefer"" for SAC Intelligence, made the presentation . The presentation was presented to the public at the time .
 No one--not CIA, not NPIC, not even the Air Staff-was willing to give credence at this early stage . CIA, NPIC and NPIC refused to give any credence .
 Those organizations had not done the background study on the human source reporting which had led the Relelrch Center to its conclusions, and they did not regard the around scars as sufficient evidence that SAMs were to be brought in .
 In July, Soviet shipments of arms resumed at a considerably increased pace . Meanwhile, in July, Russia resumed shipments at an increased pace.
 The first shipments were detected as they left the Black Sea in mid-month . The U.S. effort to photograph all ships carrying military cargoes was intensified .
 Many of the ships now transited the straits by night or in bad weather . Others left from Baltic ports, where United States Capabilities were rather limited .
 Sources told of trucks lowered into holds for loading and hoisted ° ut » v '""* ^Jj'f at paulins . Sources tell of technicians who arrived m slacks and sport shirts at Cuban docks, then formed into ranks of fours .
 Reports of 'rockets' were numerous . Reports of construction activity and equipment observed during the spring of 1962 and new . observations of suspicious-looking crates .
 Roads, faint but suggesting the characteristic ""star of David"" pattern associated with the SA-2, were also distinguishable . Roads also appeared faint but suggest the characteristic "star of the David" pattern .
 By late August the assessment was becoming more solid within the intelligence community at all levels, to the point where the State Department was almost ready to mention SAMs in a background briefing to the press .
 Colonel lighe had been operations officer of the 497th when the first photos were taken of the first SA-2 site at Glau in East Germany in 1958 . The deployment was apparently intended to deter reconnaissance .
 SAC discussed the issue frequently with the State Department advisor to SAC, Edward L Freers,* who could carry SAC's views to Washington .
 Long before the build-up began, McCone suspected on purely strategic grounds that the Soviets might install offensive missiles in Cuba . For the first time, they had access to an area within easy range of the US--and missiles of medium or intermediate range could not reach the Soviet Union if
 McCone's suspicions seemed incredible even to many others in the intelligence community . But there was no hard evidence, and without it, it seemed incredible . Without it, McCone says, "It's incredible"
 By now the attention of the public as well as the public was focusing on the military build-up in Cuba .
 The State Department invited reporters to a background briefing by Roger Hilsman, director of the department's Office of Intelligence and Research . The briefing was held on 24 August in Washington .
 Some 20 Soviet-bloc ships have arrived in Cuba since 26 July, carrying large quantities of transportation, electronic, and construction equipment, much of which seemed to be intended for the improvement of coastal and air defenses . Some of the material might include surface-to-air missiles .
 If SAMs were present, they were being installed to protect something clse--possibly offensive missiles--from an offensive missile . If there were SAMs, they would be installed in place to protect a missile .
 Most of the eastern part of Cuba was cloud-covered, but westwardward, in ^75* tne areas that were clear, photo interpreters could for C*5f the first time see SAM sites on the main camera film .
 Eight SA2 sites in various stages of construction were identified along the northern coast of Cuba . Before the fiST' day was over, eight of the sites were identified .
 Analysis of mission of 29 August continued; with a ninth SAM site discovered the following day . Analysis of the mission continued with the discovery of nine SAM sites found .
 The site is in the eastern area of Cuba, with the 1-aunchers oriented away from the United States . The briefer told him that not everything was known about the site, but not everything is known about its capabilities .
 General Carter lingered to make sure he understood what the President wanted in the way of security protection for the evidence of offensive weapons . If such evidence should be found, it must be kept very restricted, and I want to be -one of the first to know about it .
 General Carter said he had thought so, but others might have felt that the President meant the various elements of the intelligence community were to stay in isolation and try to arrive at a mutually acceptable conclusion .
 SoTfie search for answers to Cuban problem continued to involve a relatively large number of intelligence organizations and military commands . Another U-2 mission on 5 September had brought imagery of more SAM sites and a MIG-21 FJSHBED, one of the latest Soviet fighters
 Something happened on 9 September, something happened which caused a reassessment of the safety of the U-2 flights . Then, on 9 Sept, something else happened .
 A Chinese broadcast revealed that a Chinese Nationalist U-2 had been shot down over eastern China . Analysts speculated that it had been brought down by an SA-2 system credited with bringing down Gary Powers' aircraft in 1960 .
 The SA-2s had been identified in Cuba, higher echelons had regarded them as a threat to the U-2, and transfer -of-the-U-2 flights from CIA to SAC .
 SAC's 4080th Strategic Wing AT Laughlin AFB, Texas, had been flying U-2s since 1957 . SAC was based at Laughlin Air Force Base in Texas .
 Secretary of State Dean Rusk suggests shorter, more frequent flights into Cuban airspace . Rusk: Instead of covering all of Cuba, flights should be shorter and more frequent .
 He also proposed a larger number of peripheral flights that would gather intelligence from beyond the three-mile limit . The proposal is also proposed by the Air Force .
 SAC had a strategic reconnaissance mission and until the mid-1950s had been the primary airborne strategic intelligence collector . The planners agreed to this and * (U/FOUOj)
 CIA representative called on General Lemay with request that SAC pick up the operational aircraft . Then, probably in the summer of 1954, when the U-2 was first being developed at Lockheed, the CIA representative asked for the aircraft .
 General Lemay summoned then-Col Robert N Smith, who was still Chief of . the Targets Analysis Division in SAC Intelligence, andCol William J Crumm, Chief of the Operational Plans Division m the Directorate of Operations . The meeting was held in Washington, DC .
 General Lemay met with a CIA representative who outlined the capabilities of the aircraft that Clarence L Johnson was building at Lockheed . They talked with the CIA representative, who outlined to Lemay .
 General Lemay thought the proposed schedule for the •.. completion of the prototype was unrealistic . He told the CIA representative that SAC did not want to assume responsibility for the development of such a unique aircraft in such a short space of time .
 CIA agreed to be responsible for the development of the aircraft, while SAC agreed to fly it operationally . CIA was responsible for developing the aircraft and SAC for operationally. SAC was also responsible for flying it .
 The U-2 first flew, as ""Kelly"" Johnson had promised, in the summer of 1955 . Johnson's first flight was the U.2 .
 The first aircraft was delivered to the 4080th Strategic Wing in June 1957 . SAC got its own U-2s after it proved its value .
 The first medium range ballistic missiles had already arrived in Cuba . But by that time, as analysis later showed, they were already in use .
 In a press conference later that day, he assured the U.S. people that the shipments to Cuba did not constitute a serious threat to any other part of the hemisphere .
 President Obama did not rule out the possibility that the build-up might become a threat . But he carefully listed the limits Cuba must not overstep, he said .
 ELINT requirements were compiled by the 544th*s Defense Analysis Center and provided to the 55th . The 55th was the first unit to be deployed to the U.S.
 From a specially designed compartment in the converted bomb bay of the RB-47H, electronic warfare officers intercepted and recorded signals from early warning, height finder, airborne intercept, and fire control radars . They recorded signals .
 The ELINT data they collected was routinely forwarded to Offutt, where the Defense Analysis Center processed it . The data was sent to the Defense Analysts Center, Offutt .
 On 14 September 1962 the 55th had begun to fly higher headquarters directed COMMON CAUSE missions for surveillance of Cuba by means of ELINT and aerial photography . The 55th began to fly missions in September 1962 and October 1963 .
 Analysis of ELINT gathered after the discovery of the SAMs confirmed that the latest SA-2 guidance radar, the C model of the FRUIT SET, was being used in Cuba . ELINT also found that the C-2 radar, which is the latest of the SA-
 General Smith, Colonel Tighe, and sometimes General Power made several trips to Washington for intelligence sessions at the Pentagon . General Power and General Smith traveled to Washington several times for intelligence meetings .
 Both were built for thelumber trade, with exceptionally wide hatches . They carried trucks on deck and rode high in the water . The ships were built in the 1930s and 1940s .
 A U-2 mission on 17 September had been basiC^-T' cally peripheral and added nothing new to the mission . The mission was "basiC*T'C' tally peripheral" to the U.S.
 General Smith and Colonel Tighe were flown to Washington as Sjjgfc' back-up briefers . General Smith was flown to D.C. as part of the SjjGfc' brief .
 Air Force's Assistant Chief of Staff, £<; Intelligence, Maj Gen Robert A Breitweiser, was present probably as a member of the Board . General Smith and Colonel Tighe were allowed into the meeting .
 Several times the ACS/1 asked General Smith questions or referred to him, so he had the opportunity to present his case . General Smith was the subject of several questions .
 The likely outcome of the meeting was, essentially, to put the USIB imprimatur on the final product of a laborious process . However, this estimate had been in the making for some days .
 These included the scarcity of indications of the presence of strategic missiles, the failure of the U-2 photography to confirm the U.S. role in the Soviet Union, and the pattern of Soviet foreign policy .
 They did not want to avoid making an estimate at all, but neither did they want to make a ""worst case" estimate . Finally, they did not . want to  make an estimate all the time .
 Eut from the perspective of General Smith and Colonel Tighe, a ""worst case" estimate was appropriate in this instance, to allow for military preparation and possible action . Eut was the first time the U.S. military had been involved in a major war in the area .
 Some-much less vague and more reliable reports from observers in Cuba filtered up through the system . Very soon, however, some-much-reliable and accurate reports from Cuba filtered into the system.
 A report that an agent in Cuba had sighted the rear profile of a strategic missile on 12 September . The report reached CIA and DIA on 21 September, followed by a sketch with a sketch on 27 September .
 Analysts at the upper level of the intelligence community had been studying the evidence of the earlier flights as well as the new reports out of Cuba .
 Col John R Wright, Jr., Jr., at DIA, had been studying the pattern of SAM installations photographed over western Cuba on 5 September . Wright noted that the trapezoidal patterns of SAMs near the Cuban town of San Cristobal resembled SAM installations designed to protect strategic missiles in
 DIA analysts were also led to the hypothesis that the Soviets were placing strategic missiles in the San Cristobal area . Between 27 September and 2 October, analysts were led to a hypothesis that Soviet missiles were in the area .
 The CIA characterized the central and western parts of Cuba as ""suspicious" The CIA classified them as the highest priority for aerial reconnaissance . On 3 October, the CIA certified them as highest priority .
 The all-source analysis at SAC was leading to similar conclusions about where the missiles probably were . The analysis was similar to that of SAC's SAC in the past .
 SAC had long had a requirement to provide cloud-free photography of Cuba for the US, in order to maintain a current baseline photomosaic of Cuba .
 The State Department argued that the loss of a U-2 over Cuba would have been political . The State Dept. argued that it was necessary for the U.2 to be dropped .
 Colonel Wright had recommended to Lt Gen Joseph F Carroll, the Director of DIA, that San Cristobal receive immediate photographic coverage . San Cristabal accordingly became part of the flight plan .
 SAC told the 4080th to send Maj Rudolph Anderson, Jr., as well . The next day SAC also told the SAC to send Major Rudolph Anderson Jr. as well. Maj Anderson was also sent to the U.S.
 On Friday, 12 October, General Power was flying a KC-135 back from Europe to Omaha, with General Smith and General Compton . General Compton and General Smith were flying the plane back to Omaha .
 General Power received an urgent telephone call from Secretary of Defense Robert S McNamara's office, telling him to come to the Pentagon immediately to discuss a matter of national concern . When they stopped in Bermuda to refuel, General Power was told by McNamara to come immediately .
 General Power went in alone to see the Secretary of the Air Force, Eugene M Zuckert, who told him about the high level of concern over Cuba . SAC was given the mission to carry out overflight missions .
 General Power was not surprised, since he had long since recognized Cuba as both an ever-worsening political problem and a mounting threat to SAC's southern bases . SAC may possibly have informed him in Europe of the decision that sent Majors Heyser and Anderson to Edwards
 A second meeting followed, in the ""Tank,"" the room in the Pentagon where the Joint Chiefs or"" Staff met .
 He had come to the Pentagon that morning to brief General LeMay and then returned to Offutt . Offutt had been briefed by LeMay that morning . LeMay was the first to meet Offutt at the Pentagon .
 General LeMay had mentioned the briefing to others, and Colonel Tighe was asked to come back and brief at the JCS level . General Lemay had mentioned it to others .
 He favored the concept, since recent U-2 flights had not been getting photography of the areas SAC was interested in . He knew there had been discussion of SAC's taking on the overflight mission, and favored the idea .
 Another issue discussed at the meeting in the ""Tank"" was the processing of the U-2 film . The film was processed by the U.2 .
 The Undersecretary of the Air Force had given SAC responsibility for supervising the delivery and processing of all original film from the U-2 mission . SAC had been given responsibility for the delivery of the film .
 General Power promised that SAC would get the film to Washington in less time than the CIA had been getting the film through its own system . General Smith would personally courier it to the U.S.
 General Smith guaranteed that it would get there if he had to fly the airplane himself . General Smith said he would fly the plane himself if it got there .
 CIA feared SAC might make material "SAC only" when it was of national interest . CIA was concerned that material might be used for decision-making of the President .
 CIA was 'very reluctant' to give up responsibility for overflights; they wanted at least to be sure NPIC could look at the film . CIA was very reluctant' CIA wanted NPIC to look at film .
 General Power, General Smith, and General Compton resumed their journey to Offutt . After the meeting, General Power and General Smith met General Compton again .
 While still on the airplane, General Power started to put SAC's. well-oiled machinery into high gear . General Power: "SAC is a great place to work"
 General Compton was given the job of getting the U-2s ready for a flight on Sunday . It could not be done any sooner, because a hurricane was in progress in Cuba .
 Getting ready for the flight itself kept bothSAC's operational planners and the people at Edwards busy during most of Saturday, 13 October, and well into Saturday night . Getting ready to fly was a huge undertaking for the Air Force .
 The SAC support team arrived at Edwards on Saturday . The two ""F'J models intended for the operation were painted with USAF insignia .
 55SRW had been directed to fly BLUE INK weather reconnaissance missions of Cuban coastal areas . Weather was an important factor in planning U-2 flights .
 The 55th established an operating location at MacDill AFB, Florida, and flew the initial BLUE INK sortie . Immediately the 55th set up an operating site at the base . The first mission was the first to carry out the mission .
 The weather information was relayed to SAC by radio, and the first U-2 launch was planned for late that night . iXiih^elligence preparations were equally intense .
 This was the first direct evidence of a radical change in the nature of the military buildup in Cuba . The Cuban military buildup has been described as a major military operation .
 Colonel Keegan's Air Estimates Division had been fully involved in (U the Cuban problem) for some time .
 SAC had a great deal of ; because of its strategic the most viable penetration of the Soviet borders . The command had floun ig Soviet borders.
 Committee on Military Overhead Requirements list updated . CAUSL list updated to reflect current requirements .
 Captain Enn'ey had been planning to go to a SAC in telligence party, but instead he was called -to deal with the COMAR list .
 The branch office was collocated with the Research Center in BB-18, an area in the basement of SAC headquarters . The Research Center is located in a basement of the SAC HQ .
 Captain Enney , *~TUj Col on eI~C~ or del and Captain I.nncv both, eventually becaire major generals and served as SAC ' s DCS/In te] 1 igence . 'liNCLAS$F c
 Major Heyser crossed the Cuban coastline at 1237Z--0737 Eastern Standard Time --at an average altitude of 72,500 feet . Approaching from the south, and 'using the Isle of Pines as the initial point', he crossed the coast .
 He crossed the north coast and changed course for Florida . Six minutes later, he crossed the coast .
 There had been no ground fire or any other encounter with Cuba s new defenses . There were no encounters with Cuba's new defenses.
 The film film was unloaded, placed in shipping containers, and rushed to General Smith's KC-135 . The film was then loaded into shipping containers .
 The film from the tracker ^ camera was loaded on another aircraft, probably a T-39, to be flown to Offutt for processing and readout . The film was loaded onto another aircraft to be processed .
 The people who were waiting at Andrews to receive the film were not en the list .
 It was about half an hour before matters were sorted out and authorized people arrived to accept the turn . The turn was delayed for more than an hour .
 The main camera film was taken to the Naval Photographic Interpretation Center at Suitland, Maryland, one of several locations where it was processed .
 Plane with tracker film flew to Offutt and landed and landed . Meanwhile the aircraft with the tracker film landed in Offutt .
 The film had to be processed at once and sent to NPIC in time for use with the readout of the mam camerafilm, so that exact locations could be determined . NPIC had to process the film at once, so it could be used to determine exact locations
 It was taken immediately to the 544th«s Special Projects Lab Branch, * subdivision of the Target Materials Center, which did all classified photoprocessing at Offutt .
 Ihe Special Projects Lab """"also located in the basement of SAC headquarters, immediately south of the Research Center . The lab is located in a basement of the headquarters .
 The 544th had its best Pis on duty waiting for the £ ilm to come out of the lab . The best Pis were on duty at the time of the £3m project .
 NAVPIC lso the 6594th Aerospace Test Squadron at ^""tover AFB Massachusetts; the 4080th Strategic Wing at Laughlin AFB, Texas, and the 15th Reconnaissance Technical Squadron atMarch A ™, California; and Offutt itself .
 Airman First Class Michael Davis, one of the sharpest young Pis, had been called in because of his experience in the exploitation of missile sites . He was called in to the U.S. because he had been trained to exploit missile sites.
 Major Olsen telephoned Colonel Tighe at home and told him the film was about to be ready . The film was set to be released on Sunday afternoon .
 Callanan, the assistant chief of the Research Center, went to BB-18 to see it . Callanan: "It's a great place to go" Callanan is a member of the National Science Council .
 Major Olsen and Airman Davis were working in a small room towards the far end of BB-18 . The room is one of several rooms used for detailed photo interpretation .
 They scanned through the film, looking at it in a viewer and under stereo, under stereo . They looked at the film in viewer and stereo and used stereo .
 Both had been very much interested in the Cuban problem and knew the terrain very well, so they had no trouble orienting themselves .
 Airman Davis sighted MRBMs on trailers on trailers . They knew where they wanted to look, and very soon they sighted them .
 It was perhaps at this point that the Pis found out that they were not expected to send out a Uniform Photo Interpretation Report to SAC's usual intelligence custo-"" mers .
 NPIC claimed the right to make the determination, from the main camera film, on what was in Cuba . NPIC had claimed the rights to make a decision from the film .
 No one in Washington D.C. had even imagined they could do what they had just done . No one had ever imagined they would be able to do so .
 SAC Intelligence was now sure that there were Soviet offensive missiles in Cuba . Nevertheless, SAC intelligence was still sure that the Soviet missiles were in Cuba.
 General Smith immediately informed General Power, and General Power undoubtedly passed the word to General LeMay before the day was out . General Smith also passed the news to General Power . General Power also passed on the word .
 General Smith directed the chief of the Special Projects Lab, 1stLt William B Sullivan, to make a copy of the tracker film for the Research Center . General Power wanted to be briefed on the tracker .
 The tracker film which would go to NPIC was done first, probably on the prototype Variscan viewer which allowed the Pis to enlarge the image so they could more quickly identify the location of the aircraft and determine where the clouds were .
 This film wa^s dispatched to Washington, probably by T-39, to be available for "the readout of the main camera film"
 Center's copy were enlargeerto make very large briefing boards for General Power . High quality photography was very high quality photography .
 The F"" model had been made ready at Edwards, and Major Anderson had been checked out in it .
 Major Anderson was flown to McCoy as a passenger on a KC-135 . That evening it was ferried to McCoy, while Major Anderson flew to McCoy on the same plane .
 The eight cans of film were delivered at midmorning on 15 October and were quickly distributed among the waiting PI teams . They were delivered by mid-morning on October 15 .
 There were only three teams, of two Pis each, composed of CIA, Air Force, Army, and Navy people . The mission had been a short mission .
 Because of the Banes site, they searched next for cruise missile launchers and attendant guidance radars . They searched for cruise missiles launchers .
 The team determined that the six objects were missile transporters . After a systematic analysis of the photography, the team determined the objects were missiles .
 The measurements, computed manually by all members of the team, were consistently in the 60to 75-foot range . The measurements were calculated manually .
 The position and size of the equipment did not correspond to anything they had seen before, they said . They said they were surprised to see the equipment they had never seen before .
 Di Renzo calls in Jay Quantrill, an all-source intelligence analyst specializing in SAMs and MRBMs . Quantrill is an expert who specializes in analyzing SAMs, MRBs and SAMs .
 Quantrill searched his looseleaf volumes of photographs taken at Moscow parade's and from Soviet handbooks . The SS-4 missile was a Soviet-era missile . Quantrill's photos show a side view of the missile .
 NPIC at that time had closer ties with DIA than was later the case . NPIC's deputy director called John Hughes, a special assistant to the director of DIA, and asked him to look at what appeared to be an important discovery .
 John Hughes had been an Army photo interpreter ' at NPIC whose specialty was missiles . Hughes was a photo interpreter for the Army . Hughes had a specialty of missiles .
 When he left the Army, Lt Gen Joseph F Carroll, the first Director of DIA, had asked him to become a special assistant . Lt Gen. Carroll, who was the first DIA Director, had been asked to become his special assistant to the DIA .
 He came to the Center, looked at the photographs, talked with the Pis, and made .up his mind . Now he comes to the center, looking at the photos .
 Convinced that these were offensive missiles, he went to inform General Carroll . General Carroll informed General Carroll about the missile threat .
 After hearing the evidence, General Carroll sent him and another analyst to brief the deputy Secretary of Defense, Roswell Gilpatric . The deputy secretary of defense was also briefed on the evidence .
 John Hughes presented the facts from notes from notes and told Gilpatric the photography would be available the next day . Hughes: "John Hughes is a great writer. John Hughes is not a bad writer. He is a good writer and a great photographer."
 Hughes was asked to brief the Secretary of Defense first thing in the morning . Gilpatric asked Hughes to be ready to brief him first day of the day .
 A second MRBM site was found, then the beginnings of a third . As the search went on, MRBM sites were also found .
 He returned at 0600 on 16 October to review briefing boards and background notes which had been prepared during the night . He returned to review the briefing boards, background notes and briefing boards .
 At 0730 he briefed Ray Cline, the Deputy Director for Intelligence at CIA headquarters . The CIA briefed him at 0730 at CIA HQ .
 President Kennedy was briefed by McGeorge Bundy, the President's special assistant for national security affairs . Bundy informed President Kennedy that there was now hard evidence of the presence of offensive missiles in Cuba .
 The President directed him to set up an extraordinary meeting at 1145 to hear the briefing . The meeting will take place at 11:30am .
 The Secretary of Defense had been briefed by John Hughes and General Carroll before he arrived . John Hughes, General Carroll and John Hughes were briefed by the Pentagon .
 Tuesday morning, the 0-2 photography by itself reveal n All they could really distinguish were cl ^***f Gilding o£ a as easily have been intended for farming or for the buiiog or for a h lull. Tuesday morning . Tuesday morning,. the 0
 The dominant feeling that . was stunned J«P »P »|J' ike . Clearly some form of action . rejuired-^erhaps a n a i i & on the missile sites .
 There must be no disclosure of the presence he had decided what to do about them . Second was thatsharp increase in the number of . the . number of """" 2 ""j|^|' o£ H the missiles .
 McGeorge Bundy Bundy C>3 suggested that they talk to the President . Since they could not agree, they decided to talk to him . The President is expected to be the next president .
 Major Heyser and Major Anderson overflowed Cuba on 15 October . They brought back more imagery of San Cristobal .
 Even though theSoviets-had .apparently known about U-2 surveillance of Cuba since at least March, no efforts were being made to camouflage what was going on . No effort was made to conceal what was happening .
 Photo interpreters were able to identify missile hold tents at the third San Cristobal MRBM site . The site had been bare of everything but arriving equipment the day before .
 Concrete arches for a bunkered nuclear storage facility were visible . Along with the tents, pads and missile emplacements were emerging .
 Evidence of detailed preplanning and urgency was clear at other sites . The evidence of pre-planning for the site was clear in other parts of the site .
 IL-28 bomber crates lined up at San Julian Airfield, California, ready for assembly . IL-27 bomber crates were lined up in readiness for assembly.
 A SAM site at Bahia Honda was operational, with missiles visible on every other launcher . The site was operational at the time of the attack .
 Most ominous of all were two sites-at Guanajay, with four pads each and a bunker in between . The two sites were two pads each with four sites each and four bunker sites in between.
 The sites were similar to IRBM sites identified in the USSR . They were estimated to be intended for the SS-5, one of the Soviets' most advanced missile systems at the time .
 With the sharp increase in overflights, more SAC pilots and SAC ""A"" model U-2s had to be brought into the program .
 Maj Buddy L Brown, Maj James A Quails, Maj Edwin G Emerling, Capt Gerald E Mcllmoyle, Capt Roger H Herman, Capt Charles Kern, Capt Robert L Primrose, Capt David W Scharr, and Capt George M Bull were pilots .
 Of the six missions of 17 October, four were launched from Laughlin in ""A"" models flown by Majors Brown and Quails and Captains Herman and Bull . Three took off in a spot thunderstorm well before daylight, one in a thunderstorm .
 The other two missions were flown by Majors Heyser and_ Anderson out of McCoy in mid-morning . The other three missions were carried out mid-afternoon .
 Capt Bull obtained photography on which the Pis were able to identify two more MRBM sites, under construction at Sagua La Grande . Capt Bull had obtained photography .
 The film was ferried to NAVPIC for processing, and the intelligence derived from . their film was .in the hands of Defense Department officials within a few hours after the U-2s landed .
 The Pis identified what appeared to be a missile fuel storage farm . Since the missiles were liquid fueled, they required significant storage facilities . Major Heyser brought back photography on which the photos were taken .
 Major Anderson had flown over San Cristobal and Guanajay to obtain new coverage . From that film, intelligence analysts estimated that MRBM sites would have a refire capability . IRBMs would attain an emergency combat capability .
 Major Brown, overflying San Julian Airfield, had obtained photography revealing the ongoing assembly of the IL-28 bombers . One already complete .
 General Smith allowed a few JSTPS people, such as an Army defense analysis expert in Target Development, to be brought in on it . Almost without exception they were SAC people, though some JST PS people were brought in .
 SAC aircraft maintained a nationwide pickup and delivery service for the film . General Smith couriered much of the film himself .
 There was no longer any significant delay in getting main camera photography ready for main photography .
 SAC received a duplicate negative which was also couriered to Offutt . As soon as possible after the original film has developed, typically within eight hours to a da> and a half, the original negative was couredred to SAC .
 The Soviets had developed a navigation and trajectory system, originally pioneered during World War LI by the Germans, which required the launch pads actually to be oriented in the direction in which the missile was supposed to go .
 One of the Trajectory Center's responsibilities was to determine the planned targets of missile sites in the Soviet Union . One of its responsibilities was determining the targets of Soviet missile sites .
 The sites were oriented toward major military and command-and-control installations, including Washington . Now they've done the same for the sites .
 The U-2 photography had come before the United States Intelligence Board so that they could examine it and estimate the degree of danger . Since the afternoon of 16 October, the U.S.
 On 17 October they produced their first estimate based on the intensified' U-2 overflights . The estimate was based on an increased number of overflights from U.2 missions .
 If both types were operational, the Soviets would be able to deliver an initial salvo of nuclear warheads on targets in the U.S. as far away as Wyoming and Montana . The Soviets could strike as far as Wyoming or Montana .
 The next day, Thursday, the USIB was .able to estimate that the missiles in Cuba would have a nuclear warhead potential of about half the estimated ICBM capacity of the entire Soviet Union . The U.S.IB was able to estimate the missile could have a warhead
 There was no dispute over the tremendous challenge to American prestige which the missiles represented . ExComm, ExComm said .
 The overhanging question, still unanswered, is how to get them out of Cuba without war . "How do we do this without war?" asks President Obama .
 Late in the evening of 18 October, members were still debating whether the best course of action should be an air strike or a naval blockade .
 The trend favored a United States naval blockade of Cuba . All ships approaching Cuba would be inspected by the U.S. Navy .
 This would leave the President several other options if it proved unsuccessful . This would be the President's second attempt to win the election .
 By Friday night there was broad agree-' ment that the blockade would be the best and least provocative response . Further armed action would follow if necessary, with further armed action if necessary .
 Major Heyser brought back photography of a third IRBM site, this one at Remedios . On 18 October he and Anderson flew again, this time in the air .
 Since SAC was flying the missions, the intensity of activity within SAC Intelligence was at a peak that had never been seen before . The intensity of intelligence activity in SAC intelligence was at an unprecedented peak .
 In addition to the tracker film, copies of the main camera photography were reaching SAC by plane within hours of the original processing . The film was sent to SAC within hours .
 The Pis of the S44th picked out areas that had something significant on them and had enlargements made for further analysis . The Pis had enlarges made to look at the areas of the area that had significant significance .
 The information from the imagery was plotted and its intelligence worth evaluated . The information is plotted and evaluated .
 Intelligence, the Chief of Staff of the Air Force, and the UIA and others in the Washington area are briefed on what should be briefed to the President . C_ UNCLASSIFIED h F CD CD CD x CO CO. “
 RB-47 aircraft of the 55 SRW were still flying their . COMMON CAUSE missions for the surveillance of Cuba by . means of both ELINT and aerial photography . The RB.47 aircraft were still . flying their COMMONCAUSE missions .
 On 13 October the 55th had set up an operating location at MacDill AFB, Florida, to support the COMMON CAUSE missions . On 14 October SAC raised the requirement to two missions a day to support COMMONCAUSE missions, and on 14 October it raised the
 All the material was sent back to Headquarters SAC for evaluation, as well as the ELINT from the U-2 missions . The material was evaluated by SAC and sent back for evaluation .
 The ELINT specialists in the 544th's Defense Analysis Center processed the data and made a stuay of Cuban defense elements . They matched the ELINT with the photography and determining the location of SAMs and radars .
 By 20 October all-source analysis had established the offensive order of battle in Cuba as six MRBM sites with 24 launchers, three 1RBM sites, and 42 IL-28 bombers . The offensive order was established by 20 October, with six MRB sites with 12 launchers .
 By 20 October, SAC U-2 activities at McCoy had become almost a routine operation . MRBMs had been seen at some sites, but no IRBMs--those were still at sea . iU0 iReporter: "I'm glad to see that U-
 Colonel Keegan of the Air Estimates Division had taken over a part of General Smith's, role as SAC Intelligence representative at McCoy, flying back and forth from McCoy on the T-39s .
 Additional crews and support personnel flown 'in from Laughlin AFB, Texas, brought the SAC complement at what was now an operating location to 11 pilots, four navigators, and 68 airmen .
 The day of a U-2 pilot slated to overfly Cuba began soon after midnight, when he awoke, ate, and went to the Operations building for his preflight briefing .
 Operations planners had completed his mission folder, using information received the night before from the SAC Reconnaissance Control Center at Offutt . By that time, operations planners had finished his mission .
 Pilots usually left McCoy about 0800 local time, and missions lasted two to five hours . Pilots were usually left at 0800 GMT .
 Three missions flew on 20 October, and three more on both 1l and 23 October . Three missions were carried out in October .
 On the afternoon of 19 October, messages had gone to the Atlantic and Caribbean commands, warning of possible air attacks from Cuba . U.S. SAM batteries had been directed to increase their readi. ness .
 The decision was made to begin with the blockade and, if need be, move up the ladder of military responses rung by rung . That afternoon, when the President met with rxComm, the decision made .
 CIA representatives had left that morning to brief the governments of the United Kingdom, France, Germany, and Canada . The National Security Council ratified the decisions already hammered out by ExComm. 1 CIA representatives .
 On Monday, 22 October, some hours before the President was to address the nation on television, the allies were shown the photographic evidence . The evidence was presented to the President hours before he was due to speak .
 JCS issued a blockadeplanning directive to the Atlantic Fleet on 22 October . SAC missile crews were ordered to maximum alert .
 At noon, General Power disperses his B-47 bombers to military and civilian airports in various parts of the country . Each with its assigned load of nuclear weapons, each was assigned a load of weapons .
 He ordered one-eighth of . the B-52 bomber force into the air . He ordered an unprecedented one-third of . .the bomber force to be put into the . air .
 For 30 days and nights thereafter, part of the B-52 force was in the air at all times . The biggest airborne alert in SAC's history was the biggest in history .
 As the hour approached, those who could sought out television sets tofollow the President's speech .
 The next day, the OAS voted unanimously to support a U.S. resolution authorizing the use of force m a blockade of Cuba . Wilsonfai Tliomas S. Pimi .
 U-2 photographs show work going ahead on the Cuton missile sites and 25 Soviet ships on the way . McNamara announced that the U.S. was working on the sites and the ships were still moving .
 Low-level reconnaissance flights by Navy aircraft had begun, to keep abreast of work on missile sites . That day, special low-level . flights had begun .
 SAC surveillance was augmented by Navy and TAC low-level sorties, which proved very useful in the technical evaluation of equipment capabilities at installations pinpointed earlier by the -U-2 photography .
 General Smith had made an agreement with Col Rockly Triantafellu, TAC's Director of Intelligence, to provide some SAC assistance . General Smith made a deal to provide assistance to TAC, because Colonel Triantfellu did not have enough qualified people .
 Lt Col Norm E Shaw, chief of the Research Branch of the Targets division, was sent down to MacDill . Lt Col Shaw was sent to the base on Sunday 21 October .
 As yet only reconnaissance support on the scene was an Army unit with equipment in vans .
 General Smith sent some photo processing specialists and Pis to MacDill . TAC brought down some materials from Langley to Langley . General Smith then sent some of the equipment back to the Pentagon .
 A barracks was speedily remodeled into a photo processing center, -in which, as the crisis continued, new equipment was installed directly from the manufacturer .
 Since SAC was phasing out its operation at MacDill, the simulator was no longer needed . The simulator is no longer available at SAC .
 The simulator came out, and within three days the building had been transformed into a commandpost and tactical reconnaissance center modeled on SAC's Reconnaissance Control Center . The simulator comes with hot lines to Langley and other bases where TAC was operating .
 SAC had provided TAC with the photomosaic showing where all the sites were, for mission planning . SAC provided the photo for TAC .
 The aircraft went in low, flying at two to five hundred feet, around midday to get shadow-free photography . The aircraft was flying at 2 to 5 hundred feet around midday .
 The film was rushed to NPIC for exploitation, though Langley, like Offutt, got copies later . Langley and Offutt got copies of the film .
 J collection effort had become even more'intense 25 rnmL rlulu eS J d r ent s P ublic revelation. J collection efforts had become more intense .
 This project began after the identification of the pieces that the Soviets brought in for the SS-5 si tes--precast concrete pieces that made the .SS-5 a very ""distinctive system"
 During the crisis it seemed likely" that if the Soviets were putting missiles into Cuba, they would start putting them in other places very shortly .
 The briefing identified each piece of the portable SS-4 and SS-5 launchers and support equipment and cartooned the assembly of the site . The briefing was followed by a mock-up of the missile launchers .
 It was completed and-presented ■ in-the -mid's t -of the -crisis ; but it became quite famous in the intelligence community, and Colonel Tighe later gave it to distinguished groups of military and civilian leaders .
 Target installations were weaponeered, and the Defense Analysis Center studied ingress and egress routes . Target installations in the U.S. were also studied .
 DIA's main effort still centered on the analysis with John Hughes as well as the CIA representatives briefing the President in the White House . DIA: DIA is still working with the CIA to find out what happened in Iraq .
 Navy reconnaissance planes had made careful note of ships carrying dry cargo . Five ships built in Japan for the lumber trade had extra large hatches wide enough to accommodate IRBMs below decks .
 The position, speed, and direction of each Soviet ship had been carefully plotted . There was no reason to expect the first interception within hours of the first .
 Military attaches in Moscow watched around the clock for any clue that might illuminate Soviet intentions and reactions to the situation . The United States waited tensely, for the first Navy attempt to launch the attack .
 Reporters pressed him to confirm or deny reports that some Soviet ships bound for Cuba had turned »*••**•""• but he would not comment . Reporters asked him to comment on reports of turning Soviet ships .
 In fact, that afternoon it was beginning to appear that the Soviet ships nearest Cuba had apparently stopped or altered course . The Soviet ships closest to Cuba were apparently changing course .
 Military chiefs speculated that the ships might have altered course to rendezvous with Soviet submarines, six of which had already been reported in the area . yLI One certainty was that the Soviets in Cuba were reacting vigorously to the President's announcement .
 At the beginning of the quarantine, the Commander-in-Chief, Atlantic, Adm Robert L Dennison, had tentatively asked the Air Force to help locate and identify shipping .
 The 303rd was to launch seven KC-97s on 25 October for a 13-hour search of the eastern portion of the area assigned to SAC . The 98th and 303rd were to launch nine tankers; the 303rd launched seven of the tankers .
 Tankers flew the sea search mission, radioing their sightings back to SAC headquarters, from which the information was passed to the Navy . The 55 SRW was to prepare to fulfill any subsequent missions requested .
 Headquarters Air Force contacted the SAC battle staff and asked that cameras be used to get a photographic record of the sightings . Headquarters asked that the photos be taken .
 SAC obtained cameras andfilm and shipped them by KC-97 to Lajes and Kindley . No further sea search missions were required of the refueling squadrons .
 Preparations are under way for the use of the RB-47s in the Blue BANNER sea search .
 Just before midnight on 24 October, five tankers left Forbes for Kindley to support the reconnaissance effort .
 They flew to an area near Bermuda for refueling, then searched in assigned areas east and south of the island . The search area was assigned to an assigned area east, south of Bermuda .
 Each navigator carried a second navigator to act as an observer and relay ship locations to SAC . When an aircraft made a sighting, either visually or by radar, it descended to about 5,000 feet to take photographs and take photographs .
 Four of the aircraft returned to Forbes after a 15-hour mission; the fifth had landed at Kindley beca.use of a radio malfunction . After a second refueling, four of the planes returned after 15 hours .
 The film was flown to Offutt, where it was processed by the 544th in a tremendous effort that kept some of the photo processing specialists at their task for over 24 hours straight .
 Shortly before noon on the 25th, CINCLANT had requested another mission the next day in the same area . The next day, the mission was scheduled to take place .
 A JCS message the same day said SAC should be ready to continue these missions- the implication was indefinitely . The implication is indefinitely .
 These were probably the days during which a ship called the Odessa was the focus of a great deal of concern in the intelligence community . The Odessa is believed to have been the ship of the same name in the days .
 The Odessa had left the Black Sea and then escaped the reconnaissance network . Many people' in the intelligence community suspected it was carrying nuclear warheads for missiles .
 Navy PB-4Ys looked for it f or .several days, flying the wide expanse of the Atlantic Ocean in cri-sscross fashion . The President and the Secretary of Defense grew more and more impatient .
 Many B-52s and KC-135s on airborne alert flew across the Atlantic to refueling areas near the coast of Spain . Many of the planes were on alert when they were refueled .
 There may also have been some signals intelligence tipoff suggesting where to look .
 The B-S2s used their navigational radar to spot blips in the water . They then descended to inspect the ships visually .
 Odessa never came any closer to Cuba but eventually turnede*d around and returned to the Soviet Union . The Odessa returned to Russia but never made any progress toward Cuba .
 The first intercept of a Soviet-bloc ship had taken place on the morning of 25 October . The intercept was the first of its kind .
 Twenty-two hours after the quarantine had gone into effect, the tanker Bucharest was allowed to pass 46 warships through the line of warships after declaring by radio that she carried only petroleum . Bucharest declared that she had only carried petroleum .
 The 16 dry cargo vessels which had changed course or stopped on Wednesday were lying dead in the water or moving in uncertain circles . An East German passenger ship had also been allowed to pass without being boarded .
 Some had turned around-apparently haying received orders no to risk running the blockade wU^-msitiye cargoes . United States aircraft tracked them all the way from the border .
 The Soviet ambassador to the UN challenged the United States ssador, Adlai Stevenson, to produce hard evidence -in proof . The sea search continued .
 A dry cargo ship of neutral registry, sailing under Soviet charter had . submitted to boarding, presumably on Sov let instructions, 'and proved to be carrying no weapons' But the point had been made that the Navy was exercising the right stop and search all vessels bound for Cuba .
 The latest aerial photographs of Cuba showed that work on the missile sites was . going ahead rapidly . serious efforts were under way to camouflage the activity . Work on the sites is under way .
 The President ordered more low-level reconnaissance flights, one every two hours . The President had ordered more than two hours of reconnaissance flights . President Barack Obama has ordered more .
 A long letter from Khrushchev to Kennedy arrived by teletype . That evening a long letter was sent to Kennedy by teletypewaster . The letter was the first to be sent from the Soviet Union .
 It showed some signs of willingness to negotiate the removal of the missiles . The North Korean government has shown signs of interest in negotiations .
 Khrushchev stated that the ships now sailing -to Cuba carried no weapons at all . Suggested that if the President were to give a no-invasion pledge and recall the American fleet, the problem of ""the weapons which you call offensive"" would appear in a different light .
 It was a strange, disjointed letter, without any specific commitment that the Soviet missiles would be dismantled in a verifiable manner . The letter was signed by the U.S. president in 1961 .
 ExComm reconvened at 10 that night in extraordinary session to consider the secret letter . ExComm convened in extraordinary session that night to consider it .
 They decided to treat it as a bonafide proposal meriting a serious reply . It was treated as a serious response to a proposal by the Government .
 State Department's Soviet affairs experts worked all night to find a settlement . They analyzed a letter and a proposal that seemed to outline a settlement tolerable to both sides .
 A Soviet ship detached itself from the others outside the quarantine line and was headed for Cuba . Work on the missile sites was going ahead day and night, with no sign of slackening .
 Radio Moscow started broadcasting a second Khrushchev letter addressed to Kennedy . The committee could not settle down to drafting a reply to the secret letter .
 It was markedly different in style and tone from the first . It was bearing the signs of Soviet-style group thinking .
 It demanded that if the U.S. wanted the missiles out of Cuba, it must remove its own missiles from Turkey . The United States must remove the missiles from Cuba, the Turkish government says .
 Crews briefed to go as low as necessary to make positive identification of all surface vessels . These routes were designed to sweep a wide area of suspicion .
 The third RB-47 crashed on takeoff, killing all four ere* members- the integral crew, Major Britton, Captain Constable, Lieutenant Rasmussen, and Lieutenant Rasmussen . Captain Dennis was added to the crew to aid in the search portion of the mission .
 Capt Joseph L Carney and his RB-47 crew finally located the Grozny at 2350,\ 6110V,. ""7 hey had descended for ship surveillance and"" recognition m an area where they had sighted three ships .
 After determining that, they climbed back., up to find the other shipping previously spotted in the area . The other shipping was also previously spotted .
 At approximately 1,500 feet altitude they spotted one of the other snips . The snips were located at approximately 1.500 feet above ground .
 The smoke stack in the rear has a large red band around it and the sickle and hammer displa>ed on the side of the stack . The deck was covered with long, silvery cylinders in a fore and aft position .
 After the initial identification run, the RB-47 experienced aircraft radar jamming, apparently from the Groznv, which began trying to hide in a squall line .
 The RB-47 ia a ""fa s s e s at 'the Hl£HZ from a11 angles while the crew photographed the ship . Then they uirected ""Rocket"" to the target area, -anti from ""Rocket's"" command ship they relayed orders
 The RB-47 circleed the Grozny for over two hours while directing the two U.S. ships to the area . The film was flown to Offutt, where it was processed .
 Surface ships are following the Grozny, but out of si glit . JCS reported later in the day that surface ships were following . Surface ships were also following the Russian city of Grozne .
 Rudolph Anderson Jr. Jr. had taken off from.cCoy for yet another U-2 overflight of Cuba . That same morning, kaj Rudolph Anderson, Jr. took off from .coy .
 A projectile, presumably from a Soviet-manned SAM site, exploded near his aircraft . Over the eastern end of the island a projectile exploded near the aircraft .
 The news of the loss of the U-2 arrived at HxComm while Radio Moscow was still broadcasting Khrushchev's second letter . The news was broadcast by Radio Moscow still broadcasting the second letter of the letter .
 The committee had consideied prethe appropriate-response would viously be an. bat if a U-2 was shot down strike . The appropriate response would be an an.bat if a .u-2 struck strike .
 The United States could not very well sacrifice them under threat from Soviet missiles in Cuba . Now suddenly the JUPITERs were on the bargaining table, and the U.S. could not . well sacrifice .
 The President knew that the Turkish missiles were a sideissue. I 53. But I 53 But the President . knew that . Turkish missiles are a side issue .
 If he had to order an armed attack on Cuba, it would not be because of them but because they had tried by stealth to alter the balance of forces between east and west, he says .
 The quarantine was not apparently succeeding in forcing the removal of the missiles . More drastic steps would have to be taken in a matter of hours, since the MRBMs were nearing operational readiness . And since the quarantine failed, more drastic steps were needed .
 An air strike against the missile sites, followed by an invasion of Cuba, was beginning to emerge as the likely alternative as the day wore on . The air strike is likely to be followed by a Cuban invasion of the country .
 Robert Kennedy had first broadcast letter and reply t were a valid proposal . Meanwhile . Meanwhile, there Robert Kennedyhad first broadcast . letter . Robert Kennedy first sent reply .
 Khrushchev finished of this final approach to had not been overruled since ept a set of terms . There was no reason for optimism. He finished .
 Late that evening, after a copy of the letter had been delivered to the Soviet ambassador, ExComm met again to discuss the letter .
 They had just served an ultimatum, making it clear that unless the work stopped on the missile sites, there would be a grave risk of war . It was made clear that if the work continued, the risk would be gravely high .
 Kennedy -arranged with McNamara to review the air-strike planning the next morning . Kennedy-McNamara reviewed the plans the next day .
 Major Heyser made his fateful overflight on 28 October . Sunday, 28 October, was a clear, bright day like that other Sunday on which he died .
 Kennedy's last letter to Khrushchev had been a shot in the dark, eagerly accepting a proposal never formally offered . Kennedy's final letter was a letter of support for the proposal, but it wasn't formalized .
 The Cuban 54 MMCILMSOIFOi® uhwjwoh-icu WKffi&T overflights were continuing . There still was no sign of slackening in the work of making the MRPMs ready to fire .
 A few minutes before nine o'clock, Radio Moscow announced that it would broadcast an important statement on the hour . The statement was broadcast by Radio Moscow at 9 p.m. Moscow .
 The Executive Committee waited, speculating gloomily that if Khrushchev's answer was no, the U.S. would have to launch an air strike . The Executive """""" Committee waited .
 At noon, after an hour-long session with ExComm, he drafted a quick acceptance statement . It was released to White' House reporters and beamed to Moscow over the Voice _of America .
 UN inspectors needed to certify removal of missiles and IL-28 bombers . UN inspectors also had to get UN inspectors into Cuba to certify the removal of the missiles .
 SAC had terminated its operations at Kindley, and all the 55 SRW aircraft had returned to Forbes by the night of 28 October .
 They remained ready until 29 November to support further CINCLANT requirements . But they remained ready to support additional requirements .
 Since Castro refused to allow UN inspectors into Cuba, the dismantlement and removal had to be verified by SAC high-altitude and TAC and Navy low-level photography .
 ELINT collection against air defenses continued at a high level . Because of the possibility that an air strike might still be required, ELINT collected against air defense continued .
 On 30 October the 55 SRW established an operating location at Little Rock AFB, Arkansas., to support the COMMON CAUSE missions . The missions continued to fly three a day until 22 November .
 CIA had never shown its U-2 pilots the product they acquired, he says . He learned that the CIA never showed pilots the new equipment to the pilots .
 He believed it was important that the pilots see what they were getting, so that they would understand the need for precise navigation and careful photography .
 The U.S. photo interpretation team at Laughlin was responsible for making sure that what went into or came out of Cuba was closely watched and meticulously measured . The team was shown enlarged photos of the results of their missions .
 PI reports were extremely detailed . Team members went so far as to count sugar sacks they' could see through a hatch, in the hold of a Soviet Ship and identify the sacks .
 In this way, using very detailed photography, interpreters tracked the progress of the withdrawal, as erectors were removed, launch stands broken up, missile ready tents removed .
 Convoys took missiles and associated equipment to Mariel and La Isabela and Casilda to be loaded on ships . Convoys moved out, taking the missiles and . associated equipment into Mariel . Convoy moved out to load the missiles into ships and load them onto ships .
 The vessels sailed out, to be intercepted by the quarantine fleet for close alongside inspection . The quarantine fleet intercepted the vessels .
 The IL-28s were not being shipped out of the U.S. But the same reconnaissance showed that they were not shipped out . The aircraft were still being used in the United States .
 Analysis of the Grozny photographs had revealed, meanwhile, that the mysterious silver cylinders were not disassembled missile's or missile fuel . Analysis has also revealed that the silver cylinders did not contain missile fuel or missile's .
 By 1 November the United States knew the names of the ships which had been carrying missiles, and the Gr °zny was allowed to proceed to Cuba . The United States also knew that the ships were carrying missiles .
 By 10 November it had been determined that 42 Soviet missiles had departed Cuba . The missiles had left the country .
 Castro was still holding out over the bombers, despite the arguments of Anastas Mikoyan, who had been in Havana since 2 November . Castro was holding out for the bombers .
 The following day, Khrushchev announced that the USSR would remove all the bombers, and Kennedy announced that 'the blockade would be lifted' The next day, the Soviet Union would remove the bombers .
 By 6 December a total of 42 had been counted aboard these ships batind for the USSR, thus drawing to a close the immediate threat of Soviet offensive systems in Cuba .
 On 27 November, when it was clear that the II, -28s were really being moved out, SAC had returned to a normal state of readiness .
 President Kennedy visited Headquarters SAC the day after the last IL-28 left Cuba . President Kennedy was given a tour of the underground command post and the Defense Analysis Center .
 He presented General Power with a unique plaque' citing SAC's extraordinary role in the Cuban crisis . General Power was presented with the plaque .
 SAC reconnaissance and intelligence had played key roles in the success of Operation Desert Storm . But it was overwhelmingly clear that SAC had played a key role .
 President Kennedy praised the contributions of the reconnaissance pilots . President Kennedy had earlier praised the pilots' contributions .
 The skill with which they completed their missions would have been largely wasted if the organization for quickly processing and delivering the intelligence they gathered to the highest levels of government had not existed . But the skill would not have been much wasted if it had not been created .
 The processing of raw data in the form of exposed camera film and. tapes from ELINT recorders was as vital to the reconnaissance effort as flying the mission . The processing was as important to the mission as flying .
 The Cuban crisis was a fast-developing situation in which intelligence had to be quickly processed, interpreted, and the results delivered to decision-making officials in time for them to act on it . The crisis was the first time intelligence had been processed and interpreted .
 The Air Force must continue to modernize its intelligence processing equipment to match the speed and sophistication of the collection systems, he said . But he said he believed the Air Force would continue to keep redundancy in this equipment .
 Lessons learned during the crisis contributed directly to the modernization that has been a continuing theme ever since .
 Dean Rusk, Secretary of State General Maxwell D Taylor, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff John A McCone . Secretary Rusk and Secretary of the State General Maximilian D Taylor attended the ceremony .
 Southard, ""Two Witnesses for the Defense,"" Studies in Intelligence , Fall 1964; Brugioni. Southard . Southard: "Two witnesses for the defense" Southard.
 Most of the names in the narrative have been checked against this or the Air Force Register .
 Thaxter L Goodell, "Cratology Pays Off,"" Studies in' Intelligence , fall 1964; Tighe Notes. Article, SECRET, was SECRET .
 U.S. SAC Briefing; Message: "Use this information to help us understand the complexities of our intelligence" Message was sent from a secure area in Washington, DC, D.C.
 See note above; Monograph, SECRET, HQ SAC/HO, The C ollateral Maritime Mission of the Strategi c Air Command, 31 Dec 80. — — — ; 136. See note .
 Monograph, TOP SECRET, HQ SAC/HO, SAC Operat ions in the Cuban Crisis of 1962 , 1963 . Operat ion in Cuban crisis of 1962 . Monograph. Monograph .
 The 55th Strategic Reconnaissance Wing was part of the U.S. Strategic Re-Surveillance Wing . The wing was based in Fort Worth, Texas, in May 1962 and September 1962 .
 Histories, SECRET, 544th Reconnaissance Technical Group, October December 1962 . Histories. Histories . History of the U.S. military .
 "Cratology Pays Off," n Studies in Intelligence, Fall, 1964 . Study in Intelligence was published in 1964 .
 Article, SECRET, ""A Crucial Estimate Relived," M Studies in Intelligence , Spring 1964 . Article, "Secret," was published in 1964 .
 SbCKET: "Tiie Missiles' in Cuba" Studies in Intelligence , Fall 1964 .
 Article, SECRET, ""Two Witnesses for the Defense ,"" Studies in Intelligence , Fall 1964 . Study in Intelligence .
 The existence of this journal is to be treated as information privy to the U.S. official community . (Wbcom msi ©mily)
 Interview, SECRET, with Maj Gen James C Enney and Col Norman Shaw , 5 April 1984 . Maj Gen Enney, Col Shaw and Maj. Norman Shaw .