 This list is unlikely to be complete, but I don’t claim to have checked everywhere . If there are things I’m missing, please let me know in the comments or by e-mail .
 One obvious thing missing is chapters in edited volumes; those are harder to find using traditional academic search engines . The book is published in the U.S.
 As for the “rules for inclusion,” they are both boring and common-sensical . The rules for inclusion are common and boring, but they are common-sense .
 Must be something that is primarily in the genre of the history of nuclear weapons or nuclear power . Must be a book that chronicles nuclear weapons and power .
 I’m just trying to make a useful list here and some inclusions/exclusions are going to be necessarily arbitrary . Some inclusions and exclusions are likely to be arbitrary .
 I have not read all of these — not even most of them — I do not endorse any of them . I have also not endorsed any of these books, but I don't read them .
 I thought about including book reviews, which are often useful and insightful, but decided it would make this list completely ungainly and my task disproportionately difficult .
 Project Dribble and the quest for nuclear weapons treaty verification in the Cold War era . The quest to verify nuclear weapons in the 1950s and '60s led to a nuclear disarmament crisis .
 CNN.com's "This Morning Live" airs at 9 p.m. ET on Sunday at 9 a.m., Sunday at 10 a. m. ET . This week's episode is the first of this year's "Top 10" to air on CNN iReport .
 Google Scholar proved to be no help whatsoever — too much noise, too little signal, too hard to filter by discipline . Google Scholar was no help with filtering .
 Thanks to Anthony Walker for helping with the Japanese translations of the film .
 Thanks to Will Thomas and Michael Gordin for giving this a look-see before I put it up .
 If I’ve missed something or screwed something up — highly likely — please get in touch with me .
 I wrote an essay-review of this for Historical Studies in the Natural Sciences under the title “Nuclear others’s” available here . I wrote about the nuclear age of nuclear power .
 Iversen’s biographical account of Rocky Flats was discussed by me in a part here . The author of the book, "Rocky Flats," was interviewed by John Sutter, in a book published by the author .
 I discussed these Krige articles on US-UK centrifuge history in this post . The centrifuge is a centrifuge that has been used in the past for decades .
 For a discussion of Malloy’s article on radiation effects, see my post here . For more of the discussion of radiation effects in the U.S. see this article .
 Norris and Kristensen’s accounting of nukes in Cuba and elsewhere, see my post here . For a discussion of Norris' accounting of those nukes, see this post .
 A little discussion of Tobey’s article on nuclear assassination is here, along with my own thoughts .
 My article on the “Philadelphia Story’s” is discussed and linked-to here .
 Ward Wilson’s ‘5 Myths about Nuclear Weapons’ by Ward Wilson is the most concise argument against nuclear weapons that I have come across . Ward Wilson's ‘Myths about nuclear weapons’ is the best concise argument I've ever heard against nuclear arms .
 There are a number of “2013” books released at the end of 2012, but I figure I’ll just include them in next year’s book .
 FirstView of Cambridge Journals Online published the following on 11/2/12: Jonathan Hogg and Christoph Laucht, “Introduction: British Nuclear Culture,” British Journal for the History of Science .
 These FirstView things trip me up with regards to citation and keeping track of them . I'm not sure how much of this is due to the FirstView .
 From the Manhattan Project, the most efficient way to assemble critical material is to pack explosives around it .
 I've found that having a curated bibliography goes a long way in keep abreast of what sorts of things I ought to notice .
 Lawrence Freedman of King’s College London has written several nuke-themed books .
 Thank you so much for publishing this list. December 28, 2012 .
 Congo ore was of a much higher purity rate than any other ore available to the Allies at the time and made the job much easier . The Congo ore had a higher purity than any of the other ores available for the Allies .
 It is no problem that you write in Russian. It's no problem to write in English .
 You are correct about the re-opening of the mine during the war – I had forgotten about that. You are right about that, and you are correct that the mine was re-opened during that war .
 Back in the day I was an Emergency Planning Officer in Scotland . I was a member of the Scottish Emergency Planning Council .
 When I first started the job in 1989 we were funded to carry out Civil Defence planning . But I was employed to look at Emergency Planning on an All-Hazards basis .
 This was our way of making good use of government resources for a greater public need . This was the way of using government resources to help the greater public, says the minister .
 Another one: Christoph Laucht, Elemental Germans: Klaus Fuchs, Rudolf Peierls and the Making of British Nuclear Culture .
 The state of the field as it is represented in print .