 There is no other incident of this magnitude between the Superpowers that can be considered representative of effective crisis management and national security decision making .
 This study represents the views of the author, and does not necessarily reflect the official opinion of the Air War College or the Department of Air Force . i Disclaimer: This study is published by the Center for BMD Technology . iReport.com .
 This potentially cataclysmic incident brought policy makers on both sides to seriously question their use of diplomacy, intelligence, nuclear weapons, military force, and to moderate their somewhat simplistic foreign policy rhetoric .
 Both sides had advanced to the edge of the precipice overlooking nuclear war, and had stepped back . Both sides were staunchly determined to avoid any possibilities of a reoccurrence . The two sides were determined to prevent a repeat of nuclear war .
 The strategic intelligence advantage that President John F Kennedy held over his adversary, Nikita Khrushchev, proved to be a decisive difference . President Kennedy held an intelligence advantage over his opponent .
 Colonel Oleg Penkovsky stands as a classic example of the value of human intelligence operations . Kennedy knew when Khrushchev was lying, what his capabilities were, and just as important, what they were not .
 Without the information on Soviet missiles, launchers, and associated equipment, President Kennedy had three days to think about his options . The information was provided to the Central Intelligence Agency by the CIA .
 Kennedy wisely chose to continue his dialogue with Khrushchev, which ended in a Soviet agreement to remove missiles from Cuba . In those three days, Kennedy chose to choose to continue the dialogue .
 Crisis management is necessary if crises arise, but crisis prevention and crisis avoidance based on political restraint and accommodations of differences are much to be preferred . Crisis prevention is necessary, but political restraint is needed, says Julian Zelizer .
 Arms control agreements, strategic arms reduction agreements, and improved communications are all positive steps along this pathway . Arms control agreement is a good step along the path to arms reduction .
 He has served in assignments overseas in Central America, Africa, and the Mideast .
 Policy makers on both sides of the Iron Curtain to seriously question and review their strategic policies for the use of nuclear weapons and military forces . Policy makers to adjust their use and understanding of diplomatic channels of communication .
 Both sides had steadfastly marched to the edge of the precipice overlooking nuclear war, and had stepped back . Both sides were staunchly determined to avoid any possibilities of a similar occurrence in the future .
 "For this courageous decision and subsequent actions, future generations and the world can be grateful," says President Obama . For this courageous act of action, the U.S. should be grateful .
 The Soviet leadership attempted to clandestinely place an imposing medium range nuclear strike force into Cuba, constructing it rapidly before the U.S. realized the threat or could react to its construction . The Soviets wanted to present the United States, fait accompli, a relative position of nuclear superiority
 The Soviet deployment of these medium range missiles, along with other military and naval bases constructed in Cuba during this period, were not merely for the defense of Cuba, but were an international extension of Soviet military power into the Western hemisphere . The U.S. challenged the leadership position of the
 Several other international events managed by this ""inexperienced" president, between the United States, the Soviet Union, and Cuba conspired to lead the Soviets into taking this reckless gamble, and they lost .
 The Soviet Union misjudged the character and resolve of the U.S. presidency, the mood of the country, and most importantly, United States intelligence capabilities to learn what was really happening in both Cuba and the Soviet Union .
 The U.S. public could not have tolerated the acceptance of an offensive missile base ninety miles from our shores . Any president would have been obliged to take strong actions .
 The U.S. could not have tolerated such a base without degrading its claim to its leadership position in the world . Further, the United States could not tolerate such an American base without seriously degrading its claims to leadership .
 In the first trimester curriculum of the 1995 Air War College, an article written by Eliot A Cohen, "Why We Should Stop Studying the CubanMissile Crisis,"" was assigned to all students for reading .
 Mr Cohen outlines three reasons for the popularity of serious, academic inquiry into the events in October of 1962 . He then proceeds to dismiss these reasons as irrelevant or immaterial .
 Mr Cohen's first position is the, ""unusual quality and 2 quantity of information available"" to the scholar . Mr Cohen is the author of the book, "Unusual Quality and Quantity of Information"
 An abundance of information should not, in and of itself, negate the validity of continued study of this event, says author . But an abundance of new information doesn't, nor does it negate, the author says .
 Arguing that too much available information somehow degrades the importance of an event is not particularly sound logic in my judgment . Arguing too much information is not sound logic, in my judgement, is not very sound logic .
 A simple plot studded with movie-star personalities, the whole incident unfolds and is resolved in just under two short weeks . The whole incident unfolded and was resolved in under two weeks .
 U.S. President John F Kennedy, Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev, and the mysterious revolutionary leader Fidel Castro provide dramatic performances in the scenario .
 Khrushchev deploys missiles into Cuba, Kennedy confronts him and demands removal of them . Kennedy eventually relents and withdraws them from Cuba . Kennedy confronted him and demanded removal of the missiles .
 The crisis remains the last major, indisputable success of American arms since the Inchon landings in September 1950, during the Korean War .
 Kennedy handled the unexpected threat to American security with decisiveness, determination, wisdom, and prudence . Prior to the Gulf war, only the Missile Crisis stood as a clear, ""recent" national military success .
 The Soviets were coerced to withdraw their missiles without receiving any public quid pro quo from the United States . The U.S. coerced the Soviets to withdraw missiles from the Soviet Union . The Soviets did not receive any public ousting of the missiles from Russia .
 Mr Cohen's points, with the one exception of an ""over""-abundance of data, are certainly worthy of academic consideration . The one exception is that there is an abundance of data .
 There appear to be significant lessons that can yet be learned by War College students through continued study of this incident . However, even when tempered by Mr Cohen's thoughtful arguments, there appears to be a significant lesson to be learned .
 There are many important lessons that can be drawn from continued study of this incident . However, I believe that there are many other lessons to be learned from it .
 These lessons revolve around many of the themes of the 1995 Air War College curriculum . Leadership, doctrine, strategy, technology, political-military integration, air and space power, and joint war fighting .
 Any one, or all, of these themes could be used to analyze and dissect the chronology of events and actions taken during the crisis .
 The missile crisis itself had profound effects on subsequent U.S. strategic thought, policies, and the very applications of each of these thematic topics .
 International diplomacy between the Superpowers was changed forever, from the installation of the ""hot line"" communications system between Moscow and Washington to the establishment of d6tente with the Soviet Union to the recognition of the People's Republic of China . All of these events can be traced directly to
 Much of the American military's technological development in last three decades was spawned in the wake of the missile crisis . Advanced nuclear weapons and missile designs, new intelligence satellites, reconnaissance aircraft, and even stealth technology, probably owe their existence to this crisis .
 The incident validated President Kennedy's strategy of ""flexible response"" and again proved the value of combined Ooint (Ooint) military operations in meeting a direct threat to the United States .
 The Air War College curriculum was missing from the 1995 curriculum, including strategic intelligence targeting, collection, analysis, and dissemination to the policy-maker and war-fighter .
 Without this crucial information, resolution of such a crisis becomes a mere guessing game with potentially catastrophic consequences . For this information, thoughtfully analyzed and disseminated to the decisionmakers, the crisis can't be resolved .
 This confrontation between the Superpowers, unforeseen and unwanted by either side, was eventually resolved peacefully through careful crisis management by the political leadership in both Washington and Moscow .
 The incident was a frightening and sobering episode in the titanic struggle between East and West that was embodied in the Cold War . The incident is even today, over thirty years after the fact, even today .
 Each side's-national security decision makers virtually stumbled into a war-threatening crisis . What is most frightening is the potential for a nuclear exchange, writes CNN's Peter Bergen .
 Given that so dangerous a crisis was unforeseen and unwanted by both sides, it was important to understand how it came about . The crisis was unexpected and unwanted .
 The Soviets had never stationed medium-range or intermediate-range nuclear missiles in the territories of other nations, not even in the territory of their Warsaw Pact allies . The Soviets never stationed such missiles in their territories .
 Nikita Khrushchev tried to install Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba, just over the horizon of the U.S. The Soviet Union tried to do the same in Cuba in the 1960s .
 President Kennedy's assessment of John F Kennedy had been made over the course of the previous fifteen months . Kennedy's personal assessment of President Kennedy was undoubtedly a personal assessment . President Kennedy died at the age of 65 in March 1963 .
 Khrushchev had been sparring with the young president since the beginning of Kennedy's administration . Most notably with the failed Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba in April 1961 and again, over the permanent division of Berlin .
 Kennedy's apparent lack of will and determination in providing U.S. air support to the Bay of Pigs invasion may have led Khrushchev to believe that 6 Kennedy was a weak character . Kennedy may have been reluctant to provide air support for the invasion .
 Kennedy's determination and mettle were better demonstrated to the Soviet Premier by the spring of 1962, when the two men met at their summit in Vienna . However, Kennedy's mettle was better demonstrated by the Soviet premier in spring 1962 .
 Kennedy was tough and effective in outlining U.S. and the West's position on the status of Berlin . Kennedy was effective in his use of American military initiatives during the period 1961-62 .
 It is more likely that the deployment of strategic weapons into Cuba was a ""quickfix"" measure designed to achieve a substantial improvement in Soviet strike capabilities against the United States .
 Khrushchev was vacationing at a dacha in the Crimea in 1962 . Defense Minister Rodion Ya. visited him at dacha on a spring day .
 Malinovsky drew Khrushchev's attention to the installation (and nearly completed operational status) of American Jupiter missiles just over the horizon, across the Black Sea in Turkey .
 American nuclear missiles would be able to strike their targets within the Soviet Union in ten minutes, while Soviet missiles required twenty-five minutes to reach the U.S. He pointed out that American missiles would strike within ten minutes .
 The Americans, after all, had not asked for, nor had they received, Soviet permission to do so . The U.S. did not request permission from the Soviet Union for the move .
 Khrushchev's idea was to deploy a small number of medium and intermediate range missiles secretly into Cuba . Then suddenly disclose their presence to the Untied States and to the world as a fait accompli .
 Khrushchev was asked why such a move would be unwise by the Soviet party hierarchy . The Soviet leader said such actions would be considered provocative by the U.S. The United States considered such actions provocative .
 It was believed that the United States would surely detect the construction and placement of such missiles in nearby Cuba, before the missiles could be made operational . It was also believed that Cuban leader Fidel Castro was unlikely to approve such a deployment .
 Khrushchev brushed aside these considerations, deciding to raise the issue with Castro and if he resisted the idea, to drop the matter entirely . The matter was dropped entirely .
 Khrushchev ordered a Soviet military mission to Cuba to scout out the terrain, and the conditions of shipment and emplacement, to determine whether the deployment could be made in secrecy . The mission was a Soviet mission to scout the terrain of Cuba to determine the conditions .
 The proposal was cleverly put to Castro as an offer of military support, ""All the way up to deploying Soviet medium-range missiles,"" on Cuban territory, if the Cubans considered that would be a useful measure to deter, ""The potential aggressor,"" from attack .
 Castro, evidently fearing additional attacks from the United States, agreed . Castro agreed with Castro, fearing further attacks from U.S.
 Kennedy ordered the CIA to begin clandestine efforts to overthrow the Communist regime in Cuba . In the wake of the fiasco at the Bay of Pigs, the CIA began clandestine efforts .
 CIA-handled saboteurs based in the Florida Keys called Alpha 66, repeatedly attacked the island in hit and run actions along the coast . The attack was carried out by a group based in Florida Keys known as Alpha 66 . Alpha 66 is a group of CIA-handled sabote
 CIA anti-Castro operations included sabotage of goods shipped to Cuba, arranging for European suppliers to produce faulty equipment . Operation included several plots to kill Fidel Castro, including several attempts to kill him .
 Castro and Cuba moved further into the Soviet sphere, allowing Castro to assume greater political centralization and more state management . Unfortunately, these operations had the effect of driving Cuba even farther into Soviet sphere .
 There is little evidence that anyone in the Soviet leadership considered what would happen if the missiles were discovered by the Americans before they could be made operational .
 The available record gives no indication of advance contingency planning for that possibility . No indication that there will be a contingency planning .
 Khrushchev and his advisers assumed that in the unlikely event that the deployment was discovered before it was completed, the initial United States response would be at the diplomatic level, rather than a military response .
 If the U.S. responded in this diplomatic manner, the risk of a shooting war could be avoided until a later point in the crisis . Moscow could control the situation, defuse the incident, and obtain concessions or payoffs in the bargain .
 This does not imply that the Soviets believed this action to be without risk, but they evidently did believe that the risk was easily manageable . The Soviets did not believe this action was without risk .
 In deciding to install the missiles secretly, Khrushchev failed to understand that while the Soviets had a good case for contending that the introduction of missiles into Cuba was legal and was comparable to U.S. actions in Turkey . The Soviet's use of secrecy and deception would undercut the
 Khrushchev did not adequately recognize the risks of premature U.S. discovery and announcement of the secret activity, says historian .
 Fidel Castro strongly urged Khrushchev to make the deployment of the missiles public from the outset, but he refused . It is noteworthy that Fidel Castro wanted to know more about the Soviet military support measures .
 Fidel's brother Raul and Che Guevara each made appeals to the Soviets for public disclosure . Raul's brother and Che's brother were unsuccessful .
 If the deployment of so many missiles into Cuba, carried out secretly and coupled with deception, were allowed to succeed, a variety of damaging consequences would follow for the U.S. position in the world, Kennedy's foreign and domestic policies, and his ability to provide leadership .
 The prestige and interests of the United States and the prestige and political future of John F Kennedy were merged by this action . Inextricably, the prestige of the U.S. and the future of the Kennedy family were merged .
 Khrushchev could not have designed a better plan to arouse Kennedy's personal and political concerns or to ensure that they became fused with the calculations of the national interest .
 Khrushchev, a noted bully, may have calculated the kind of personal and political damage that the covert deployment of missiles would inflict upon the president . He assessed the risks involved, assessing this damage to be worth the risks .
 Kennedy administration was placed under severe domestic pressure to take stronger actions against Fidel Castro . Kennedy administration faced increasing domestic pressure in the late summer of 1962 to take action .
 The Republicans had announced that Cuba would be the dominant issue in the midterm Congressional elections in November . The Republicans announced that the issue would be a dominant issue .
 The administration sought to reassure the public that the dangers of the Soviet military buildup in Cuba were being exaggerated . There was no reason to respond with war-like measures, such as a blockade .
 The administration disclosed considerable intelligence information concerning the character of the Soviet military supplies and personnel flowing into Cuba . The administration hoped to assure the public that it was well informed as to what the Soviets were doing in Cuba .
 Although clouds obscured most of the eastern portion of the island, observations in the western part of Cuba triggered alert mechanisms throughout the intelligence community . The alert was triggered by clear areas in the west of Cuba .
 Photo-interpreter finds surface-to-air missile site at National Photographic Interpretation Center in Washington . The site was discovered by a photo interpreter .
 Eight SAM sites had been discovered in various stages of construction across western Cuba . Before the day over, eight SAM sites were discovered .
 SAM sites were located along the northern coast of Cuba . The placement of the SAM sites was designed to protect the entire island rather than specific key installations . SAM sites are located along Cuba's northern coast .
 SAM sites were deployed to protect the Soviet IRBM facilities . This fact contradicts the position historians have often stated, that the SAMs were deployed in the Soviet Union .
 The installation of SAM's was an escalation of weaponry that was significant . However, it was not the first time SAM's had been installed in the country .
 Director of Central Intelligence John A McCone was briefed on the sites . He said, "They're not putting them in to protect the cane cutters"
 In separate statements issued on 4 and 13 September, Kennedy explicitly warned the Soviets that he would not tolerate the introduction of offensive weapons into Cuba . Kennedy publicly committed himself to act if strategic missiles were introduced into Cuba.
 Kennedy thought it most unlikely that the Soviets would undertake such a move, a belief reinforced by U.S. intelligence estimates and Soviet deception efforts . Kennedy thought such a pledge was relatively easy to make, as Kennedy thought most unlikely .
 The pledge to act if challenged was virtually irrevocable . Once such a stand had been taken in the heated domestic political environment, the pledge was virtually irreversible . The pledge was taken in a heated political environment .
 When the nuclear missiles were discovered later, in October, the U.S. might not have been in mortal danger, but the administration surely was . The administration surely wasn't in danger when they were .
 Kennedy and his advisors were swayed less by the military threat posed by the missiles than by the important political-diplomatic advantages they saw accruing to Khrushchev if the nuclear missiles remained .
 Historians generally have noted that Kennedy followed prudent crisis management principles in dealing with the situation created by Khrushchev's gamble .
 The president adhered to the political requirements of dealing with crisis management . He limited his objectives and the means used in reaching those objectives, he said .
 Kennedy rejected the notion that the missile crisis demanded the overthrow of Castro, or the elimination of Soviet influence on the island . Kennedy: "The missile crisis was not the end of the Soviet influence in Cuba"
 Kennedy made it clear that his objective was the removal of the missiles from Cuba, no more and no less, a position he held firmly throughout the crisis . Inferring that such goals would substantially increase the chances for war .
 Kennedy initially favored an air strike at the outset of the crisis . He soon saw the merits of limiting not only the objective but also the means to achieve it .
 Interest in the blockade option grew as it became an option which might achieve the removal of the 12 missiles without triggering a war . The blockade option is an option that might remove the missiles from Syria without triggering war .
 Kennedy also determined that a purely diplomatic maneuver, which several of his key advisors were recommending, would be ineffective and could possibly be dangerous .
 Khrushchev could perceive such action as an exploitable opening, and encourage him to attempt to capitalize on his investment, without understanding the seriousness of the president's intentions and regarding subsequent threats as mere bluff .
 Direct military action would certainly result in American casualties, and perhaps trigger a strong Soviet response, leading to war . On the other hand, direct military action could result in U.S. casualties .
 The one weakness of the blockade plan was that although it would prevent any additional weapons from reaching Cuba, it did little to coerce the removal of the weapons already there . The blockade plan would not coerce any more weapons from Cuba .
 Members of the Executive Committee (or ExComm) advocated the air strike option . This point was cogently argued by those members of the National Security Council personally chosen by Kennedy to assist him in resolving the crisis .
 Kennedy imposed the blockade without knowing how he would convince Khrushchev to remove the missiles from Cuba . He did know that the blockade option provided him more options and allowed for continued pressure .
 Kennedy played to his strengths. It offered time for an effort to persuade the Soviets to remove the missiles voluntarily, thereby controlling the risk .
 First, enforcing the blockade were the superior U.S. naval forces which the Soviets could not possibly match, positioned across the globe . The Soviets were unable to match the strength of the United States naval forces .
 The U.S. held a distinct advantage in strategic nuclear weapons, which is why the Soviets placed their missiles into Cuba in the first place, a point not lost on Khrushchev . The United States also had a strong advantage over the Soviet Union in Cuba, which was not lost
 Kennedy always doubted whether Kennedy and the U.S. would be able to summon the motivation and will to prevent his success . What he always had doubted was whether Kennedy's success would be prevented .
 The question became how to convince the irascible Soviet Premier to forego the considerable advantages he expected to gain from the missile deployment, and how easily he might accept the considerable loss of international prestige and the domestic costs .
 The dominant view was that Khrushchev had miscalculated the risks of his initiative and that if he was made fully aware of these risks, he would be capable of retreating and withdrawing the missiles without bloodshed . In the 1960s, the dominant view of the view was: Khrush
 Kennedy believed that Khrushchev was a rational, intelligent man who, if given sufficient time and shown determination, would have to alter his position . Kennedy believed if given time he would have changed his position, he would change his mind .
 Photo-analysts at the National Photographic Interpretation Center in Washington concluded firmly that the Soviet Union was installing nuclear missiles in Cuba that could reach targets in the U.S. One day later, startled photo-analysis analysts at the N.P.C. center concluded .
 President Kennedy imposed a naval quarantine on the further delivery of offensive weapons to Cuba . He also insisted on the prompt withdrawal of Soviet missiles already delivered . The quarantine was imposed on 20 October .
 On the evening of Monday, 22 October, he announced his decision to the country and the world . He announced his resignation from the presidency on the night of October 22 .
 There followed a six-day international crisis of unprecedented severity in which the risk of nuclear was greater than at any time before or since .
 Only one life was lost by hostile action (that of Major Anderson, on 27 October) The crisis ended-on Sunday, 28 October, by a public statement from Nikita Khrushchev that the missiles would be removed from Cuba .
 Strategic intelligence played a critical role in this incident, from the discovery of the first SA-2 SAM site in mid-August to the detection of the construction of a mediumrange ballistic missile site in October 1962 .
 By the fall of 1962, CIA U-2 reconnaissance aircraft had achieved an impressive intelligence record, flying over the Soviet Union during the 1950's . The Soviet Bomber Gap was a myth .
 Approximately twenty American U-2 missions were flown over the Soviet Union from July 1956 until Francis Gary Powers was shot down on I May 1960, thus 15 ending overflights of Soviet airspace . The mission ended 15 U.S. U.2 overflights over Soviet airspace in 1960 .
 The venerable U-2 again proved its value in Cuba, providing irrefutable evidence of Soviet installation of ballistic missiles . The U.2 provided evidence that the Soviets installed ballistic missiles in Cuba .
 When the Soviets first began sending weapons and armaments abroad, such equipment was frequently carried as deck cargo on merchant vessels . Such equipment was often carried on deck cargo .
 In an attempt to conceal and protect these shipments, the Soviets covered the weapons with packing crates or placed them in special shipping containers . The weapons were placed in special containers .
 Liberty ships or vessels constructed in Western shipyards were available to intelligence analysts . The dimensions of these ships were known to be available to analysts .
 Officials at CIA and NPIC developed expertise known as ""cratology" which allowed careful analysis and measurement of such crates to determine what equipment or weapons were being shipped .
 By the late summer and fall of 1962, ""cratology"" had become firmly established as an intelligence technique . ""Cratology" was established as a technique for intelligence .
 NPIC photo-interpreters were able to discern what types of Soviet weaponry was being off-loaded at the port of Mariel, and also monitor the withdrawal of the missiles in the post-crisis stage .
 Director of Central Intelligence, John A McCone, convinced that the discovery of SAM sites in mid-August presaged the installation of Soviet ballistic missiles . McCone was convinced that SAM sites were discovered in August .
 President Kennedy insisted that Cuba be photographed as soon as possible by U-2 aircraft was a grand stroke of luck for the United States, President Kennedy, and future generations .
 McCone, a Republican appointee in the Democratic administration, faced heavy political skepticism for his views on Cuba . McCone faced skepticism fueled by the impending mid-term congressional elections in November 1962 .
 Attorney General Robert F Kennedy thought to be secretly informed by DCI McCone . The Republican opposition made Cuba an issue in the campaign .
 The president trusted McCone to fulfill the duties as DCI in a professional manner . Fortunately, McCone was not disappointed .
 In the months prior to the discovery, thousands of Cuban refugees were pouring into Miami and other Florida cities with wild stories of ""Mongol"" soldiers, Russian military activity, and missiles in Cuba .
 These confused reports were alarming, especially in the wake of the Bay of Pigs disaster and the tense domestic political campaign . The confusion was alarming .
 Some reports were the result of fertile imaginations designed to prod the U.S. into direct military action against Castro . Some of the reports were actually false . Others were made up of a plot to provoke the United States to attack Castro .
 Some information was almost certainly Soviet and Cuban disinformation planted among fleeing refugees . Some of the information was probably planted among the fleeing refugees.
 Known as the Caribbean Admission Center, this facility was administered by CIA, and interesting reports were sped to Washington for further analysis .
 All categories of military activities were cataloged by the Center . Any report that appeared convincing was checked against U-2 photography . The Center cataloged military activities .
 Oleg Penkovsky, a GRU Colonel, played a vital role in this epic story . Some of the most valuable intelligence provided to President Kennedy and the U.S. during the crisis .
 In the early part of 1961, Penkovsky approached a British businessman with an offer to ""work"" for Western intelligence . In the mid-1960s, he offered to work for the CIA .
 Penkovsky began his espionage career for British and American intelligence service after a lengthy and frustrating experience establishing his bona fides as a worthwhile intelligence asset . Penkovski began his spy career after a long, frustrating experience with the CIA .
 His information came at a time when satellite information was just being assembled and evaluated, after the curtailment of U-2 overflights caused by the Powers shootdown .
 He provided a rational explanation to accompany the emerging satellite evidence, which led to a revision of a revised of a National Intelligence Estimate on Soviet missile strength in the fall of 1961 .
 His reporting was later fully corroborated by satellite imagery and disproved the ""Missile Gap"" believed to exist between the Soviet Union and the United States . His reporting later fully confirmed by satellite images .
 Over the course of his espionage, Penkovsky passed manuals and blueprints of Soviet missiles and related equipment . He also passed manuals, blueprints and equipment .
 Only twenty people were authorized access to Penkovsky's reports, on a strict need-toknow basis . Only 20 people were allowed access to his reports .
 President Kennedy was concerned that earlier Air Force estimates of Soviet missile strength sharply contradicted the intelligence community consensus . President Kennedy lost interest in the Air Force claims during 1961 .
 The new evidence from Penkovsky and the Discoverer satellite imagery overwhelmed the unsubstantiated Air Force conjectures .
 Kennedy himself had accused the Republicans of allowing the Soviets to surpass the U.S. in missiles and nuclear weapons . Shifting from the idea of American inferiority to American superiority in strategic missiles would be a difficult public perception .
 Kennedy's knowledge undoubtedly strengthened his position when negotiating with Soviet Premier Khrushchev in the fall of 1962 .
 CIA could reliably estimate how long it would take to complete the missile installations and when the sites would become operational . Penkovsky said the CIA was able to estimate the time it would be necessary for the sites to be operational .
 Monitoring construction of power, fuel lines, launching booms and other equipment at the launching sites provided critical information that gave President Kennedy three extra days to discuss and decide how to proceed with Khrushchev .
 The 18 larger issue at the time was whether or not to order a first strike against the missile sites in Cuba and destroy the Cuban Air Force . The larger issue was whether to strike in Cuba .
 CIA could assure the President that there was time to think, plan, and execute . With the aid of the material Penkovsky delivered, the CIA could .
 Then Deputy Director for Operations of CIA Richard Helms later commented, "I don't know of any single instance where intelligence was more immediately valuable than this time" Helms was CIA's Deputy for Operations .
 Penkovsky's intelligence information played a critical role in assessing the readiness of the Soviet missiles in Cuba and the overall Soviet nuclear strength . The Soviets dismantled the missiles and destroyed their sites in November .
 CIA analysts were able to understand what was presented to them because Penkovsky provided the basic information upon which to build their judgments . CIA analysts are able to make their judgments based on the information provided .
 Deputy Director for Intelligence, Ray Cline, believed that the initial imagery of the missile sites at San Cristobal was the key to the successful resolution of the crisis . It has not been conclusively determined to this day whether any of the nuclear warheads had actually arrived in Cuba by mid October
 The United States intelligence community had to assume that the Soviet nuclear warheads were present, but did not know for certain . The U.S. intelligence community assumed that the warheads would be present .
 Actual numbers were between 40,000 and 42,000, a significant difference if an American invasion was deemed necessary . Actual numbers of Americans killed in Iraq in the fall of 1991 were 40-42,000 .
 Recent Soviet evidence suggests nine nuclear warheads for tactical missiles were on the island . Local Soviet commanders had the authority to fire these weapons without further orders from Moscow in the event of an American invasion .
 There was intelligence which provided concrete evidence that nuclear warheads for the Cuban missiles had been loaded on the Soviet cargo ship Poltava, one of the largehatch freighters that was en route to Cuba .
 As with all of the missile transporting ships, the Poltava declared for a false destination, Algeria, and had a false cargo manifest . The ship had declared for Algeria, but it was headed for Algeria .
 The Poltava was only a few days sailing from Cuba when the quarantine was imposed . The ship was bound for Cuba when it was taken into quarantine .
 The Poltava turned back toward the Black Sea on 24 October, along with four ships carrying missiles and associated equipment . Eleven additional ships with other military equipment were also turned back into the sea .
 It must be noted that failing to detect the packing, loading, and transport of the missiles from the Soviet Union to Cuba in the first place was, in and of itself, an intelligence failure .
 The intervening time period between the shootdown of Francis Gary .-Powers' U-2 and the deployment of the Discoverer satellite system created a period of blindness for U.S. intelligence .
 This does not excuse the failure to photograph the Soviet Union's Black Sea ports and merchant cargo shipments through the Mediterranean .
 In the midst of the crisis, it provided the President and his advisors with very accurate, detailed information on the sequence of events as they occurred . It could even predict future events, such as the timing of Soviet missile activation .
 President knew when the Soviets were lying 20 and could expose their duplicity . Armed with such information, the President knew that he could expose them .
 After the Soviet agreement to remove missiles, intelligence platforms accurately verified their withdrawal . The missiles were removed from the Soviet Union in 1979 .
 The overall effectiveness of crisis management depends on satisfying political goals while controlling military measures used to attain them . The effectiveness of the military measures depends on political goals and political goals, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 He effectively integrated national, political, diplomatic, and military elements by carefully selecting the membership of his executive committee who helped him manage the crisis .
 Kennedy largely controlled the urge to micro-manage military operations, allowing the established command and control elements to perform their duties . Kennedy was president of the U.S. in the early 1960s .
 The tempo and momentum of the crisis, critical if one is to ""manage"" a crisis, were controlled throughout the incident, ensuring that his opposite number in the Kremlin knew what was happening at all times . The tempo, momentum and tempo of a crisis were kept in check .
 This allowed both men to think over their options, exchange diplomatic correspondence when necessary, and to control raging emotions .
 Kennedy carefully selected appropriate military operations that were consistent with his political objectives and diplomatic statements . Kennedy selected appropriate operations consistent with political objectives, he said .
 Each U.S. military escalation or preparation is clear and highly visible, signaling American resolve and consistency . Each escalation, or preparation, is visible and clear .
 War was avoided because the incentive to avoid it remained powerful throughout the crisis, and opportunities for avoiding escalation were available, and were not abandoned due to the skill of the two national leaders involved . The incentive for avoiding war was strong throughout the entire crisis, writes Peter Bergen .
 Khrushchev and Kennedy behaved with sober prudence and reasonable skill to extricate themselves from the threatening 22 confrontation they found themselves . President Truman and his Secretary of State, Dean Acheson, who in 1950 imprudently escalated the United States objective to the unification of the
 Khrushchev quickly saw the need to pull back his cargo ships and submarines and settle for whatever he could safely gain once confronted by President Kennedy's tough military response . Similarly, however ambitious, he quickly pulled back cargo ships, submarines and submarines .
 Each leader was aware that events could quickly spin out of their individual control if the utmost care were not exercised . Both leaders were determined that this should not occur .
 President Kennedy bought the crisis to the brink of war with Khrushchev . Kennedy was ultimately able to provide an acceptable carrot to the Soviet leader .
 Both sides agreed to step back from the brink, somewhat breathless at the thought of how close they had come to mutual disaster . Both sides were breathless and breathless after the brink of disaster .
 One of the more dangerous threats to effective crisis management was the shooting down of an American U-2 on 27 October . The shooting was one of the most serious threats to the U.S. government .
 This action nearly triggered a U.S. decision to retaliate against one or more of the Soviet SAM sites in Cuba, a development that would have placed the burden of continued peace in Khrushchev's pudgy hands .
 If the rules of engagement upon which the Soviet navy was operating, some of the U.S. Navy quarantine efforts might have ended in armed conflict between the two forces . Equally troubling were the rules that the Soviet Navy was operating .
 For whatever reason, Soviet naval commanders exercised more restraint than their land based SAM counterparts . The Soviet naval commander was more restrained than his land based counterparts .
 Additional information surfaces with each passing day, most notably from the archives of the former Soviet Union . Additional information has been published in the past week .
 Central to any lesson from this incident is the idea that strategic intelligence is critically important to national security decision makers at any time, but especially in the midst of crisis .
 President Barack Obama was made available to the President through the knowledge gained from U.S. strategic intelligence sources . President Obama was given a range of options by the President in the wake of 9/11 attacks .
 If GRU Colonel Penkovsky had not been as persistent as he was in contacting Western intelligence officials and volunteering his considerable services, U.S. analysts would have been unable to determine the operational status of the Cuban missile sites .
 Nikita Khrushchev had been able to complete the installation of missiles in Cuba without the U.S. learning of the operation prior to its completion .
 Because the very ""uniqueness"" of the missile crisis argues for its continued importance as a historical case study . Because of its unique nature, the case study argues for continued importance of the crisis .
 "The crisis was, in fact, the most acute and dangerous confrontation during the Cold War," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The U.S. and the Soviet Union were the closest to a nuclear exchange . It was, and remains, the closest the two countries ever came to a nuke exchange .
 The missile crisis, like it or not, has been and will continue to remain a significant historical paradigm . Fundamentally, the missile crisis has been a significant historic paradigm .
 Edward F Dolan, Jr. and Margaret M Scariano, Cuba and the United States. Edward F. Dolan and Margaret F. Scariane, Cuba, U.S. and Cuba. respectively.
 The Brookings Institution, 1989), pages 13, 16, 22, 24, 25, and 25, 36, 37, 38, 39 . The Brookings Institute, 1989, published the book "The Brookings Institution"
 Statements made by United States Representative to the United Nations Security Council . U.S. representative to the U.N. Security Council: The Council is responsible for the United States.