 Thirteen Days is the story of mankind's closest brush with nuclear Armageddon . The film is based on the book "Thirteen Days" and is based in London .
 The movie captures the tension that the crisis provoked . It provides an example of how foreign policy was made in the last half of the 20th century . The movie was released in March 2013 .
 The film shows how wise leadership during the crisis saved the world from nuclear war . It also shows how mistakes and errors in judgment led to the crisis .
 The movie can serve as a motivator and supplement for a unit on the Cold War . With the corrections outlined in this Learning Guide, the movie can be a motivation and supplement .
 It believed that the missiles were not operational and that only 2-3,000 Soviet personnel were in place . For example, it believed that only two-3-4 million Soviet personnel would be in place at the time .
 Air strike planned for 30th, before any nuclear warheads could be installed . Air strike was planned for the 30th before any nukes were installed .
 9 SRBMs were ready to be used against the Americans in case of an invasion . Further, 9 SRBs were ready for use against the U.S. in the event of a US invasion .
 Although the crisis began and ended in October of 1962, the story began much earlier . See also McNamara's interview in ""The Fog of War"
 Relations between the Soviet Union and the U.S. deteriorated almost immediately after World War II . It ended cooperation which enabled the Allies to defeat Nazi Germany . Relations between Russia and the United States deteriorated .
 Russian occupying forces overstayed their tour of duty in the Middle East . Russia's occupying forces were overstaying in the Mideast .
 Britain and America thwarted the expansion of the Azerbaijani Soviet Republic into Iran and began the policy of containment attempting to restrict Soviet expansion . Britain and U.S. tried to restrict the Soviet Union into Iran .
 As the Cold War took hold, Americans became alarmed at the spread of Communist regimes in East Europe and East Asia . Americans were alarmed by the spread in East Asia and East Europe .
 The Soviets were worried about postwar unity among the U.S. and powerful West European nations . The Soviets feared postwar unity between the United States and West Europe .
 Both the Communist bloc and the capitalist democracies lurched from crisis to crisis . Both the communist bloc and capitalist democracies have been in crisis . The world's most recent crisis was in the Soviet Union in 1991 .
 These ranged from the Soviet blockade of Berlin, the Korean War and the confrontation between Egypt and Western allies Israel, France and Britain over the Suez Canal .
 IRBMs could not reach the U.S. but they could reach Western Europe . The IRBmars could not be intercepted by the United States, but could be sent to Western Europe.
 Well over a hundred million people would have been killed in the U.S. and NATO countries . Well over 100 million would have died in the United States and the NATO countries, says CNN.com .
 While there were defenses to the long range bombers, there were no defenses to ICBMs or IRBMs . There were also no defenses for ICBm or IRBM missiles .
 In 1962, the United States knew that its nuclear forces were much stronger than those of the Soviet Union . The U.S. government realized that losing its major cities with casualties approaching 100,000,000 people was not acceptable .
 "No U.S. government could permit Europe to be destroyed," says Obama . Treaty obligations and as a practical matter, no United States government would permit such destruction .
 The Soviets acutely felt the inferiority of their nuclear deterrent . However, the Soviets felt inferiority to their nuclear weapons .
 The effort to place missiles in Cuba was an effort by the Russians to improve their nuclear capability quickly and inexpensively . The effort was part of a plan to improve Russia's nuclear capabilities quickly .
 Missile transporters and missile-ready tents where fueling and maintenance took place . The U.S. missile program has been in place since 2009 .
 The Kennedy Administration increased military expenditures and increased its lead in nuclear weapons over the Russians . While, at the same time, refused to disavow a nuclear first strike, the U.S. continued to increase its nuclear lead .
 Despite the Bay of Pigs debacle, the U.S. continued its efforts to destabilize Cuba and assassinate its dictator, Fidel Castro . In addition, the United States continued to try to assassinate Castro .
 The Soviet leadership didn't realize how much the United States feared Russia's nuclear deterrent . The U.S. didn't know how much it was feared by the Soviet leadership .
 The CIA learned of suspicious activity from intelligence sources on the island . The U.S. sent U-2 spy planes to investigate .
 When a U-2 came back with photographs of missile sites under construction, President Kennedy convened his advisors before announcing the discovery to the world .
 While some recommended diplomacy, others pressed for military options, such as air strikes or invasion of Cuba . Some recommended diplomacy . Others pressed for air strikes, air strikes and invasion .
 The U.S. Navy quarantined the island of Cuba, preventing any additional missiles or offensive weapons from reaching the island . The island has been declared a state of quarantine .
 The United States mounted a diplomatic offensive attempting to use world opinion to pressure the Soviets to remove the missiles . In the meantime, the U.S. mounted an effort to pressure them to remove them .
 Soviet ships tested the blockade, but ultimately chose not to challenge the quarantine . The quarantine was quarantined until the end of the Cold War .
 The United States for its part allowed ships with food and fuel through the quarantine . The U.S. also allowed ships carrying fuel and food to enter quarantine .
 A Soviet surface-to-air missile battery shot down a U-2 spy plane over Cuba, killing the pilot . Acting without Moscow's approval, the plane was shot down by a Soviet missile battery .
 In a confidential side agreement, the United States promised future removal of 15 obsolete Jupiter missiles from Turkey . The U.S. also promised to remove 15 obsolete missiles from the country .
 President Kennedy had ordered these missiles removed months before . But because of objections from the Turks and bureaucratic inertia, the missiles remained in place .
 Difficulties in Communications encountered during the crisis led to the installation of direct telephone communications between the leaders to avoid future misunderstandings .
 In subsequent years, the countries negotiated a nuclear test ban treaty . The countries then signed a treaty to ban nuclear weapons .
 Future presidents and Soviet leaders conducted Strategic Arms Limitation Talks in the 1960s and 1970s to limit the number of nuclear warheads poised to strike each other .
 Never again would America and Russia come to the same level of threat that characterized those thirteen days in October of 1962 .
 The following additional background will be helpful in understanding the concerns of the participants and their statements, as set out in the film .
 In the 1930s a resurgent Nazi Germany violated the restrictions on its military set out in the Versailles treaty that ended WW I . Germany demanded that Czechoslovakia cede to it a part of the Sudentenland in which approximately 3 million ethnic Germans lived .
 Leaders of the Western powers agreed to the dismemberment of Czechoslovakia to appease Hitler . At a conference in Munich held to consider Hitler's demands, the leaders agreed to a dismembered state . The leaders of the West agreed to an agreement in Munich to appease the dictator .
 Hitler promised that if Germany absorbed the Sudentenland, it would seek no additional territory . Hitler promised to ensure that no more territory was sought by Germany .
 The Munich conference convinced Hitler that France and Britain were weak, leading directly to the German invasion of Poland . The conference convinced him that the Germans were weak .
 Kennedy was one of the few millionaires to back Franklin Roosevelt in the 1932 election . Kennedy was a millionaire who backed FDR in 1932 . Kennedy had been a millionaire to back FDR in the 1930s .
 Ambassador Kennedy supported the Munich compromise . In private cables to the State Department and in public speeches, he supported the compromise . Ambassador Kennedy: "In private cables, the world's best friend"
 From the time of Munich until long after the U.S. had declared war on Germany, Joe Kennedy advocated a compromise with Hitler and an isolationist foreign policy . Joe Kennedy was a prominent advocate for isolationism and a compromise .
 President Kennedy, as a young man, had written a best selling book criticizing appeasement . President Kennedy wrote a best-selling book criticizing appeasment .
 John Kennedy carried the burden of his father's stand in favor of appeasement . Despite this fact, until the end of the missile crisis, John Kennedy continued to carry the weight of his dad's stand .
 On December 7, 1941, the Imperial Japanese Navy mounted a sneak attack on the United States naval base at Pearl Harbor, Hawaii . The attack was the first Pearl Harbor attack since December 7 .
 The lesson that an adversary might mount a sneak attack had been absorbed by U.S. intelligence . The U-2 flights and aerial reconnaissance that discovered the missiles were partially responsible for the discovery of the missiles .
 The fear of losing the moral high ground by mounting a sneak attack on the missile bases served as a restraint on the policy makers . Second, throughout the Excomm deliberations, the fear of . losing . the moral . high ground served as the . policy makers' restraint on an attack on
 The men in the Excomm had personal memories of World War II and the Korean War . The men were deployed to South Korea in 1950s .
 President Kennedy hid back problems that would easily have won him an exemption from military service . President Kennedy, for example, volunteered for combat, hiding back problems would have won an exemption .
 When the PT boat he commanded was rammed and sunk by a Japanese destroyer, Kennedy led his men to a small island several miles away . He saved one severely injured sailor by holding the strap to a life preserver between his teeth while he swam to shore .
 Kennedy was awarded the Navy and Marine Corps Medal for his leadership and courage . Kennedy was also awarded the Medal of Honor .
 Russia suffered more from the war than any other nation in terms of casualties and property destruction . Russia had suffered more than any others from the conflict than any nation .
 Fidel Castro had only experience only in a civil war that was relatively painless . Fidel Castro, had experience in a war that wasn't a bloody war . The Castro government was victorious in the war .
 Castro's willingness to provoke a nuclear war was one of the destabilizing factors in the Crisis . Castro was a key figure in the Cuban crisis . As will be seen, Castro was willing to provoke war .
 After WW II, the Allies divided the German capital, the city of Berlin, into four zones of occupation . Berlin was occupied by the Germans during the Second World War .
 Shortly after the war, the Western powers consolidated their zones into a new state called West Germany . West Germany became West Germany after West Germany was formed from West Berlin .
 The Russians established a Communist state in their zone called East Germany . They established the state in East Germany in the 1960s .
 The Western sector of Berlin was deep within East German territory . It became a part of West Germany after the fall of the Berlin wall .
 The status of West Berlin increasingly annoyed the Russians and the East Germans . West Berlin's prosperity in the 1950s and '60s annoyed the Soviets and East Germans'
 In 1948 Stalin suddenly stopped permitting access by land to West Berlin . In 1948 the Soviets stopped allowing access to the west Berlin . West Berlin was a major hub for West Berlin during the Cold War .
 Western powers, led by the U.S., mounted an effective airlift to bring supplies to the city . The Western powers led to the airlift of supplies to help the residents .
 The Western democracies made it clear that if the Soviets interfered with the airlift there would be war . Western democracies had made clear they would not tolerate the Soviets interfering with airlift .
 Eventually, when the Russians became convinced that the West would not back down, they dropped the blockade . Eventually, the blockade was lifted when the West refused to back down .
 It was a cornerstone of the Western policy of ""containment"" which sought to block the expansion of Russian influence and Communist ideology . As such, it was the cornerstone of a policy of containment .
 Through the years, West Berlin became a wealthy glittering city standing in stark contrast to the drab and relatively impoverished life of East Germany . West Berlin is now a glittering glittering, glittering West Berlin .
 West Germany also became an economic powerhouse, dwarfing its Eastern rival . West Germany became a major economic hub in the 1950s and 1960s .
 The situation had become intolerable for the Russians and East Germans . The situation was 'unacceptable' for the two countries .
 U.S. Ambassador to Russia Llewelyn ""Tommy"" Thompson to Kennedy to Kennedy, 1961 . Thompson was ambassador to Russia from 1961 to 1961 .
 As Khrushchev colorfully put it, Berlin was a ""bone in the throat"" of the Soviet Union . Berlin was Berlin's "bone" in the USSR's history . Berlin's role in Berlin was described as a "bone in its throat"
 The Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko stated to President Kennedy that after the November elections in the U.S., the Russians would be ""compelled"" to ""take steps to end the Western presence in Berlin"
 In August 1961, the Russians and East Germans sealed off West Berlin and began construction of the Berlin Wall . To stop the exodus through Berlin to West Germany, the Wall was built in August 1961 .
 Its defenders were surrounded on all sides by East Germany and superior numbers of Russian and East German troops . It was surrounded by superior forces of Russia and East Germany .
 If the U.S. allowed the Russians to take West Berlin, its Western European partners would feel betrayed and the NATO alliance severely weakened, if not destroyed . If the United States allowed the Russia to take Berlin, the alliance would be weakened .
 President Kennedy said West Berlin would be defended, if necessary, with a nuclear strike on the Soviet Union . In response to the need of the Western Europeans for maintenance of the status quo in Berlin, the West's inability to defend the city using conventional forces, the U.S. policy
 West Berlin was more important to the Russians and the Europeans than was Cuba, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "West Berlin is more important than Cuba"
 For the U.S., the maintenance of the NATO alliance was, militarily, more important than removing the missiles from Cuba . The maintenance of NATO was more important for the United States than removing missiles, the president says .
 The United States public would not tolerate the presence of Russian missiles in the Western Hemisphere . The U.S. would not have had any credibility with its allies or its foes if it permitted missiles to be secretly introduced into the island .
 In April of 1961 the CIA mounted an invasion of Cuba using Cuban exiles as the initial landing force . President Kennedy approved of the invasion, with President Kennedy's approval of the action .
 President Kennedy relied upon advice of experienced men in the government who told him that the invasion would succeed . President Kennedy had relied upon the advice of experts who told the president that he would succeed in the invasion .
 The invasion was an unmitigated disaster for the U.S. government and for President Kennedy, says President Kennedy . President Kennedy says the invasion was a disaster for him and his government .
 The responsible officials, the head of the CIA and an assistant were told by President Kennedy that they were to resign after a decent interval . President Kennedy told the responsible officials to resign .
 After the Bay of Pigs invasion, the CIA developed Operation Mongoose which actively tried to destabilize the Cuban regime and assassinate Castro . The CIA developed the operation in response to the invasion of Cuba .
 Robert Kennedy, at the direction of the President, personally supervised these activities . Robert Kennedy was very persistent in pushing the CIA for more agressive action against Cuba .
 He now knew that before making important decisions he needed to explore the possible consequences of each alternative course of action .
 Excomm was an unusual body because it included representatives from outside the government . Dean Acheson was a member of the Excomm, a body of former Secretary of State .
 Government officials from agencies not usually involved in critical military decisions were included in the committee . The committee also included government officials from non-government agencies .
 Douglas Dillon was Secretary of the Treasury Douglas Dillon, a Republican . Dillon is a former Cabinet member of the U.S. House of Representatives .
 Adlai Stevenson, a two-time Democratic candidate for President, advocated appeasement of the Russians . As shown in the movie, the movie shows how he did it . Stevenson was the U.S. ambassador to the United Nations .
 President Kennedy protected Stevenson from being ousted from the Excomm and removed as Ambassador to the U.N. as Bobby Kennedy advised . Stevenson was protected from being removed from Excomm .
 Stevenson proved immensely valuable to the U.S. by dramatically showing that the Russians were lying to the world about the missiles . In the end, Stevenson proved invaluable to the United States .
 President Kennedy reached out to a broad array of advisors for help in making decisions in the crisis . Chairman Khrushchev had very few advisors. In contrast to the way in which President Kennedy .
 He viewed the members of the Presidium, which would have provided the most experienced and logical pool of advisors, as political adversaries . He said he viewed them as political opponents, and viewed them in the past as adversaries .
 Khrushchev conceived of the policy and extended the crisis to obtain more leverage against the U.S. See discussion below for more on the policy of the crisis .
 Khrushchev acted in a civilized manner and withdrew the missiles from Cuba . As it turned out, when faced with the probability that his ploy in Cuba would lead to nuclear war, he acted civilized manner .
 President Kennedy secretly made tapes of some of the meetings of the Excomm.com . President Kennedy made the tapes in his own own words . The tapes were made in the early 1960s .
 "When we said we're not going to [allow missiles in Cuba] and then they go ahead and do it, then we do nothing, then I would think that our risks increase," he says .
 If they don't have enough ICBMs today, they're going to have them in a year..."" pg.6.6 . If they're not enough ICBMMs today they're . going to be in a . year .
 It was a rather dangerous but rather useful play of theirs . Well, actually, it was a very useful play . It was rather dangerous and useful .
 If we do nothing, they have a missile base there with all the pressure that brings to bear on the United States and damage to our prestige, says President Obama . The U.S. is under pressure from North Korea, Obama says .
 If we attack Cuba, the missiles, or Cuba, then it gives them a clear line to take Berlin, he says . "They were able to do in Hungary under the Anglo war in Egypt," he adds .
 We will have been regarded as they think we've got this fixation about Cuba anyway - we would be regarded as the trigger-happy Americans who lost Berlin . We would have been seen as 'trigger-happy' U.S. would be seen as having lost Berlin.
 Berlin was let go because we didn't have the guts to endure a situation in Cuba. And that we let Berlin go, he says . And that Berlin went because of the situation in Berlin, he said . The U.S. did not have the courage to endure in Cuba,
 The U.S. took pre-emptive action in Cuba, says President Obama . The Cuban government would say it endangered their interests and security, says Obama .
 If we do nothing, then they'll have these missiles and they'll be able to say that any time we ever try to do anything about Cuba, that they'll fire these missiles, says President Obama . And thirdly, if we do . do . nothing, if . we do
 "I think it's dangerous, but rather satisfactory, from their point of view," he says . "So that I think it was dangerous, ... from their view of view. So that I . think it would be dangerous."
 Khrushchev committed himself to Berlin - that's what he committed himself personally . Even last night we talked about Cuba for a while, but Berlin was the focus of our conversation .
 "So, actually, it's actually a quite desirable situation from their point of view," she says . "It's actually quite desirable," she adds .
 If we go in and take them out on a quick air strike, we neutralize the chance of danger to the United States of these missiles being used, he says . "We prevent a situation from arising, at least within Cuba, where the Cubans themselves have the means of exercising
 There is bound to be a reprisal from the Soviet Union, there always is -of their just going in and taking Berlin by force at some point . On the other hand, we increase the chance greatly, as I think they - there's bound to - there always - of a
 'Which leaves me only one alternative, which is to fire nuclear weapons -which is a hell of an alternative -and begin a nuclear exchange with all this happening,' he says . ‘Which is . Which is . which is the . alternative,’ he adds .
 "If we begin the blockade that we're talking about, the chances are they will begin a blockade and say that we started it. On the other hand, if we begin . The chances are that they will say that they started it," he says .
 "Once again, once again, they will say that there will be this feeling in Europe that the Berlin blockade has been commenced by our blockade," he said . "So that they will ... say that once again they will . say that . there will not say that, once . again
 Cuba is not only Cuba but it is also Berlin, says CNN's John Sutter . Berlin is important to the United States, he says . Berlin's importance to the U.S. is also important to Europe, Sutter says .
 "If we do nothing, we're going to have the problem of Berlin anyway," says Berliner . "We will have to deal with it anyway," he says .
 Khrushchev knew that was extremely important and this was a fact he had not understood when he gave the order to put the missiles in Cuba . There was an additional fact that Khrush .
 The United States population was unwilling to tolerate hostile nuclear missiles in Cuba . The U.S. population was willing to tolerate the threat .
 It was therefore impossible for any U.S. government to permit the missiles to remain . The United States would go to war, if neccessary, to remove the missiles, if necessary .
 The failure to gauge the reaction of ordinary U.S. citizens to the prospect of Russian missiles in Cuba was Khrushchev's key mistake in his planning for the crisis .
 By 1962, with the advent of nuclear tipped ballistic missiles, that feeling of insulation may have been irrational, but it was still very real .
 Khrushchev never dreamed that the U.S. populace would react so dramatically to Russian missiles in Cuba . The U.K. never dreamed of the reaction to the missile launch .
 Khrushchev had only incomplete control over the Russian military units in Cuba . As a result of the Cuban military units, he had only partial control over them . The Soviet Union was losing control of Cuba in 1959 .
 The primary example of this was the shooting down of the American U-2 spy plane over Cuba on October 27 . The U.2 plane was shot down over Cuba .
 Castro was sure the U.S. was going to invade Cuba during the crisis . Castro was always sure the United States would invade Cuba . Castro: "During the crisis, Castro was very sure" about the invasion .
 Given the massive military buildup in Florida, Castro had good reason for this belief . Given the history of the Bay of Pigs and Operation Mongoose with its sabotage and assassination attempts, Castro believed the invasion was imminent .
 He also knew of the Red Army regiments in Cuba and their nuclear capabilities . He also known of the Soviet Union's nuclear capabilities in the country .
 He may not have been completely aware of the great advantage that the United States had in ICBMs . But he did know that Russian IRBMs in Cuba could deal a massive blow to his hated enemy to the North .
 Castro thought that if an invasion would trigger a nuclear war, the Soviets had the best chance of winning if they struck first with their nuclear weapons . Castro thought an invasion of Cuba would trigger nuclear war . The Soviet Union had a best chance to win if it struck first .
 Castro knew Cuba would be incinerated but was willing to sacrifice the island and its people for the good of his friends in the Communist block . Castro knew he was going to sacrifice Cuba for his friends' good will .
 Castro proposed to Khrushchev that the Russians begin a nuclear war before the invasion of Cuba . When Castro proposed the idea, the Soviet leader was horrified . Khrushchen was horrified by Castro's proposal .
 Khrushchev had already decided to remove the missiles, he was just waiting for the right time . The missiles were already being removed from the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev decided that Russia had to dismantle the missiles immediately . After learning of Castro's position, he ordered the missiles to be dismantled .
 Khrushchev backed down because President Kennedy was willing to provide a formal commitment that, if the missiles were withdrawn, the U.S. would not invade Cuba and that it would not help others to do so . President Kennedy also agreed to give a commitment that the United States would not
 This commitment was, in fact, a concession by the U.S. It gave Khrushchev a way to claim that he had achieved an important objective despite removing missiles . This commitment, however, was actually a concession .
 President Kennedy is credited with forcing the Russians to remove the missiles without provoking a nuclear war . Kennedy was credited with stopping the Russians from using the missiles in the 1960s .
 With the disclosure of once secret documents, our understanding of Kennedy's triumph has changed . But the crisis is still seen as a tremendous success for him and for U.S. foreign policy .
 In the aftermath of the crisis, it appeared the removal of the missiles had been achieved without the U.S. making any real concessions to the Russians . The removal of missiles was seen as a success in the aftermath .
 The scope of Operation Mongoose was not known and it had not been official U.S. policy to invade Cuba . It had not officially been official United States policy to invasion Cuba . Operation Mangoose is not known .
 The no invasion pledge was merely a restatement of existing policy . Thus, the no invasion pledges were merely restatements of existing policies .
 Over the years, as more about the crisis became public, it become clear that the noninvasion pledge was a real concession . The pledge is a concession to the U.S. government, but it's not a concession .
 The Kennedy brothers were actively working to change the government of Cuba and assassinate Castro . The brothers worked to assassinate Castro and change the Cuban government .
 Kennedy's role in restraining forces in the U.S. that wanted to conduct air strikes or invade Cuba has been disclosed . However, as more information has come out, it has been revealed that Kennedy was involved in restraining the forces .
 President Kennedy always chose actions that would not lead to war . As shown in the film, while preparing for war if it had to come, he always chose to avoid war . President Kennedy was always prepared for war .
 He ratcheted up the pressure on the Soviet Union with steps that left the Soviets room to maneuver and time to rationally decide what to do . The U.S. has always left room for the Soviets to maneuver .
 President Kennedy gave Khrushchev a way out of the crisis . President Kennedy agreed not to invade Cuba . Kennedy's willingness to agree formally not invade Cuba was a key factor .
 Revelations in the 1990s that the Russians had secretly conducted a massive military build-up in Cuba, introducing 40,000 Red Army troops, and that 42 nuclear missiles were operational during the crisis .
 By restraining those who wanted to initiate air strikes or an invasion, President Kennedy avoided war . By starting the U.S. response with a naval quarantine, he avoided war in Vietnam .
 A primary example of Kennedy's restraint occurred on October 27 when a Russian missile shot down an American U-2 spy plane killing the pilot . The pilot was killed by the missile .
 He could treat the incident as an intentional escalation ordered by the Kremlin or view it as an unauthorized action by an overeager Soviet commander . The incident could be seen as an accidental escalation or an overzealous commander .
 One choice led the world much closer to nuclear war and the other kept alive the hope for a peaceful resolution . The choice led to the world being closer to a nuclear war .
 If he had been wrong, and ordered the U.S. Air Force to take out the SAM battery that had fired on the U-2, we would have been several steps closer to war .
 Khrushchev, on the other hand, exhibited extremely poor leadership by initiating the crisis, writes . "Krushchev's leadership was extremely poor," writes Peter Bergen .
 He put his country and the entire world at tremendous risk of nuclear holocaust, says CNN.com's John Sutter . He put the world at risk of a nuclear war .
 Khrushchev showed foresight and political courage by backing down and removing missiles with only a no invasion promise . The missile removal was a bold move by the Soviet leader to show foresight .
 Both sides contributed to the crisis, but the consensus is that most responsibility lies with Khrushchev and the Soviets . The consensus among historians is most responsibility for the crisis .
 Khrushchev had several goals when he initiated the crisis . It appears he had a few goals in mind when he started the crisis.
 Russia wants to improve Russia's nuclear capabilities without waiting for Russian scientists and engineers to improve and build Russia's own missile fleet . He wanted Russia to improve its own nuclear capabilities .
 At the time of the crisis, Russia had less than 40 ICBMs while the United States had approximately 170 . Russia had about 40 ICBM while the U.S. had about 170 . At the same time, the United. States had around 170 ICBM missiles .
 The United States had an even greater advantage in strategic bombers and submarine based missiles . The U.S. had a greater advantage with strategic bombers, submarine missiles .
 IRBMs could be installed in Cuba rather than waiting to build the ICBMs that could strike the U.S. from Russia . The Soviet Union would save billions of rubles if they were installed immediately, the author says .
 Even with the great U.S. advantage, there was no defense against the 40 ICBMs possessed by the Soviets . The Soviets were able to make the most of the world's most powerful missiles .
 The casualties in such an exchange, tens of millions, were unacceptable to any U.S. leader . "Tens of millions" would be unacceptable, he says .
 Khrushchev wanted to protect Cuba from invasion from the U.S. in the service of Russian neo-imperialism and Communist solidarity, he says .
 Russians and Cubans had reason to fear U.S. intentions . Even before the crisis, with the history of the Bay of Pigs invasion and the ongoing ""Operation Mongoose"" the Russians and the Cubans were wary of the United States .
 Khrushchev is reported to have made several remarks to close aids that indicated that improving Russia's nuclear capabilities and reducing the United States advantage were important to him . The remarks were reported to be made in a speech to close allies .
 Castro's reasons to accept missiles were based upon solidarity with the other Communist countries rather than defending Cuba from a U.S. attack . Castro accepted the missiles in order to defend Cuba from an attack .
 The presence of Russian missiles in Cuba would hinder many of Castro's other goals, such as exporting revolution to other Latin American countries . Castro's Cuban government has been criticized for its lack of transparency in Cuba .
 Khrushchev could have just sent the 40,000 Red Army troops (or even 5,000 or 10,000) with a mission to defend the island .
 Everyone knew that an attack on a large number of Red Army troops would have triggered a larger war . The attack on the Red Army would have led to a larger conflict in Russia .
 After all, if they were confined to the island they would only be defensive in nature . After all the islanders were only defending themselves, they were only defensive .
 The only reason for the massive Soviet military buildup on the island was to protect the missiles, not Cuba . Cuba was not the target of the Soviet invasion, not the Cuban missile program .
 Khrushchev wanted to use the missiles to force the United States to back down on Berlin, or trade West Berlin for taking the missiles out of Cuba or to distract the U.S. so that it would not react to a Russian takeover .
 Khrushchev's major goal was changing the status quo in Berlin and improving the Soviet's strategic nuclear position . Any of these situations, if they had come to pass, would have shown the Europeans that they could not rely on the United States to look after their interests .
 The idea for the installation of the missiles was Khrushchev's and his alone, he says . The idea of the missile installation in the Soviet Union was his alone . The missile system was installed in the USSR in the 1960s .
 The entire Presidium signed onto the plan to put missiles in Cuba, Khrushchev's word was final . At that time he was the absolute dictator of the Soviet Union .
 The attempted invasion of Cuba at the Bay of Pigs followed by Operation Mongoose, which attempted to subvert Castro's government and assassinate Castro, certainly helped set the stage for the crisis . The attempted attack on Cuba in the 1960s helped set up the situation .
 U.S. nuclear policy at the time also helped set the stage for the crisis . The U.N. nuclear program in the 1950s and '60s helped set up the crisis in Iran .
 The United States would not disavow a nuclear first strike as a military option . Yet because of the numerical superiority of the Red Army and of the Chinese Army, the U.S. wouldn't disavow such a move .
 U.S. policy makers felt, with substantial justification, that its ""nuclear shield"" was all that kept the peace in Europe .
 The expense of maintaining an army large enough to counter the Red Army in Europe and the Chinese Army in Asia would have put a tremendous strain on Western economies . Western economies would have been strained by the expense .
 The Western outpost of Berlin would certainly have fallen and perhaps the entire NATO alliance would have failed, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer says the Russians had not been convinced that the U.S. would wage a nuclear war to protect Berlin .
 The refusal of the United States to disavow a nuclear first strike made the Russians quite nervous . However, the U.S. has not disavowed a first strike, making the Russians nervous .
 On balance, responsibility for events which put the future of the world at risk fall much further to the Soviet side than to the U.S. responsibility . More to Khrushchev than Kennedy than to Kennedy, says historian .
 Khrushchev's decision to back down and that was his saving grace . We think that this played a role in Khrushchevitch's decision in backing down .
 It recalls vividly a confrontation in which nuclear war was really possible, reminding us of the enduring truth about the nuclear age . The film is a reminder of the dangers of nuclear war .
 It invites viewers 'into the room' as a president and his advisors struggle with a seemingly intractable problem that offers no good options . The White House invites viewers into the room to watch the White House debate .
 Most of the incidents described in the film occurred, including the meetings in which the Russian Foreign Minister Gromyko lied directly to President Kennedy when he assured him that the Russians were not installing missiles in Cuba .
 The language of many important conversations is taken right out of the transcripts or reports of the participants . The language is taken from the transcripts of the conversations .
 The film leaves the viewer with several important misimpressions . That being said, the film is not the best of the film .
 President Kennedy's position is shown by his statements quoted above . As shown, this was his position . President Kennedy was President Kennedy .
 Secretary of Defense McNamara agreed with him, although many of the Joint Chiefs did not . Secretary of defense McNamara said he wanted to protect the U.S. from Iran .
 The Kennedy Administration would not have been able to govern had it allowed the missiles to remain in Cuba . The Kennedy administration would have been unable to govern if the missiles had been allowed to remain .
 President Kennedy had gone on record stating that the U.S. would never accept nuclear missiles in Cuba . President Kennedy believed Russian assurances they had no plans to put missiles in the country .
 The credibility of the Kennedy Administration, with its friends and foes, had been tied to keeping Cuba free of Russian missiles . Thus, the credibility .
 The installation of missiles in Cuba was the opening gambit in the Russians' long planned move against West Berlin . The installation was the first step in Russia's long planned attack on West Berlin.
 An attack on Cuba would give the Russians an excuse for overrunning West Berlin . The Russians would have an excuse to overrun West Berlin, author says . The U.S. government has been accused of attacking Cuba .
 The secret placement of nuclear missiles in Cuba was an agressive move by the Soviets . It was an aggressive move to place nuclear missiles there .
 None of these reasons for forcing the removal of the missiles had anything to do with the actual damage they could inflict upon the U.S., but instead were secondary effects of the placement of the missile .
 A proper appraisal of the actions of President Kennedy and his administration should refer to these goals . President Kennedy's actions should be taken to account of his administration's goals .
 While important, one must answer the question of whether they were worth risking nuclear war . The question is whether it was worth risking a nuclear war?
 The Russians had to be forced to remove the missiles on terms that appeared to be a U.S. foreign policy victory . To achieve the policy goals of the United States government, the Russians must have to be removed .
 The crisis could not be allowed to escalate into World War III, the author says . At the same time, the crisis could also be prevented from becoming World War I, he says .
 In thirteen incredibly tense days in October 1962, President Kennedy and his advisors attained these goals . President Kennedy's advisors achieved these goals in 13 tense days .
 After that time, the Superpowers introduced new procedures to defuse crises and acted more cautiously . The Superpowers introduce new procedures .
 The Russians and the Cubans justifiably feared for the territorial integrity of Cuba . Given the historical tendency of the United States to invade Latin American countries, the U.S. should not invade Cuba, the Russians and Cubans feared .
 The United States had completed installation of 15 Jupiter missiles in Turkey in 1962 . In addition, the ongoing U.S. nuclear arms build up had led to a ""missile gap"" in favor of the United States .
 The missiles were already obsolete and added little, if anything, to U.S. military power, Kennedy said . This infuriated the Russians and was totally unnecessary .
 U.S. policy underestimated the effect of these missiles on the Russians, says CNN.com's John Sutter . The missiles were launched in 2003, he says .
 U.S. policy makers understood that Russian nuclear forces could inflict unacceptably high casualties . United States policy makers clearly understood that Russia could inflict high casualties on American soil .
 U.S. policy helped set up the stage for the crisis in Syria, says David Rothkopf . "Any evaluation of the crisis must take this into account," he says .
 General LeMay thought that nuclear war with the Soviets was inevitable and wanted it to occur before the U.S. lost its 18 to 1 superiority in nuclear missiles . LeMay wanted the war before the United States lost its 18 to 1 superiority in missiles .
 We are not aware of evidence demonstrating a concerted effort by the military to maneuver the U.S. into a war . We are aware of . evidence demonstrating that . the United States .
 President Kennedy had President Kennedy's confidence before, during and after the crisis . State Department official who served during that time makes it clear that the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff had the confidence .
 The subplot of O'Donnell contacting U.S. pilots, asking them to bypass the chain of command and make false statements to their superiors, is simply fiction . "The subplot" is based on a subplot involving O’Donnell contacting United States pilots .
 Excomm meeting transcripts clearly show that the Chiefs knew that the planes were being shot at . The Chiefs knew they were going to be shot at, according to the transcripts .
 "If we had left it up to the military, there probably would have been a war," he says . "There probably would be a war. If we had . left it . up to . the military," he adds. "We are not going to war."
 The movie glosses over the importance of the quick support of NATO allies in the crisis . African countries would have had an important role if the Russians tried to send nuclear arms to Cuba by air .
 The only available landing strips for refueling were in two countries in Guinea and Senegal, which agreed not to permit the flights . The only remaining landing strips were in Guinea, Senegal and Guinea .
 O'Donnell character asks Bobby Kennedy if he thinks the second Russian letter, the more aggressive letter, was caused by the Kennedys' proposals to trade the obsolete U.S. missiles in Turkey for the Russian missiles in Cuba .
 The second, harsher letter, was prompted by the Kennedy's proposals for the trade . However, it is true that the second letter, prompted by his proposals, was .
 Khrushchev tried to "change horses in midstream" when he was informed of Kennedy's feelers that the U.S. might also trade the missiles in Turkey . After offering to remove missiles in return only for guarantees that the United States would not invade Cuba . Kennedy offered Kh
 There is no defense for what Khrushchev did by delaying resolution of the crisis by a day or more just to gain a little advantage, writes David Frum .
 In that time, an American U-2 pilot was killed and it was only President Kennedy's restraint that prevented nuclear war . President Kennedy was only president to prevent nuclear war in that time .
 "We are lucky that some other incident didn't occur that would have caused a general war," says President Obama . "Some other incident ... wouldn't have caused war," he says .
 According to McNamara in ""The Fog of War", Tuchman related a conversation between two men who had formerly been Chancellor of Germany during different periods of the war . McNamara .
 One asked the other how the war came to be and the other said that he wished he knew . The two men said they wished he could have known how it started .
 Know your adversary and see the situation through your adversary's eyes, be considerate of his needs and give him room to move . Know your opponent's needs and see his situation through his eyes . Be considerate and give your opponent room to maneuver .
 Khrushchev didn't look at the missile crisis through the eyes of the U.S. leaders or its people . He said the crisis was the result of a failed missile strike in the Soviet Union .
 The existence of nuclear missiles 90 miles from the United States coast was intolerable to the public in the U.S. because of its history of isolation and the protection behind the Atlantic and Pacific oceans .
 This may have been irrational since ICBMs launched from Russia would take only a few minutes longer to reach the U.S., but it was a fact . This may not be irrational, but it's a fact that it would take less than a minute longer to get there .
 The U.S. maintained nuclear missiles in Turkey and several other countries close to the Soviet Union . It was also a hypocritical view, given the fact that the United States maintained nuclear missile sites in Turkey .
 The key factor in Khrushchev's decision to back down was that the U.S. population was aroused and would force its government to go to war to remove the missiles . The key decision was that that the United States population would force the government to war .
 Khrushchev didn't know much about United States history and his experts on the U.S. history failed to tell him about this, he says . Khrushchevski says he didn't learn much about the United States .
 The person making the ultimate decision, in the United States the President, should have the benefit of the best information possible and many recommendations and opinions from both inside and outside of government . The President should also have a good idea of what he needs to do to make a decision .
 This has already been discussed above, but one more example will be helpful . This is already discussed above . The example is an example of how to deal with this problem .
 During the Excomm deliberations, President Kennedy called in Llewellyn Thompson who had just returned from serving as the United States Ambassador to Moscow . Thompson was the U.S. Ambassador to the Soviet Union .
 At times Ambassador Thompson contradicted President Kennedy's initial ideas convincing him to change his mind . Ambassador Thompson was a key member of the Kennedy administration .
 People spend years, perhaps their entire lives, studying this question . People spend their lives studying the question .
 As discussed above, try to see the situation through the eyes of your adversary . Try to see your opponent's view of the situation .
 The policy maker, while trying to get the best information possible, must understand that there will be many things that he doesn't know . Policy makers must also understand that many things they don't know, says the author .
 "Every diplomatic and peaceful avenue should be tried before there is a commitment to war," says Peter Bergen . Bergen: Every diplomatic, peaceful avenue must be tried .
 A graduated approach which always allows your opponent a face saving way out is optimal, is optimal . Graduated approach is optimal to avoid a fight against your opponent .
 Be flexible and compromise on the little things, but don't appease by giving away the important points . Be flexible, compromise and compromise, but not give away the most important points. Be flexible .
 President Kennedy described crisis management by stating that one must be firm, obtain the best information possible and act with care . After the missiles had been removed, Kennedy described the process of crisis management as 'firm'
 During the crisis he said, ""there's always some sonofabitch"" meaning that there will be people who through stupidity or because of their own agenda will take actions that push the country toward war .
 See the section entitled ""WHY DID KHRUSHCHEV BACK DOWN?"", second paragraph . See the second paragraph of this article .
 In the movie, the O'Donnell character asks Bobby Kennedy to consider whether the hostile second letter was the result of the feelers he and his brother had sent to Khrushchev which offered to trade the obsolete NATO missiles in Turkey for the Russian missiles in Cuba .
 Khrushchev wrote to President Kennedy that he might be willing to add missiles in Turkey to the deal . President Kennedy suggested he might add the missiles to the agreement . The second letter was the direct result of the suggestions by Kennedy .
 In the movie at the end, the McNamara character and the McCone character have a conversation in which they mention ""running the table"" on the Russians in several locations, including Asia . In the end of the film, the characters mention running the table on the Russian in Asia .
 The United States lost the Vietnam War after many casualties and great expense . The U.S. lost the war in Vietnam at many costs .
 Success in one area can lead to over confidence in another that results in a later defeat . Success leads to overconfidence in another area, which can result in a defeat .
 President Kennedy knew the missiles in Turkey were obsolete and scheduled to be replaced by submarine based missiles . Taking the missiles out of Turkey was not like Munich in that way . Kennedy knew that the missiles were obsolete .
 At the Munich conference, the Germans obtained a great benefit, i.e. Germany was given large amounts of territory and it obtained possession of the Czech fortifications in the only natural barrier between Germany and the rest of Czechoslovakia .
 The situation in 1962 was like Munich in that the Soviets wanted the missiles out of Turkey . The political victory might have encouraged them to make more demands, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Taking the missiles out of Turkey would not have been appeasement, it appears . The missiles were already obsolete and scheduled to be replaced with a more formidable threat to the Soviets, submarines carrying nuclear missiles .
 President Kennedy worried that a surprise pre-emptive attack on Cuba would be the moral equivalent of Japan's attack upon the United States at Pearl Harbor . President Kennedy was worried a surprise attack would be a moral equivalent to the U.S. attack upon Cuba . Kennedy: A surprise pre
 Japan made an unprovoked sneak attack on the U.S. naval base at Pearl Harbor in 1941 .
 Japan felt that U.S. economic sanctions were hampering its war of expansion in Asia . Japan felt the sanctions hamper its ambitions in the region . The United States felt that the sanctions would hamper Japan's ambitions .
 Local Soviet commanders had authority to use nuclear weapons if they were attacked . Their mission was to defend the island and the local Soviet commander had authority .
 The advantages of involving a large group include: the President is exposed to a wide range of opinions and ideas . A large group of people working on a problem can often come up with alternatives and ideas that a single person would not have considered .
 Ambassador to the United Nations Adlai Stevenson recommended the option of making substantial concessions to the Russians in addition to agreeing not to invade Cuba . Stevenson: "Make substantial concessions" to Russia .
 If it was simply a choice between peace with some concessions and war, the answer is easy . Suggested Response: If it had been a choice, peace would be peace with concessions, war would be easy .
 Munich taught us that one concession is usually followed by a demand for another concession, and on and on until war results from miscalculation or when the aggressor simply goes too far . But that is almost never the choice, because Munich taught that .
 Wisdom is knowing the difference between a concession and a legitimate compromise, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Wisdom is to know when a concession is not a concession, Sutter says .
 History has judged the pledge not to invade Cuba to have been a legitimate compromise . Additional concessions might have been appeasement, according to historians .
 There was no U.S. policy to invade Cuba and while Kennedy wanted to depose or assassinate Castro, he could and did say that the United States was giving up nothing by agreeing not to invade .
 The threat of nuclear war by both countries preserved the peace during the Cold War . Paradoxically, the threat of nukes by both nations preserved peace .
 Bobby Kennedy was referring to the situation in which all of the President's major advisors told him that the Bay of Pigs invasion would be successful . All of the president's advisors said the invasion would have been successful .
 A full scale U.S. invasion would have been much different than the puny Bay of Pigs effort . A full-scale invasion would be much different from a full scale invasion .
 Joints Chief said it would not have been nearly as easy as he predicted . However, it would have been easier for the Joints chief to get his job .
 U.S. could use a blockade, because it had been mapped out before as a war game, says McNamara . U.N. Secretary of State Robert McNamara says the blockade could be used as war game .
 Historian argued that WW I was triggered and 13 million people died because parties adhered to standard operating procedures such as the Schlieffen Plan, which could not be stopped .
 The advantage of using previously planned out scenarios is that they have been already developed at a time of leisure when the stresses of the present crisis didn't deprive planners of the time to think clearly and meticulously . The advantage is that the scenarios have already been developed before the crisis .
 The basic drawbacks are that you leave the thinking and decision-making to the people who developed the standard operating procedures and the plans don't take account of changed circumstances . The basic drawback is that you don't have to think and make the decisions .
 The United States never signed a peace treaty which took the nuclear first strike option off the table . The U.S. did not sign a treaty that took the option off of the table in the 1950s .
 A first strike with nuclear weapons was not necessarily a surprise strike . The U.S. President Barack Obama's first strike would be a first strike, he says .
 It also covered the situation in which the numerically superior Soviet armies were overrunning Western Europe and the only way to stop them was with the threat of nuclear weapons .
 There is no morally defensible reason to use massive numbers of nuclear missiles that will kill hundreds of millions, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 There is no morally defensible reason to respond if your country has suffered such an attack . Nor is there a moral defensible response to such a terrorist attack, he says .
 In either case, the vast majority of the people killed will have been totally innocent . The majority of those killed will be totally innocent, he says .
 Only justification to prepare for a first or a retaliatory nuclear strike is to convince the other side that if he strikes you, you will be able to destroy him . The only justification for preparing for a strike is that you can destroy him, he says .
 The theory of Mutually Assured Destruction kept the world free of nuclear war for the last half of the 20th century . This theory was based on the theory that nuclear weapons were mutually assured destruction .
 It did nothing to stop the construction of the missile sites or the arming of the existing missiles with nuclear warheads . It did .
 U.S. could choke off oil and other essential imports to Cuba in case of war . It did place the United States in a position to quickly choke off essential imports .
 The quarantine and preparations of the U.S. military to invade Cuba convinced Khrushchev to withdraw the missiles . The quarantine led to the withdrawal of the missiles from Cuba . The United States would remove the missiles if they were not removed .
 Pacifists contend that building a large military and using threats results in wars . They say countries decide that war is in their best interests or through miscalculation . Pacifistists say building large military forces leads to wars .
 The self-styled ""realists" believe that looking weak invites others to take advantage of you . Appeasement results in further aggression, Munich showed . The majority of people believe that appeasement leads to aggression .
 They believe that the threat of force and the ability to carry it out usually prevents war . They say that they believe that force is the only way to prevent war .
 President Kennedy was told that an air strike would probably not destroy all of the missiles . President Kennedy also told that the missiles would not be destroyed by air strikes .
 As the film accurately shows, the only person to die in the confrontation was Major Rudolph Anderson, the U-2 pilot shot down over Cuba .
 The Soviet leader of the missile battery that shot down the U-2 stated that he acted without authority from Moscow . He decided to act on his own and let the politicians sort it out later . In an interview with the History Channel, the Soviet leader said he acted alone and let politicians
 The Joint Chiefs wanted to retaliate against the Surface-to-Air Missile battery that shot down the U-2 spy plane . The U.2 was shot down by the U.S. Air Force .
 Adlai Stevenson said the Soviets were installing missiles in Cuba and that they were lying about it . Stevenson was the U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations . Stevenson said that the Soviets had installed missiles .
 Colin Powell argued the case for war against Iraq in the U.N. in 2003 . Colin Powell was Secretary of State of State at the time of the Iraq War .
 Many have noted the similarities and differences between these two events . Many of the similarities between the two events have been noted .
 Stevenson presented irrefutable proof and galvanized world public opinion . Stevenson's testimony galvanized public opinion in the U.S. Stevenson .
 It did not unite the usual allies of the United States in favor of the Iraq War . The Iraq War was a major U.S. ally in the Middle East . The war was launched in 2003, Iraq was declared in 2003 .
 It turns out that Iraq did not have weapons of mass destruction or programs to make them . There was no operational link between Al Qaeda and Iraq, etc. Source, the report of the Republican controlled Senate Intelligence Committee .
 Stevenson's speech was instrumental in preventing a war and it enhanced U.S. prestige . Stevenson was able to prevent a war, and his speech helped prevent it .
 The intelligence on which the speech was based has proved to be faulty, the speech has resulted in damage to U.S. prestige . Now that the intelligence based on the speech is based, the damage has been caused by the speech's faulty intelligence .
 The next time the U.S. or the Western nations ask the world or the United Nations to act based on intelligence information, there will be a strong question about whether that intelligence is accurate . The United States and Western nations should not rely on intelligence to act .
 More proof will be required which will increase the risk of compromising intelligence sources . More proof is needed to prove that intelligence sources have been compromised .
 U.S. and Allies in Western democracies will have to work harder and give up more information to gain the consent and cooperation in international crises . It means that in all likelihood for many years, probably for decades, the United States and its Allies in the Western democracies must work harder .
 "It means that some times we will not have the support that we need," she said . "We will not be able to get the support we need. It means that we have to wait for the support they need"
 A key point in the movie ""Thirteen Days" is the naval confrontation between an American warship and a Soviet ship which refused to stop . A key part in the film is the confrontation between a U.S. and a Russian ship which refuses to stop.
 The civilians have the ultimate responsibility and therefore need to have absolute control over the military . The civilians not only have a valuable perspective but they have the . ultimate responsibility, therefore need the ultimate control .
 The firing on the Soviet ship sent a message to Khrushchev that President Kennedy may not have wanted to send, McNamara said . In this case, as Secretary McNamara stated, the firing on a Soviet ship .
 The consensus of the world community, expressed in several treaties, is that nuclear, biological and chemical weapons are special cases and their development should be controlled . Nuclear weapons are a special case, the consensus of several treaties says .
 The countries that control the weapons do not want to give up control of the weapons . However, the countries who control them say they want to keep control .
 For students in the countries that control these weapons, ask whether or not they would be willing to have their country give control of its weapons to an international organization .
 For example, advisor Kevin O'Donnell's role has possibly been exaggerated and the civilian/military conflict has been overstated . The U.S. government has been accused of exaggerating its role in the Middle East .
 The focus of the movie is too limited to give a balanced view of the crisis, the director says . The focus was too limited, he says, and the film is not a good representation .
 The subplot of going around the military chain of command and getting pilots to make false reports to their superiors about whether they received anti-aircraft fire is fictional .
 Movies are entertainment, but they should not give a false impression of historical events, says historian . Movies should not be given false impression, he says .
 As long as the essence of the situation is conveyed, then movies dealing with historical issues are beneficial, says the author .
 The general consensus is that President Kennedy displayed good leadership skills in this crisis . This leadership was key in avoiding nuclear war . President Kennedy's leadership skills were key to avoiding a nuclear war, experts say .
 It gave President Kennedy someone he could trust completely, without any reservation . It gave him a chance to be trusted by the president .
 Of course, there were many other men involved who gave complete loyalty to the President . Of course there were others who gave loyalty to him .
 President Kennedy understood the horrors of war, especially of nuclear war . However, President Kennedy knew the horrors, especially the dangers of war .
 He is the one man in history who has guided the world back from the brink of nuclear war . He is one of the most powerful men in the world to have saved the world from nuclear war.
 A good answer will touch on the issues set out in the note from the authors preceding this question . A good question will be answered by the authors of the note .
 We would argue that President Kennedy acted responsibly during the crisis by making, at every step, the choice that minimized the chances of war while preparing for war if it had to come, we say .
 A strong argument can be made that Khrushchev acted irresponsibly except in his decision to end the crisis by backing down . A strong . argument can also be made for the decision to back down from the crisis .
 It was irresponsible for him to have risked nuclear war by placing missiles in Cuba, he says . The U.S. and President Kennedy can be faulted for setting the stage for destabilizing the Castro regime, he writes .
 Teachers are encouraged to review the specific standards to make sure that over the term all standards are met . Teachers should review the standards to ensure that all standards have been met .