 Kennedy would likely face several international challenges that could come from any number of directions . John F Kennedy: Foreign Affairs .
 Recurring flare-ups in Berlin, periodic crises with Communist China, and an increasingly vexing situation in Southeast Asia all threatened to erupt .
 Cuba was the site of an immediate crisis, largely of the administration's own making . It was Cuba, however, that was the focus of an Obama administration crisis .
 Kennedy had only been in office two months when he ordered the implementation of a covert CIA plan to topple Cuban leader Fidel Castro . The plan was inherited from the Eisenhower administration, which he altered dramatically to topple Castro .
 Kennedy gave the green light to the CIA and military advisers . Kennedy was assured by military advisers and the CIA that its prospects for success were good .
 Approximately 1,500 anti-Castro Cuban refugees landed at Bahia de Cochinos on Cuba's southern coast . In the early hours of April 17, 1961, the refugees landed .
 A series of crucial assumptions built into the plan proved false, and Castro's forces quickly overwhelmed the refugee force . The plan was based on a series of assumptions, including the assumption that the refugees were fleeing .
 The Kennedy administration's cover story collapsed immediately . Moreover, the Kennedy administration had a cover story too soon .
 It soon became clear that despite the president's denial of U.S. involvement in the attempted coup, Washington was behind it . Washington was indeed behind it, despite the denial .
 CIA-backed Operation Mongoose was launched in November 1961 to harass and destabilize the Cuban regime . Yet his administration continued to press for Castro’s ouster, launching the operation .
 Kennedy met with Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev in Vienna in June 1961 . Still recovering from this humiliating political defeat, Kennedy met in Vienna and Berlin .
 Khrushchev renewed his threat to “solve” the long-running Berlin problem unilaterally, an announcement that forced Kennedy to renew his pledge to respond to such a move with every means at his disposal, including nuclear weapons .
 In mid-August 1961, the Soviets and East Germans constructed a wall separating East and West Berlin . The wall provided the Cold War with its most tangible incarnation of the Iron Curtain .
 By the fall of 1962, Cuba again took center-stage in the Cold War . Missiles in Cuba were used in the Cuban missile tests .
 Khrushchev ordered a secret deployment of long-range nuclear missiles to Cuba along with a force of 42,000 Soviet troops and other associated conventional and atomic weaponry . In an effort to protect the Castro government, compete with China for the hearts of revolutionaries worldwide .
 For months, despite close U.S. scrutiny, the Soviets managed to keep hidden the full extent of the buildup . Despite close American scrutiny the Soviets kept hidden the extent of their buildup .
 In mid-October, U.S. aerial reconnaissance detected deployment of Soviet ballistic nuclear missiles in Cuba . The missiles could reach most of the continental United States within a matter of minutes .
 The meetings were conducted by the Executive Committee of the National Security Council, or ExComm . ExComm took place in utmost secrecy in order to maximize the range of available responses .
 Among the options considered were air strikes on missile bases, a full-scale invasion of Cuba, and a naval blockade of the island . Air strikes on the missile bases were also considered .
 Kennedy eventually chose a blockade, or quarantine, of Cuba, backed up by the threat of imminent military action . Kennedy ultimately chose to choose a blockade or quarantine of Cuba . The blockade was backed by a threat of military action, but was never implemented .
 Kennedy made the decision on national television on October 22, 1962 . He warned that the purpose of the Soviet missiles in Cuba could be “none other than to provide a nuclear strike capability against the Western Hemisphere”
 The lines, suddenly, were drawn very firmly indeed, and the world held its breath . The lines were suddenly drawn very strongly indeed .
 After several days of action and reaction, each seeming to bring the world closer to the brink of nuclear war, the two sides reached a deal . The two sides reach a deal, ending the threat of war .
 Khrushchev would order the withdrawal of offensive missiles, and Kennedy would promise not to invade Cuba . Kennedy also secretly promised to withdraw American ballistic nuclear missiles based in Turkey targeting the Soviet Union .
 Kennedy ordered lifting of the naval blockade of Cuba on November 20, 1962 . Kennedy ordered the lifting of a naval blockade on Cuba . The blockade was lifted by the end of the Cuban blockade in 1962 .
 To the Moon Kennedy was also instrumental in the success of the nation's space program . Kennedy was a major force behind the launch of the Apollo 11 .
 President Obama vowed to have Americans on the moon by the end of the decade . He has been an enthusiastic proponent of it in public, if dubious of its more scientific dimensions .
 Kennedy agreed to locate the headquarters of the Manned Spacecraft Center in Texas, the home state of his vice president . Lyndon Johnson had previously been head of the Senate subcommittee in charge of the space program .
 Kennedy would not live to see the landing of a man on the moon in July 1969 . Kennedy died in June 1969 at the age of 60 .
 President Kennedy created the Peace Corps by executive order in 1961 . The Peace Corps was a reaction to both the growing spirit of activism throughout the West and Communist efforts to capitalize on the decolonization process .
 Peace Corps volunteers sought to improve social and economic conditions throughout the world . Their work also supported Kennedy’s efforts in the Cold War battle for hearts and minds .
 In September 1961, Peace Corps volunteers went abroad to teach English in Ghana . Congress formally endorsed the Peace Corps by making it a permanent program . The first volunteers went to Ghana in 1961 .
 Fears that Castro’s example might inspire Communist revolution throughout Latin America led Kennedy to offer a more specific program for hemispheric reform . Kennedy was concerned that Castro might inspire a Communist revolution in Latin America .
 The Alliance for Progress, announced in March 1961, comprised a series of measures to improve the region's social and economic fortunes . The Alliance was formed in 1961 to improve social, economic and social conditions .
 This charter and U.S. financial aid came with it sought to improve America's standing in the region . Few Latin nations agreed with the United States embargo on Cuba or cooperated with it .
 By the end of his presidency it was Vietnam that proved as difficult, and potentially more dangerous, as Laos . Vietnam proved at least as difficult as Laos and Vietnam . Vietnam was one of the most dangerous countries in Southeast Asia .
 America had been sending military advisers to Saigon since the early 1950s to help France in its war against Vietnamese Communists for control of the nation . U.S. helped France defeat the Vietnamese Communists in the 1950s .
 In 1961, Kennedy increased this allotment and ordered in the Special Forces, an elite army unit, to train the South Vietnamese in counter-insurgency warfare . The Special Forces were the first to be trained by the U.S. in Vietnam .
 By the end of Kennedy's presidency, 16,000 U.S. military advisers were serving in Vietnam . But war continued to spread, and by the end, it had become a major problem .
 It's not clear how Kennedy would have handled America's commitment to Vietnam had he lived out his term in office .
 Kennedy had announced plans in 1963 to reduce the number of American advisers . But this did not necessarily mean a reduction in the United States commitment . Kennedy announced plans to reduce American advisers in 1963 .
 The announcement was one of several measures designed to pressure Saigon into making reforms . Saigon was pressured to make reforms after the announcement .
 President Ngo Dinh Diem's regime continued its repression of political opponents . Instead, the regime of President Diem continued to repress its political opponents.
 Diem was assassinated in November 1963 in a military coup . The act perpetuated, and arguably exacerbated, the country’s political instability . Diem's assassination was an act that perpetuated and exacerbated, political instability in Vietnam .
 Kennedy secured an agreement, with Britain and the Soviet Union, to limit the testing of nuclear weapons in space, underwater, and in the earth's atmosphere . Kennedy secured the agreement months before his death .
 Kennedy considered this agreement his greatest accomplishment as president . Kennedy considered it his greatest achievement of his presidency .