 McCone forced Kennedy and top national security I advisers to consider options,* | such,as blockades and quarantines, for ret acting to what was then only a hunch about v Soviet intentions .
 McCone’s hunch turned into reality when U-2 spy plane phov tographs revealed construction of Soviet J medium-range ballistic missile sites near San Cristobal, in northern Cuba, in October .
 The discovery raised the threat that Soviet nuclear warheads would be in position to reach the U.S. mainland with little warning time . I The discovery raises the threat .
 I declared a naval quarantine of all Soviet and l communist bloc shipping into Cuba and called t on Khrushchev to remove the missiles . After secretly studying options, Ken| nedy .
 Khrushchev hoped to have the weapons installed J before they were discovered . He was certain he would have the upper hand once they were ready to fire .
 I Kennedy was determined to take action * before that point was reached . I Kennedy said he would take action to prevent it being reached . He said: "I was determined not to let it happen again"
 By Oct. 31, the crisis had reached a boiling point for Kennedy aides . By Oct., I termed ""Black Saturday"" by Kennedy aides, by . Oct. 30, by Oct. 29, by the end of the month .
 Among the materials being disclosed are CIA data given Kennedy the morning of Oct. 31 . CIA data reported that the agency considered 24 Soviet medium-range ballistic missiles on the island operational .
 1,000-mile-range missiles could reach as far as New Orleans, Nashville and Richmond . The missiles could be launched from Cuba, according to a map provided Kennedy .
 Photographs confirmed that missiles had been moved to the launch site in nighttime exercises . Cables, fueling trucks and separate guidance equipment had been put in place .
 In the aftermath of the dissolution of the Soviet Union and its communist empire, it is hard to recall — and more difficult to recreate — the tensions that existed 30 years ago, particularly in Washington . Nowadays, in the wake of the dissolving of Soviet Union, it's hard to
 President Eisenhower had announced that United States nuclear missiles would be stationed in Italy and Turkey, just over the border from Soviet territory . Two years earlier, President Dwight D Eisenhower announced that U.S. nuclear missile bases would be in Turkey and Italy .
 Khrushchev boasted about Soviet nuclear strength, but knew it was minuscule compared to the American nuclear arsenal . The U.S. carried on missiles and bombers surrounding his country .
 In 1961, Khrushchev decided to take Kennedy’s measure . In 1961 the new U.S. president took office . The new president was elected by the Soviet Union in 1961 .
 At a meeting in Vienna in June of that year, the Soviet leader decided that Kennedy could be pushed around, and he decided to test him . The Soviet leader was determined to push Kennedy around .
 Berlin Wall went up in August 1961, and Soviet nuclear testing resumed that same month . The Berlin Wall was the first Soviet nuclear test site .
 The congressional election campaign of 1962 provided a stage on which Republicans attacked Kennedy for being indecisive and weak in not facing up to the Soviet challenge, particularly in Cuba .
 Kenneth Keating began talking specifics about the buildup and other Republicans followed suit . Keating: "I'm not going to let it go, but I'm going to get involved in it. It's a good start"
 Kennedy was forced to defend the Cuba buildup as defensive in nature, a conclusion of his top aides and some CIA analysts . Kennedy's Cuba buildup was a result of a decision by the CIA and some analysts .
 On Aug., 1962, at a noon meeting at the State Department, McCone set out his views in front of Kennedy’s advisers . Two months later, Kennedy would be wrestling with the question of how to get the missiles removed without triggering a nuclear war .
 McCone's memo: Those present were Secretary of State Dean Rusk, Defense Secretary Robert S McNamara, Attorney General Robert F Kennedy, Joint Chiefs of Staff Chairman Gen. Gen. Robert F. Kennedy .
 Maxwell Taylor and McGeorge Bundy are the president's national security adviser . Bundy is a former CIA director of operations in Washington, D.C. and the secretary of state .
 The president asked if Soviet missiles in Cuba could be taken out 'by an air attack ‘or would a ground offensive be necessary,” according to a CIA memo .
 The flights had been stopped in early September after one U-2 strayed over Soviet territory in the Far East . Another was lost over China and another was lost in September .
 When flights over Cuba were allowed to take place at the end of September, Rusk S insisted, because of concerns raised by the '* earlier mishaps, that the spy planes not fly 4 directly over the island .
 He feared that Soi\ viet ground-to-air missiles would shoot one down and cause an embarrassing international incident . He feared it would be an embarrassment for the country .
 As a result, those missions failed to cover areas where missiles were eventually found . The mission was a failure to cover those areas where missile missiles were found .
 Kennedy quietly got McCone to change the wording of certain reports, CIA documents reveal . Kennedy quietly changed the wording, according to the CIA documents .
 From A 10 of intelligence information was one focus of attention during last year’s Senate confirmation hearings of CIA Director Robert M Gates . 30 years ago, the CIA director was in charge of the CIA in Cuba .
 U-2 reconnaissance planes crisscrossed Cuba on orders from President Kennedy to cover the whole island . In an Oct., 1962, memo that was once classified ""Secret EYES ONLY,” McCone wrote .
 Khrushchev sent Kennedy a rambling private telegram, the substance of which was that if the president pledged not to invade Cuba, the Soviet missiles would be removed . The substance of the telegram was that the U.S. would remove the missiles from Cuba .
 Khrushchev said the Cuban missiles would be removed as part of a deal that had to be made . McNamara told the president that there had been a change in the character of orders given to the Cubans .
 Kennedy wanted to take up Khrushchev's proposal for a joint withdrawal of missiles from Cuba and Turkey, but wanted to tie that to an immediate halt to further missile construction . Kennedy began discussions that morning by saying he wanted to withdraw missiles .
 Llewellyn E Thompson, a former ambassador to the Soviet Union who knew Khrushchev well, disagreed . Thompson suggested that the Soviet leader had made the public offer of a trade “just to put pressure on us, I mean, to accept the other” earlier offer
 Kennedy’s aides misled the public into believing that no deal had been made to take the U.S. missiles out of Turkey . Khrushchev announced the next day that the Cuban missiles would be removed from Cuba .
 New data also show the young president did not let the crisis interfere totally with his private life . The data also shows that he did not allow the crisis interfered with his personal life .
 A White House telephone record lists a call made at 3:40 m.m. to a Washington divorcee . Kennedy reportedly maintained a liaison with the divorcee with whom he reportedly had a liaison . The divorcee was reportedly a longtime White House mistress .
 At 9m., Kennedy called actor Peter Lawford, his brother-in-law, who was in Las Vegas . Kennedy called Lawford at 9m. ET, according to the records .