 The weather is foggy in Washington D.C. on the morning of Tuesday, October 16, 1962 .
 As the morning progresses, there is a drizzle of rain, but in the afternoon and evening it becomes a warm sunny autumn day .
 The President of the United States of America, John Fitzgerald Kennedy, begins his day with a meeting with one of the original Mercury astronauts, Wally Schirra, to congratulate him on his nine-orbit space flight two weeks earlier .
 Mostly, though, the day is spent in the fog of potential war with the Cuba or even the Soviet Union .
 Two days ago, Air Force pilot Richard Heyer flew over the island of Cuba in a spy plane equipped with high resolution cameras . Heyer's plane was equipped with a high resolution camera .
 The photos he brought back showed three installations of Soviet nuclear Medium Range Ballistic Missile launch sites . SS-4 and SS-5 missiles waiting to be made deployable .
 The Soviets now have nuclear first strike capacity and can launch an attack on the US mainland just as quickly as the Americans can on the USSR from Turkey . The U.S. can launch a strike on the Soviet Union from Turkey as well as the US can attack the US from Turkey,
 The CIA reported this to McGeorge Bundy, the President’s National Security Advisor, last night . The CIA said this to Bundy last night.
 Bundy tells Kennedy the news this morning at 8:45 and is now assembling the committee that will deal with the impending crisis . Bundy says he is assembling a committee of experts to handle the situation . Bundy also tells Kennedy that he will be prepared for the crisis .
 EXCOMM is the Executive Committee of the National Security Council . This group is EXCOMm, which is the group of the national security council's Executive Committee .
 Over the coming thirteen days, their deliberations and actions will hold the fate of humanity in their hands . Over the next 13 days, they will decide whether to take action against ISIS .
 President records conversations with members of EXCOMM . The President records their conversations .
 2020, when content of their meetings has been declassified, it gives us unprecedented documentation as to how this crisis was handled on the American side . The content of the meetings will be declassified in 2020, it will be unprecedented .
 EXCOMM was created during the Berlin Crisis in 1961 specifically to avoid the mistakes that had been made during the disastrous Bay of Pigs invasion earlier that same year . EXCOMm was created to avoid mistakes made by the disastrous 'Bay of Pigs' invasion .
 ‘Group think’ is the practice of thinking or making decisions as a group in a way that discourages creativity or individual responsibility . The decisions during that crisis had turned out to be a textbook example of 'group think'
 EXCOMM will meet for the first time this week in a bid to form a new government . ExCOMM is the first government body to hold a meeting with the White House . The first meeting will take place in Washington, DC, next week .
 John F Kennedy won the presidency after campaigning on making America stronger than the Soviet Union in nuclear weapons . He campaigned on making the U.S. stronger than Russia .
 JFK was well aware that the 'Missile Gap' was a myth . America was already much stronger then Russia in terms of missiles .
 Vice President Lyndon B Johnson supported the Kennedy’s bluff in order to make the ticket look hard on the communism something their Republican opponent Richard Nixon had accused them of not being capable of . Vice President Johnson also supported the decision to back the Kennedy's bluff .
 Secretary of State Dean Rusk is in favor of diplomatic solutions and a limited rapprochement with the Soviets . Rusk: Diplomatic solutions are possible, but not necessarily all-American solutions .
 Secretary of the Treasury C Douglas Dillon is a deeply anti-communist Republican businessman . He is a long time supporter of a hard line against the Soviets . Dillon is an anti-Communist Republican .
 Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara has been alternating between the calls for rapprochement and harder actions against the Soviets for the past year and a half .
 Attorney General Robert F Kennedy, the President’s brother, leads efforts to maintain a dialogue with the Soviets, but he is a hardliner on Cuba . President Kennedy has personal contacts with Russian operatives .
 Only two weeks ago, on October 4th, he was made the unofficial chairman of Operation Mongoose a covert CIA led initiative to overthrow Fidel Castro . He was made to support an overthrow of Castro, or possibly even prepare for another Cuba invasion .
 National Security Advisor McGeorge Bundy is an ex-navy man . Bundy is a staunch advocate for a hard line against the Soviets . Bundy was a staunch supporter of the U.S. effort against the Soviet Union .
 Director of the CIA John McCone was the first one to suspect a military build-up on Cuba earlier this summer .
 McCone is a long time supporter of military action against Cuba . He is a supporter of increasing the nuclear advantage against the Soviet Union .
 US Army Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, General Maxwell D Taylor, is a self-described “two-fold hawk from start to finish” The Joint Chiefs whom he represents are also deeply suspicious of the Kennedy brothers . General Taylor is also a member of the US Army
 Shortly after 11 AM on October 16th, EXCOMM meets about Cuba for the first time . ExCOMM will meet about Cuba at 11:30 a.m. ET .
 President Barack Obama has been accused of corruption in the past . He has been charged with a crime of fraud and human trafficking .
 CNN's John Sutter points out the possibility of eliminating the missile bases in Cuba . He also points out that this could, theoretically, involve the total destruction of Cuba .
 He outlines the diplomatic options, including making Castro aware that the Soviets might be ready to take the destruction of Cuba into consideration in order to gain control of Berlin .
 This is something that Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko had intimated to the press a few weeks back . This is an example of the Soviet Union's policy of secrecy .
 Sources indicate that this may have been part of a ruse by the Russians to divert attention from Cuba to Berlin, and give them time to build up secret missile sites without American interference .
 The real reason for the missiles in Cuba is to even out the first nuclear strike capability created by the U.S. in Turkey, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says the missiles will even out out the nuclear strike capabilities created in Turkey .
 Secretary Rusk and CIA Director McCone seem to understand this full well . Rusk, McCone and Rusk seem to know each other very well .
 He wants to mobilize forces along the Atlantic coast, gather more intelligence, and then take out the missiles, he says . He says he wants to take out missiles .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin says he will assess the possibility of invasion . Putin also suggests a blockade to stop further missiles from coming in . Putin says Russia is ready to respond to the threat of an invasion .
 The President opposes a blockade, in his view it could be easily circumvented with submarines . The President says a blockade could be circumvented by submarines .
 They believe that it's unlikely that the Soviets will go to full on nuclear war over Cuba, but Berlin might be in play . They believe it’s unlikely that it will be a full-scale nuclear war .
 McNamara is concerned that the Cubans, not the Russians, might have control of the missiles . McNamara says he's concerned that Cubans might not be able to control the missiles.
 Khrushchev has considered giving control over at least the tactical nuclear arms to Castro . Control over the actual ballistic missiles has never been an option .
 First Deputy Mikoyan opposed giving any control whatsoever to the Cubans . McNamara’s fears are justified in other ways, as we’ll see in few days .
 EXCOMM agrees to draw up a variety of plans for airstrikes to knock out missile sites before they become operational . In the end, the agency agrees to seriously consider invasion plans .
 At 6:30 p.m., the lines now get drawn more clearly . When they do, the discussion continues, and the lines get drawn clearly .
 Joint Chiefs want to go for a full scale air strike to knock out all of the missiles and any military aircraft on Cuba . 24 hour preparations can be made any time after coming Friday .
 Secretary Rusk wants to explore political and diplomatic options . He's especially concerned about the effects of military action on the rest of Latin America and on NATO allies .
 Defense Sectary McNamara argues that the missiles haven’t changed anything in practice . McNamara says the missiles have been used in practice.
 The United States still has a massive advantage in destructive deterrence, the Joint Chiefs say . The Joint Chiefs strongly disagree .
 National Security Advisor Bundy believes in a limited airstrike as ‘fit punishment’ and a warning . Bundy: A limited airstrike would be a 'fit punishment' and a 'fitting punishment' for the Syrian regime .
 General Taylor is opposed for fear of not knocking out all of the missiles . General Taylor says he is opposed to the idea .
 Robert Kennedy wants to know if invasion after a partial strike is an option . Robert Kennedy says invasion after partial strike could be an option in Iraq .
 His main concern is that if any missiles at all are left in place they can be used to deter the U.S. from taking action against revolutionary activity in other parts of Latin America .
 The President expresses shock that the Soviets have been willing to take this enormous risk of provocation . The president expresses shock at the risk .
 He’s undecided what action to take, but wants to know if all possible options are in preparation . He's undecided what to do, but says he wants to see if there's any possible options .
 They agree to continue planning for all eventualities and to revisit the issue tomorrow . They will continue gathering intelligence via spy plane activity .
 The world goes to sleep without knowing that the wheels of war have been set in motion by Moscow, Havana, and Washington . It will be several days until the world finds out, but by then the crisis will have deepened, and many of the fears expressed in the White House this
 In his book ‘Two Concepts of Liberty’, Berlin argues that there are two concepts of freedom; ’negative freedom', which is freedom from interference, and ‘positive freedom’ which asks not what we are free from, but what we're free to do .
 Berlin has freedom of speech and freedom of expression in Berlin . Little does Berlin know that his host that evening has neither those freedoms .