 Mikoian makes use of research materials and books on the crisis published on the U.S. side . His main focus primarily and justifiably covers the Soviet angle of the confrontation .
 Anastas Mikoian was a ranking Presidium member and a close associate of Nikita Khrushchev . Mikoian is a former member of the Presidium of the Soviet Union .
 He was perhaps the only Soviet leader to have input in the making of foreign policy after Khrushchev purged his political rivals from power . He had no input in making foreign policy decisions after the purge of rivals .
 Mikoian’s experience and diplomatic skills made him indispensable to Khrushchev as a troubleshooter in places where Soviet policies went badly wrong, as in Hungary in 1956 or in Cuba in 1962 . Mikoian's experience and diplomacy helped him in Hungary, Cuba and Cuba .
 Even discounting the author’s personal connection to Mikoian, it is understandable that he is at the center of the story, though perhaps with some injustice to other important actors . So, even discounting .
 About 80 photographs of Mikoian on different occasions, compared to only about 70 of Castro, 60 of Che Guevara, 17 of Kennedy, and just 12 of Khrushchev .
 Mikoian: Khrushchev's decision to send missiles to Cuba was a mistake . Mikoian's mission to Cuba and the U.S. was to put out the flames in November 1962 .
 He also followed his father to Cuba in 1960 and 1962 and adds his personal experiences to the film .
 The author's detailed description of his father’s meetings with the Cuban leadership in February 1960 raises a number of interesting questions about the origin and the nature of the Soviet–Cuban alliance .
 Fidel Castro predicted that Cuba would take the socialist road in ten years, Mikoian says . Mikoian cites an memorandum of a conversation involving Mikoian, Fidel Castro, and Che Guevara .
 This enthusiasm helps explain, from the author's viewpoint, why the Soviet Union sent missiles to Cuba . The Soviet Union was enthusiastic about sending missiles to the island .
 He takes sides unequivocally in the old historiographical debate . He says Khrushchev was not thinking of the strategic balance between the U.S. and the USSR .
 His decision to send missiles to Cuba was motivated solely by one rationale—to save the Cuban revolution from a U.S. invasion . The Cuban revolution was saved from a United States invasion .
 We both agreed that this would inevitably be repeated, but with a different force, with an eye to a quick and full victory of the Americans . The two sides will meet again in the next round of the World Cup on Sunday .
 They will find themselves in the condition of the same balance, as in the relationship with our country, says President Obama . They will be in the balance, he says .
 Any attack on Cuba will mean a strike directly against their territory . Any strike on Cuba would mean a attack directly against its territory .
 Khrushchev raised the question of Cuba’s vulnerability at a Presidium meeting . Asked Defense Minister Rodion Malinovskii how long it would take for the Soviet forces to occupy an island off its coast .
 Malinovskii predicted that the operation would take three to four days, at worst a week . The operation is expected to take place at least three days .
 Mikoian acquiesced to Khrushchev’s adventurism, author claims . In the end, the author claims, Mikoian . Mikoian was a Soviet leader in the 1950s and 1960s .
 Mikoian’s recollections offer striking and revealing details of Kremlin decision-making under Khrushchev . Mikoian: "I was in charge of the Kremlin in the 1960s and 1960s, but I was not in charge"
 The first secretary dominated policy discussions; these discussions, in fact, came down to him voicing his opinion . "No one else’s mattered. These discussions, fact, were about him expressing his opinion," he says .
 Mikoian’s own dissenting voice drowned in the flattering and congratulatory chorus of the other Presidium members . Mikoian: “I’m not happy with the outcome of this decision, but I’ll be happy with it,” he said .
 The only question is to what extent Mikoian’s claims that he was the only voice of reason in the Presidium corresponded to reality .
 Mikoian is portrayed as a lone wise man in an ocean of bureaucratic stupidity . Yet the author predictably portrays Mikoian as a lonely wise man . Mikoian's story is not true .
 Mikoian, Jr., Jr. does an excellent job with his insider analysis of the Kremlin’s mode of thought .
 Khrushchev tried to sneak behind the United States’ back in a covert operation . This unseemly propensity in part helps explain why he tried to move Soviet missiles to Cuba . The U.S. tried to hide behind the U.K. back .
 Khrushchev’s deceit eroded Soviet standing in the eyes of international public opinion and hardened U.S. resolve to oppose his adventurism . In the end, the United States was determined to stand against his actions .
 Khrushchev’s attempt to surprise the U.S. with nuclear missiles in Cuba was that he simply had no contingency plans . Another problem is that he didn’t have any contingency plans, he had no plans .
 Khrushchev was simply too confident in his own harebrained schemes to permit any second thought . He was too confident of his own plans to permit no second thought.
 Author offers credible yet simple explanations for Soviet foreign policy behavior . Author offers simple yet simple explanation for Soviet behavior .
 At the same time he badly offended Castro when he failed to consult with him about withdrawing missiles from Cuba, and other cases . He also volunteered to allow inspections on Cuban territory .
 The author laments Khrushchev’s lack of tact, arrogance, and chauvinism . The author also laments his lack of respect for the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev dispatched Anastas Mikoian to Cuba to patch up problems with Castro in November 1962 . Mikoian had a better feel for making friends and influencing people, or else he would have been dispatched .
 The book includes a lengthy chapter on Mikoian’s talks with the Cuban leadership . Mikoian's book also includes a chapter on his talks with Cuban leaders .
 Some of these memcons have been published in English translation in translation in the Cold War International History Project Bulletin .
 For example, the book contains exchanges between Mikoian and Khrushchev while the former was in Havana . The appendix to the book includes exchanges between the two men .
 Khrushchev complains about Castro’s unwillingness to “make joint decisions and take coordinated steps” —this is after he completely ignored Castro in his negotiations with Washington . In his letter of 11 November, Khrushche writes that he completely ignores Castro .
 Mikoian did not blurt out Khrushchev’s instructions in his talks with the Cubans . Mikoian helped repair the crumbling Soviet–Cuban alliance .
 One chapter examines more closely the fate of the Soviet–Cuban alliance . Another chapter examines the Soviet-Cuban relationship .
 Of course, there is no denial of the sacrifice, or of the extent of the Soviet economic aid to Cuba, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "In the end cost the USSR an arm and a leg"
 Western literature says Cuba switched one imperialist patron for another . Cuba's relationship with Russia has been a source of tension in the region for decades . Russia's relations with the West has also been strained in recent years .
 Mikoian argues that great-power politics under the veil of class solidarity can be overlooked by class solidarity . In fact, the evidence that Mikoian presents in his book requires careful reading of proletarian internationalism, he says .
 Mikoian's excellent research, his profound expertise and command of the subject, and his lively and engaging style deserve the highest praise . Mikoian’s excellent research makes for pleasant and informative reading .
 Dept. of International History London School of Economics and Political Science Houghton St. St. George's School of the History of the World .