 Neither Khrushchev nor Castro seemed to have any fear that missile placement in Cuba would lead to a nuclear war . Neither did they fear that the Cuban missile placement could lead to nuclear war.
 The United States believed that the Soviets were planting nuclear missiles in Cuba as response to American installation in Turkey . The U.S. believed the move was a response to an American presence in Turkey in Cuba .
 Cuba was first analyzed by specialists in the early evening of October 15 . Monday, October 15Photographs of Cuba were first analyzed .
 At 8:30 pm a CIA agent telephoned McGeorge Bundy, the president’s special advisor on national security affairs . Bundy was president's national security advisor . Bundy is the president's special advisor .
 Intelligence experts had worked that night on a report . Tuesday, October 16, was October 16 .
 At 8:00 am an intelligence officer delivered the report to Bundy at the White House . Bundy received the report at 8:30 am . Bundy says the report was delivered to Bundy by a White House intelligence officer .
 At 11:45 the executive Committee of the National Security Council assembled . The committee was assembled at 11:30 a.m. EST .
 These included doing nothing, and losing credibility, bombing the Cuban bases or invading Cuba, and lastly a blockade . A blockade of Cuba would be the last option .
 The president was absent this day on speaking dates . They decided not to take any action until further information was gained . Wednesday, October 17 .
 They discussed the possibilities of an air strike to remove the missiles . They also discussed the possibility of a strike on the missiles in Syria . The missiles are believed to have been removed from Syria .
 This would mean the bombing of airfields, aircraft, and all possible nuclear warhead storage sites . This would be the first time the US has bombed possible nuclear sites .
 This would mean an awful lot of deaths, almost surely drawing a Russian retaliation . This would be almost certainly drawing a response to the deaths .
 The possibility of a blockade was also discussed and looked promising, except for the legal issues . The legal issues are still to be resolved, including the legal issue .
 The U-2’s provided more photographic evidence of missiles increasing urgency and thus tension . This is a prime example of how difficult decision making is under the stressful conditions of a crisis .
 It was estimated intermediate range sites would be ready by 1 December . It is estimated intermediate ranges will be ready for the first time in December .
 This showed that the bases were being constructed, so there would be no time to waste, the Americans had to act quickly . The Americans had a lot of time to react quickly to the situation .
 A buildup of air power in the southeastern U.S. increased the pressure on the planning group to come to an immediate decision .
 These reports add more pressure to the urgency of a quick solution to the crisis .
 For the most part of the day the president was not at the State Department for crisis discussions . President Obama was not there for crisis talks .
 At 5:00 pm President Kennedy was to meet Andrei A Gromyko in a conference scheduled prior to the crisis . Kennedy was due to meet with Andrei Gromyko prior to crisis .
 Before leaving for political campaigning the president expressed his approval towards a blockade . As well the legal advisor of the United States was in Paris to stop trade from the west in to Cuba .
 They discussed how to go about a blockade, and the chances of going with an air strike . They also discussed the possibility of a possible air strike in Syria .
 Although work was done on alternatives, the decision went to the blockade . Although work had been done, the blockade went ahead . The decision was made by the government .
 Many of the planners were questioning what reactions would take place due to the blockade . The blockade is expected to be the largest in the country's history .
 A proclamation of such a major action was bound to increase the pressure for all sides in the crisis . The announcement was bound for increased pressure for the government .
 The president cancels the rest of his trip, and would be flown back to Washington . Saturday, October 20, is the president of the United States. Saturday, Oct. 20, will be flown to Washington.
 He was briefed and given the first of five drafts of a speech for Monday evening . He was then briefed by the PM and given five draft versions of the speech .
 The crisis planners could only wait in suspense as to the world reaction . Crisis planners were only waiting for the world to react .
 At 11:00 am there was a meeting of officials with the president . Sunday, October 21, was the president's meeting with officials .
 At 2:30 pm the National Security Council met with the Office of Emergency Planning . “43 letters were drafted for the heads of government of all alliances.”
 At noon an announcement was made that the president would make an important speech of great urgency at 7:00 pm. The speech was made at noon . The president was expected to make the speech at the time .
 In Cuba a newspaper was printing maps with the build up of American forces . In Cuba, maps were printed of the build-up of U.S. forces .
 The same day Krushchev announced that the intent of the missiles was to prevent a war between the U.S.A. and Cuba . The intent was to avoid a war, according to the Soviets .
 President Obama has ordered a quarantine of offensive weapons to Cuba . The president stated that he had ordered the quarantine . The quarantine was ordered by the Cuban government .
 He added that preparation of missile sites must cease or further action would be taken . He warned that further action will be taken if preparations for missile sites are not stopped .
 He called upon Chairman Krushchev to withdraw weapons already there . Finally he called upon him to do so . He said: "I want to see the weapons withdrawn from the Soviet Union"
 The draft resolution demands that the Russians were to dismantle and withdraw the missiles under U.N. verification . Included with the letter was a draft resolution demanding that Russia were to remove the missiles .
 In Paris the North Atlantic Treaty Organization went over American reasons for their actions . In Paris they went over the reasons for the U.S. actions .
 United States intelligence got word that a highly placed Russian spy had sent a terrifying message from Moscow . U.S. intelligence received word that the highly placed spy had been sent to Moscow .
 Before arrest he was able to send a signal that the Soviets were about to launch a nuclear attack . Before arrest, he sent a signal to warn the Soviets of a nuclear strike .
 The signal was not credited and never reached the director of Intelligence, the superior deputies, or the president and his advisors . Fortunately, the signal never got credited . Fortunately the signal did not reach the president .
 The Russians called it a violation of international war, and provocative acts that might lead to thermonuclear war . The Russian government called it an act of war that could lead to war .
 They claimed their acts to Cuba were peaceful, and no way of offensive purposes . They said their acts were peaceful and not offensive .
 This increased space between the two nations as the Americans were not getting what they wanted . This increased the space between two nations .
 The American Foreign Office responded with a statement that Russia was deliberately threatening the U.S. The U.K. responded to a statement by saying that Russia had deliberately threatened the United States .
 NATO and the Organization of American States were behind the U.S. blockade decision . Both NATO and OAS countries are behind the decision .
 The tension between the two countries really began to build . To this point the pressure on the U.S. was great, but this is where the tension began .
 Wednesday, October 24, is the first day of the blockade which began at 10:00 am.
 During the course of the day a Soviet ship was on, but changed course for Cuba . During the day, the ship was going to Cuba . The ship changed course and headed for Cuba.
 The coming of this ship caused a lot of pressure to build, and the change in course a great deal of relief, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 All was not well as the two nations began somewhat of a game of pressuring each other . The two nations were not well at the start of the game .
 A message that the proclamation was deemed unacceptable arrived from Moscow that morning . A message from Moscow had been sent to the Kremlin that morning.
 After the message bulletens were received that Premier Krushchev proposed a summit meeting, the Soviet Union agreed to hold a summit .
 He proposed a stop to everything for two weeks during which talks would go on . He proposed two weeks of talks between the two sides of the world leaders .
 The United States had already rejected negotiations until the missile bases had been dismantled . The U.S. has already rejected talks until the bases have been dismantled.
 The president authorized low level reconnaissance flights of P 8Us, to join the U2s. The president also authorized low-level reconnaissance flights . The P 8U joined the U.2s in the 1980s .
 Pressure intensified in the White House waiting for the reaction . Thursday, October 25, was the time for the first contact .
 The first contact of the blockade came at 8:00 on Thursday morning . The blockade began at 8 a.m. local time on Thursday .
 The Cubans were under a great deal of stress thinking they may be invaded . Cubans thought they may have been invaded by the U.S. State Department .
 The Americans were fearing the approach of Russian ships, and their reactions . Meanwhile the Americans were worried about their reaction to the Russian ships .
 The Americans had made it clear to Mr Thant that they would settle for nothing less than the removal of the missiles . The U.S. has made clear they would be willing to remove missiles from the region .
 This simply seemed to increase the barrier of the nations involved in the crisis . This simply increased the barrier between the two countries .
 Just before 8:00 am a vessel heading for Cuba was boarded without incident, and was permitted to continue . The vessel was allowed to continue without incident .
 This was a great relief, at this time the slightest offensive action could have set off a war . This was the greatest relief, as it was possible to avoid a war, the author says .
 President received a letter from Krushchev, he made an offer to remove the missiles . Further relief arrived at 11:00 pm when the president received a . letter from the president . The president received the letter to remove missiles .
 This would be done in return for blockade removal, and assurance that Cuba would not be invaded by the western hemispheres nations . Cuba would be given a return to blockade removal and assurances that the western hemisphere would not invade Cuba .
 On this morning another letter arrived from Moscow . Saturday, October 27, is October 27 . The letter was sent from Moscow to Washington .
 The premier offered to make a trade of Cuban bases for the American bases existing in Cuba . The deal would be made between Cuba and the United States .
 The tone and style of this letter brought back some of the pressure that had been relieved by the previous letter . The tone of the letter was similar to that of the previous letters .
 The Americans replied that Cuba must be dealt with first as base construction was continuing . Without rejecting the offer, the U.S. responded to the offer .
 A shock hit the U.S. bringing with it all, and more of the tension and pressure the government was facing . The U.N. government is facing more pressure and pressure .
 At any earlier a time in the Crisis this may have lead to immediate nuclear war . This may have happened at any earlier time during the Crisis .
 It was the downing of a U-2 reconnaissance plane, and an attempt on a second by Cuban antiaircraft guns . The U.2 was shot down by Cuban anti-aircraft guns in Cuba .
 Evidence suggests that the order for the shooting came from Castro . Khrushchev was supposedly shocked, and evidence suggests that Castro ordered the shooting .
 Surveillance had to continue, and this meant fighter escorts and possible direct attack at ant-aircraft weapons . Surveillance continued to continue with the threat posed .
 Washington drafted a new letter which generally ignored the second letter from Moscow . Washington drafted the new letter . The new letter was generally ignored .
 If Krushchev was willing to remove offensive weapons from Cuba, in return for removal of the blockade, and promise that there would be no attacks from the hemisphere, they had a deal .
 None of the officials expected a nuclear war, but the threat of having to remove antiaircraft weaponry was far from comfortable . The threat of removing anti-aircraft weaponry from aircraft was not comfortable .
 Krushchev’s letter said he had ordered work on the missile sites stopped . The letter also said he ordered work to be stopped on the sites .
 This was all to be followed under the verification of the United Nations . This was done under the verified of the U.N. The United Nations.
 The crisis was caused by the installation of ground to ground ballistic missiles in Cuba . Ground to ground missiles were installed in Cuba in response to the ground-to-ground missiles .
 Through out this time many unforeseen events took place, under great tension and pressure . Under great tension, the government was under great pressure . Through out of this time, many unforeseen things took place .
 These included the first contacts of the blockade, and the downing of a U.S. reconnaissance plane . The first contacts were made during the blockade .
 Many critics state that Kennedy gave away to much to resolve the crisis . Others feel it was a tacit agreement to free the world of the threat of nuclear war .
 The United States agreed to protect Cuba against attacks from the western hemisphere . The U.S. agreed to the removal of United States bases in Turkey .
 How close to nuclear war did the world come to in the Cuban missile crisis in 1962? How close did it come to a nuclear war? The U.S. and Cuba were at odds in 1962 .