 Owens, Lane, Dyer & Co. displays displays and demonstrations by four local firms . The event was held at Owens Lane, Lane & Dyer's headquarters .
 Hamilton was a leading industrial center in the 19th century . His article described some of the wares which established Hamilton .
 The company traced its origin to 1845 and is regarded as Hamilton's first industry . Job E Owens, Clark Lane and Elbridge G Dyer founded the company in Hamilton .
 Its factory was between North Fourth and North Fifth streets, south of Heaton Street . The factory was located between Fourth and Fifth Street and North Fourth .
 The company was formed in 1856 by John M Long, Peter Black and Robert Allstatter . It also displayed ""sickle-teeth and agricultural machinery"" which it built in its factory on the north side of High Street .
 McBeth, Bentel & Margedant, started in 1864 by Charles E Mcbeth who later joined Fred Bentel and William C Margadant . The company displayed its woodworking line .
 Niles, which began in Cincinnati before the Civil War, was then completing its move to its Hamilton shop . Niles is now located along the west side of North Third Street . The Niles store is located in Cincinnati .
 All of the companies profiled in the 1871 article were located along branches of the Hamilton Hydraulic . The canal drew water from the Great Miami River four miles north of Hamilton to provide water power for Hamilton industries .
 Their goods were transported out of Hamilton by the Miami-Erie Canal and three railroads . The canal and railroads were used to transport their goods .
 The federal census in 1870 counted 11,081 persons in Hamilton and 39,912 in Butler County . Hamilton and Butler County were part of the Hamilton area .
 Ohio, with more than 2. million, was the third most populous of 37 states . Ohio is the most populous state in the United States, with 2.2 million people .
 Missiles near Oxford part of Cold War defense 30 years ago . Ajax and Hercules missiles were placed in Butler County . Missiles were placed during the Cold War, now a welcomed thaw .
 Construction of underground silos was nearing completion west of Oxford . In October 1959, when most Americans were troubled by the much-publicized ""Missile Gap,"" construction of underground launching silos began .
 Oxford Nike base was one of four bases encircling the Cincinnati region . The Oxford Nike bases were one of the four Nike bases in Cincinnati .
 Others were at Wilmington, Felicity and Felicity in Ohio and Dillsboro in Indiana .
 Also at Wilmington then was Clinton County Air Force Base, a home for planes of the Strategic Air Command . Clinton County Base was home to planes of Strategic Air command .
 The 14-building, 14-acre complex also included barracks and offices in addition to missile control and monitoring facilities . The complex was built in the 1980s and 1990s .
 About 40 men were stationed at the base, north of U.S. 27 off Todd Road, about two miles west of Oxford .
 All four area missile bases were activated in February 1960 as part of the North American air defense network . All four missile bases are located in the U.S. area .
 Charles R Arvin, commander of the 5th Missile Battalion, when the bases opened. Charles R. Arvin was commander .
 Among prime U.S. targets, it was suspected, would be the industrial corridor extending north from Cincinnati through Hamilton and Middletown to Dayton . Defense products included steel, machine tools, jet engines and processed uranium .
 The chance of a U.S.-Soviet war seemed to be increasing as the Oxford base was planned and constructed . The chances of a war increased as the base was constructed .
 Oct. 1957, the Soviets launched Sputnik I, the first man-made satellite in orbit, taking a lead in the Space Race . Oct. 1958, the Soviet Union launched the first satellite in space, taking an early lead .
 Almost instantly, the United States was believed to be on the short end of the Missile Gap . The issue continued as a hot issue into the 1960 Kennedy-Nixon presidential election campaign .
 May 1, 1960 -about eight weeks after the Oxford base became operational - an American U-2 high-altitude spy plane, piloted by Francis Gary Powers, was shot down over Russia . The U.2 was the first to be shot down in the Soviet Union .
 The tension mounted in 1961, first with the ill-fated Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba and then the start of construction of the Berlin Wall in August . The tension rose in the wake of the construction of Berlin Wall .
 The base in Oxford Township was capable of firing missiles with either conventional or nuclear warheads . Military spokesmen repeatedly admitted that the base was capable .
 There was never official confirmation of the presence of nuclear weapons at the local base . The base was never officially confirmed of its nuclear weapons .
 By the late 1960s, new long-range weapons had emerged and missile bases like the one west of Oxford were obsolete . By the mid-1960s, the bases had become obsolete .
 Journal-News, Wednesday, Oct., 1989 Joel Williams built county's first mills . Williams would have been Butler County's first real estate agent .
 The Pennsylvania millwright was an enterprising frontiersman whose determined quest for profit put him at odds with early leaders in Cincinnati . He was a millwright whose determination to make money put him on the ground .
 Williams worked as an agent for John Cleves Symmes, who had purchased the land north of the Ohio River between the Little Miami and Great Miami rivers from the government . Williams worked in the early 1900s as a real estate agent for Symme .
 Williams operated a tavern in Cincinnati and a ferry on the Ohio River between the foot of Main Street and Kentucky . Williams also operated a bar and ferry in Cincinnati .
 Williams combined milling experience with real estate skills to create Butler County . In 1803, he created Butler County, which became Butler County in 1803 .
 Mills were essential in the settlers' struggle to convert their land from a debt to an asset . Mills are essential in converting their land into an asset, helping them convert it into a debt .
 Their financial survival depended on access to access to gristmills, sawmills and carding mills, which were the trading complexes and community centers on the Ohio frontier until about 1830 .
 Williams came to this area in the 1790s when it was unsettled and explored the Great Miami River and its tributaries . Williams was searching for the most promising sites for water-powered mills .
 He scouted banks of Indian Creek and Four Mile Creek before land west of the Great Miami River was placed on scale by the federal government .
 In other places, he sold land to persons who were interested in building mills . The land was sold to persons interested in developing mills .
 In some cases, he sold the site and contracted to build the mill for the land buyer . And, in others, he also sold the land to the site .
 It was in the southern end of Fairfield Township at the mouth of Bank Lick, where it empties into the east side of the Great Miami River . It was located at the end of the township .
 Today, it would be near River Road in the vicinity of Burns and Georgetown roads, near the county line . Today's location would be in the near vicinity of River Road .
 The Williams-built mill at Bank Lick served the earliest settlers in two important ways . The mill was built in the early 1900s in the area .
 First, of course, it enabled them to have their corn and grains ground without the expense and time-consuming task of building their own mills .
 Williams would deduct the value of the processed grain from the amount the settler owed Symmes for the land . Williams, as the agent, would deduct from the value . Williams would then deduct the amount of the . processed grain . Williams' agent would then take the value from the
 Williams is credited with building at least a half dozen mills in Butler County, Butler County . Williams built a structure on Indian Creek completed in 1805 for Joseph Van Horne . Williams also built at least two mills in the county .
 Williams was embroiled in a long-runnung controversy in Cincinnati . Meanwhile, Williams is embroiled in another controversy in the city .
 In 1789 he challenged a town plat drawn by Israel Ludlow, who later would be Hamilton's founder . Hamilton had challenged Ludlow's town plat in 1789 . Ludlow was later the founder of Hamilton's company .
 Ludlow designated the Cincinnati riverfront as a public landing instead of offering it for sale . Ludlow had designated the riverfront in place of sale . The landing was designated as public landing .
 Williams produced a plat on which he claimed the land along the river, igniting a legal battle which divided the community for years . The land was claimed by Williams, but it was disputed by the community . Williams won the legal battle over the land in which he claims the land .
 Mass murder overshadowed 1929 stock market crash by news of the murder of five persons, including four children, in 1989 . Journal-News, Sunday, Oct., 1989, was Sunday October 1 .
 Within a few months, a fourth of the nation's labor force was jobless, banks failed, personal savings vanished, families lost their houses and farms . Many who had enjoyed relative affluence during the Roaring '20s were hungry in the 1930s .
 Statistics are unavailable on the number of area residents who suffered huge losses or financial ruin because of the sudden drop in stock prices in 1929 .
 Hamiltonians could buy a man's all-wool suit for $19.50 and shirts for 95 cents at Dunlap Clothing on South Third Street . When the crash came 60 years ago, Hamiltonians were able to buy a suit and a shirt for just 95 cents .
 A woman's dress cost $19.50 to $29.50 at Robinson-Schwenn on High Street . A dress can be bought at the store for between $20 and $30 .
 Kroger was advertising hamburger at 25 cents a pound and pork chops at 33 cents per pound . Kroger also advertised hamburgurgurgers at around 25 cents .
 At Jonson Brothers Restaurant on High Street, complete Sunday dinners ranged from 60 cents for veal chops to $1 for filet mignon . Most meals priced at 75 cents .
 Savings accounts earn 5 percent at the West Side Building & Loan Association on Main Street . Savings accounts are earning 5 percent .
 President Herbert Hoover was in Ohio just 48 hours before the stock market crash . Hoover is commonly blamed for much of the ensuing Depression .
 The engineer on the Baltimore & Ohio locomotive of the southbound special was George Wortendyke, identified as a former Hamiltonian . The engineer of the special was identified as former Hamiltonians .
 The president was on his way to Cincinnati to participate in ceremonies marking completion of the lock and dam system on the Ohio River from Pittsburgh to Cairo, Ill. The president is expected to attend the ceremony .
 Hoover was aboard the presidential special train when the panic began Thursday morning on Wall Street . Hoover was still aboard the president's special train at the time of the panic . Hoover is still on the train when it happened .
 The major topic in Hamilton that day was the murder of five family members discovered the previous day in their house in Lindenwald, Hamilton . Five family members were found dead in their home the next day .
 The father, who turned on the gas and fled, was captured a year later . In 1931, he became the second person sentenced from Butler County to die in the Ohio electric chair .
 Butler County farmers say the stock market panic had an immediate impact on their farmers . The market panic has been a big hit for Butler County, Butler County .
 Prices for wheat, corn, hogs, livestock and other items traded at Cincinnati markets resembled a roller coaster as they plunged, rose and plunged again . During the next week, prices for wheat and corn rose, fell and again .
 Legend of Hangman's Hollow began in 1851 . Halloween is an appropriate time to recall a ghost story .
 Hangman's Hollow is known for ghost sightings and warnings from unseen persons . It is the legend of Hangman’s Hollow .
 There are several versions of the legend, which is understandable because the story survived for many years, and from generation to generation, by word of mouth . The legend is said to have survived for generations of generations .
 Some verbal variations even differ on the exact site of Hangman's Hollow . Hangman Hollow is located in the middle of a river in the area .
 What appears to be the first printed account — complete with the names of key participants, location and date of the event which started the legend — was published Oct. 10, 1910, in the Hamilton Telegraph .
 Report said the story was associated with the first Butler County Fair in 1851 . The report said the first fair was held in Butler County, Butler County . The story is associated with a story associated with an 1851 fair .
 That year the fair was held on a site Just east of Hamilton along High Street east of Sixth Street . The fair is held on the same site just east of the city .
 Four young men from the Darrtown area -Taylor Marshall, Ben Scott, Chambers Flenner and Dan Warwick -went by horseback to the first fair Oct.-3, 1851 . The fair was held in the town's first fair in 1851.
 The Darrtown men encountered a small group of people who had gathered in the roadway . They encountered a group of small groups of people .
 The lifeless body of a man was found hanging from a tree just off the dusty turnpike . They had been attracted to the tree by a man hanging from the tree .
 Some believed the man, who had been dead for several days, had committed suicide . Some believed it was a suicide .
 They pointed out that he died with his suspenders around his neck, not a rope . They said that he was not tied to a rope but with suspenders on his neck .
 The victim was tentatively identified as a stockman who had left a Hamilton hotel about a week earlier to call on Butler County farmers . It was several days later before authorities identified the victim as a farmer .
 Others recall that the apparent victim flashed ""quite a roll of money"" before leaving town . Others recalled that the victim flashed "quite a Roll of money" before leaving .
 A robbery or murder along a lonely turnpike was not an unusual crime in the mid 19th century . The crime was not unusual in the 19th Century .
 The 1851 incident beside the Darrtown Pike was not enough to attach the eerie Hangman's Hollow label to the spot . Hangman’s Hollow is the name of a spot in the area that was later christened by the same name .
 It was what happened or supposedly happened, after the robbery-murder in October 1851 . Instead of the murder, it was what actually happened .
 Several times in succeeding years, travelers along the road between Rossville and Darrtown told of seeing a mysterious image in the hollow .
 The aberration was believed to be the ghost of the hanged stock dealer . It is believed to have been an aberration of a stock dealer's ghost .
 Voice or voices heard from unseen ghosts, possibly coming from ghosts . It was heard from a strange voice or voices .
 In most instances, the voice warned riders to beware of danger lurking there . The voice said riders should beware of the danger lurking .
 According to a 1910 report, for several generations, travelers through the spooky woods spurred their horses for extra speed to avoid an encounter with a ghost or mysterious voices . The 1910 report said that travelers had to push their horses to extra speed .