 Soviet land-based nuclear missiles threatened U.S. from Cuba, 90 miles from Florida . Soviet missiles threatened American soil not just from launching sites in the USSR, but also from Cuba .
 In the Soviet Union, it was known as the Caribbean crisis, defined in terms of where it took place . In the 1980s, the crisis took place in the Caribbean, known as 'the Caribbean crisis'
 My purpose in this essay is to examine the role of Cuban intelligence in the genesis, management, and resolution of the crisis . My purpose is to look at the genesis of the Cuban crisis .
 In particular, I seek to explain the organization and operation of Cuban intelligence; its assessments ; its relationship to Soviet intelligence; and its . relationship to Cuban politics and policy making .
 These are topics that have essentially never been explored in the scholarly literature . These topics have never been discussed in the academic literature .
 Cuba has released very few documents that bear on these questions . There are few public testimonies by knowledgeable Cuban officials . Cuba has not released any of these documents .
 It is likely that when more extensive testimony from official Cuban sources and the full documentary record become available, various aspects of my account will have to be modified .
 Despite serious obstacles, Cuban intelligence was able to collect information necessary to help Cuban leaders make sound political decisions . Cuban leaders were able to interpret that information with reasonable though not perfect accuracy, says author .
 The operations side of Cuban intelligence performed well in certain tasks and poorly in others, as is the case in all intelligence services . But, on balance, it made an important contribution to national security, he says .
 Six crucial features of the context in which Cuban intelligence operated affected the degree to which political leaders made use of Cuban intelligence . Political exploitation varied considerably over time, and to some extent influenced the collection of information .
 The origins and organization of Cuban intelligence in the early 1960s are explained in this article . Before making that argument, however, I will briefly explain the origins .
 Of the three intelligence communities involved in the October crisis, the KGB and CIA were mature institutions, with long histories, highlyqualified personnel, advanced technology, and ample resources . Building an Intelligence Apparatus was the CIA's first major intelligence operation in Latin America .
 Beginning in the 1940s, the PSP managed to penetrate President Fulgencio Batista's security forces .
 PSP underground was led by Osvaldo Sanchez Cabrera, a talented agent and politician . Sanchez Cabrera later joined the party executive .
 The urban branches of various groups opposing Batista, most notably the 26th of July Movement and the Revolutionary Directorate of 13 March, are urban branches .
 These groups developed significant clandestine networks and information channels, conducted active surveillance, and successfully penetrated Batista's security forces . The groups were successful in penetrating Batista security forces, according to reports .
 The Ejercito Rebelde developed the rudiments of an intelligence service in the latter stages of the struggle against Batista . It developed the basic intelligence service .
 A small group within the DIER organized the rudiments of an intelligence section . Shortly thereafter, a very small group of members of the intelligence section organized an intelligence department .
 Cuba's DGI became Cuba's chief external intelligence and counterintelligence body . DGI was Cuba's main external intelligence body . Cuba is Cuba's most secretive intelligence agency .
 DGI relied heavily on direct Soviet advice, especially after the middle of 1960 . Department of State Security had no Soviet advisor .
 It did not conduct operations abroad, and focused exclusively on military threat assessment . The U.S. did not engage in operations abroad .
 U.S. forces and operations are the focus of the U.N. mission in Afghanistan, Afghanistan . The U.K. is the only nation to be involved in Afghanistan and Afghanistan .
 Soviet advisers and Soviet assessments were extremely influential with Cuban military intelligence . The Cuban military was heavily influenced by Soviet advisers .
 DIM consistently echoed the dire assessments coming directly from Soviet sources . On the most fundamental issue, the likelihood of U.S. aggression, DIM echoed the Soviet warnings .
 The first major expansion of the resources, range of operations, and activities of Cuban intelligence took place after Playa Giron . The Cuban intelligence community was expanded in 1961 .
 Soviet advisers played an increasingly important role in almost every area, but especially in encryption, communications, and other technical matters . Soviet intelligence shared intelligence with DGI information and reports drawn from their own sources .
 Czech and East German intelligence provided assistance and information on a smaller scale . Czech, East German and Czech intelligence provided information on the attack .
 Prague, Berlin, Paris and Madrid became key Cuban intelligence stations and bases for operations in Western Europe, Africa, and the Middle East .
 Havana was the key station and base of operations in the Western Hemisphere for the Soviet, Czech, and East German intelligence services . Havana was a key station for the Soviets, Czechs and East Germans in the 1980s and 1990s . Havana became a key base for intelligence services in the
 Cooperation between these services and Cuban intelligence was regulated by a series of bilateral agreements . Cooperation between the two countries is regulated by bilateral agreements, including Cuba .
 The Events of 26 March 1962 and their Effect on the Structure of Cuban Intelligence . An internal crisis within Cuba's power structure that came to a head in March 1962 had important implications for the structure of Cuban intelligence .
 From the beginning, the revolutionary government of Cuba included groups of various stripes sharing power under the overall leadership of Fidel Castro . From the start of the Cuban revolution, the government was dominated by the Communist Party .
 The old PSP, which had close ties to Moscow, began quietly attempting to fill as many of the leading positions as possible . In early 1960, the old PSP began quietly .
 Castro appreciated the necessity of securing increased levels of economic and military aid from the Soviet Union . At this time, Castro was in Cuba .
 He was sensitive to the threat Escalante's machinations posed both to his personal position and to Cuban autonomy . However, he was also sensitive to his own personal position .
 It would be dangerous to rely even more heavily upon Moscow materially while members of the Escalante faction, who were under Moscow's influence, were in positions of authority .
 Moscow's support for Escalante indicated that the Soviets had designs on the Cuban Revolution incompatible with the course Castro sought to steer . Moscow's backing of Escalantes indicated that it had designs incompatible with Castro's course of course .
 Castro felt it necessary to crush Moscow's local proxies and demonstrate his firm control . Castro then approached Moscow with the hand of friendship and requested increased levels of assistance .
 Castro denounced Escalante's 'sectarian' efforts to promote relatives and former PSP associates into positions of influence . He carefully avoided any suggestion of conspiracy, any hint of political or ideological struggle, or even mention of Escalantes's Soviet connection .
 He placed Kudriavtsev under military custody and expelled him from Cuba, and also sent Escalante into exile . He also expelled Escalantes from Cuba .
 Escalante sent a secret delegation to Moscow with the express purpose of promoting Soviet-Cuban cooperation . He then urged the Soviet leadership to increase the amount and quality of military aid to Cuba . The Soviet leadership increased the amount of military assistance to Cuba.
 Cuban intelligence experienced its second period of spectacular growth and its second reorganization . Shortly thereafter, Cuban intelligence underwent a second period .
 Castro began to take a strong personal interest in every aspect of Cuban intelligence, even in some cases maintaining personal contacts with operatives and analysts . Castro took a strong interest in all aspects of the Cuban intelligence .
 The Cuban intelligence community was given access to Cuba's top intelligence officials . This unusual contact between intelligence professionals and the top leadership gave them access to the top level .
 Castro gave strict orders not to create problems with Soviet advisers and experts . Relations between the two countries' intelligence communities became considerably closer .
 Javier oversaw Information Services . Augusto oversaw Liberacion Nacional (National Liberation) as well as Operations . Rene oversaw Technical Services . Javier oversaw information services; Augusto overseeing Operations .
 Soviet influence within DGI was essentially limited to technical and professional issues . However, Soviet influence was limited only to technical issues . Soviet influence in DGI is limited to issues of professional and technical .
 Soviet intelligence had limited access to, and limited influence, over, sensitive aspects of DGI's activities . DGI was founded in 1961 .
 Fifteen 94 INTELLIGENCE and the CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS analysts dealt with information coming from the United States and Canada .
 2. United States planning for a military invasion of Cuba and for the execution of Fidel Castro; 2. U.S. planning for an assassination of Castro and for an execution of Castro; . 2. The United States. Planning for an attack on Castro. 2.
 The counterrevolutionary activities of exiles and their direct or independent role in a potential American invasion or execution attempt; 3. The role of exile in a possible American invasion . 3. Exiles' role in an American invasion, execution attempt, and 3.
 Surveillance of United States military bases in the Southeastern United States . 4.4.5% of the U.S. military bases are located in the Southeast United States; 4.6% of U.N. bases are in the region; 4% of bases are military bases
 Dozens of agents assisted by numerous spontaneous informants monitored US military installations in South Florida . Homestead Air Force Base and nearby facility .
 In the summer of 1962, additional agents were sent to collect information and establish new networks in Panama and in the Southeastern United States . Additional agents were also sent to Panama and the S.E. U.S.
 Cuban intelligence maintained close contacts with Soviet intelligence . Czech and East German intelligence also maintained close ties .
 Latin American countries provided technical assistance as well as information from agents in Latin America .
 Cuban agents operated from covert bases in Washington, Madrid, Paris, Brazil, Santiago de Chile, and Buenos Aires . Cuban agents also operated from secret bases in Paris, Chile, Brazil and Argentina .
 Cuban intelligence also had at their disposal the intelligence resources of communist parties throughout the hemisphere . Many of the communist parties had excellent contacts within their governments and military establishments . Cuban intelligence was able to use their contacts with communist parties .
 Fidel Castro and his Soviet advisers considered Empresa B a key indicator of U.S. intentions . Any imminent attack against Cuba would be preceded by changes in the daily routine at Guantanamo Bay and various other activities which could be relatively easily detected .
 Empresa B was organized by Soviet advisers toward the end of 1960, and was conducted by DIM and DSE, relying almost entirely upon human intelligence .
 Cuban workers inside the base provided the most important information, reporting on the numbers, types, armaments, locations, schedules, schedules and reinforcements .
 DIM also filed weekly reports on American U-2 flights their frequency, their routes, and their probable objectives . In 1962, DIM reported on U.2 flights .
 DGI and DIM analysts hold regular meetings to discuss these reports . Regular meetings are held between DGI analysts and analysts to discuss the reports .
 Soviet advisers suggested also that Cuban intelligence undertake systematic surveillance of diplomats from certain foreign embassies who had been identified as CIA agents .
 Officials from the embassies of the United Kingdom, Brazil, Italy, Italy and Uruguay participated in the operation .
 The Cuban leadership received most of its information and analysis from Cuban intelligence directly from Pineiro, either orally or in writing .
 Pineiro dealt directly with Castro most of the time, though occasionally also with Che Che .
 As a matter of routine, these reports would be returned to Pineiro within a week, whereupon Pineiro would redirect them to his analysts with remarks, questions, and criticisms . Pineiro's analysts would then return the reports to his desk .
 To those of us working in the intelligence community, it was often apparent that these were not Pineiro's comments, but Castro's or Che's . Che died at the hands of Soviet dictator Vladimir Putin in 2009 .
 DGI provided the bulk of intelligence to Cuban leadership . DIM, DIM and DSE reported separately to the Cuban leadership, but DGI reported to the leadership .
 It could tap all of the institutions, resources, and services of the Cuban state in pursuit of its mandate, including, but not limited to, the FAR, MINREX, the Ministry of Foreign Trade, the Prensa Latina news agency and the merchant marine .
 Castro maintained personal contacts with operatives and analysts throughout the period in question . Pineiro was jealous of his contacts with Castro and actively sought to ensure that he served as the sole channel between Castro and the intelligence community .
 Castro's fascination with intelligence and his taste for conspiracy more than any distrust of Pineiro . Castro was fascinated with intelligence more with Pineiro than with his distrust .
 They represented both an irritant and a challenge to the efficient management of information flows . Nevertheless, they represented both irritants and challenges to the efficiency of information flow .
 Cuban intelligence concluded, however, that no aggression was imminent . Based on our own sources and on a different reading of Soviet and East European sources, Cuba's intelligence concluded no aggression would be imminent, CNN says .
 Cuban intelligence collected no information that it considered significant or reliable concerning attempts to assassinate Fidel Castro . Nor did Cuban intelligence .
 There were two crucial issues that partly accounted for this discrepancy . There are two crucial factors that partly account for the discrepancy .
 Soviet intelligence interpreted it as a preliminary to a larger American assault . The U.S. invasion of Afghanistan was seen as a precursor to a bigger assault .
 Operation 'Mongoose' indicated to Cuban intelligence that its purposes were merely to collect information and to harass the Cuban Revolution through small-scale acts of sabotage . But the nature of the activity conducted under the rubric of Operation 'Operation 'Mongouge' indicated that it was
 Operation 'Mongoose' clearly seemed not to be designed to foment insurrection, to facilitate American military operations, or to provide feints and diversions . From the Cuban perspective, a perspective informed by a great deal of recent relevant experience that the Soviets quite naturally lacked Operation '
 Soviet and Cuban intelligence also disagreed over the political preconditions for an American invasion . The two sides also disagreed on the political conditions for an invasion .
 Cuban intelligence insisted that the U.S. would only undertake open and direct aggression with the sanction of the OAS and its member states under the guise of a collective security action .
 The United States would have provided the overwhelming majority of the troops and resources, the U.S. intelligence community said . Washington would require at least the appearance of international legitimacy and hemispheric solidarity before undertaking a move so likely to trigger international condemnation without it .
 Cuban sources indicated that there was no indication that Latin American governments were willing, disposed, or committed to associate themselves with such an adventure .
 Even those governments unfriendly to Cuba recoiled from assessments that an invasion would imply an initial cost of 50,000 casualties . U.S. estimates that the invasion of Cuba would imply a cost of $50,000,000 .
 The Cuban invasion of Cuba was a powerful domestic argument against an invasion of the U.S. within the United States itself . Not only was this an important international consideration, it provided a strong domestic argument .
 The Cuban intelligence community was initially inclined to credit the sincerity of Soviet assessments . Cuban intelligence was trying to try to account for the differences in the two intelligence communities' judgments .
 The discrepancies are simply too great to explain in this way . However, the discrepancies were simply too much to explain .
 By the spring of 1962, Cuban intelligence had decided that the Soviets were deliberately skewing their assessments . Cuban intelligence believed the Soviets had deliberately skewed their assessment .
 After Soviet nuclear forces began to arrive in Cuba, Cuban intelligence concluded that the Soviets had skewed their assessments in order to persuade Castro to agree to the deployment . The deployment was intended primarily to serve Soviet geopolitical objectives .
 This remains the prevailing view among the Cuban intelligence community today . This is the view among Cuban intelligence officials .
 Fidel Castro had independent reasons for desiring a Soviet nuclear deployment in Cuba, however . Fidel Castro was not the only Cuban leader to seek nuclear weapons .
 He accepted Soviet assessments, rejected the contradictory Cuban assessments, in part because they coincided with his own assumptions about U.S. intentions . He accepted the Soviet assessment, and rejected the Cuban assessments .
 Washington would never forgive Cuba for inflicting upon it such a disaster in the United States' own backyard . It convinced the Cuban leadership Fidel Castro and Che Guevara that Washington would not forgive Cuba .
 Cuban leaders felt that the U.S. would not be satisfied until it had exacted its revenge and destroyed the Cuban Revolution . Cuban leaders believed that the United States would never be satisfied with the Cuban revolution .
 Cuban leaders believed that a deadly confrontation with the U.S. was inevitable . Thus from this point forward, Cuban leaders thought that a clash with the United States .
 Cuban leaders eventually came to believe that it was necessary to involve the Soviet Union in Cuba's defense, including a major deployment in situ, in order to forestall a decisive American attack . This led directly to the October crisis .
 Cuban intelligence was instructed to treat the inevitable confrontation with the United States as its guiding strategic assumption shaping every aspect of data collection and interpretation . Not only did Cuban leaders privilege Soviet over Cuban assessments, but Cuban intelligence also treated the inevitable U.S. confrontation as a guide to intelligence .
 This did not result in smoother integration of Soviet and Cuban intelligence efforts . The Soviet-Cuban intelligence effort failed to achieve a smoother integration .
 As Castro was jealous of Cuban autonomy, Cuban intelligence officers had instructions not to discuss information, sources, and assessments with their Soviet advisers . As a result of Castro's jealousy, Cuban spies were forbidden to discuss intelligence with Soviet advisers.
 Soviet advisers perceived important differences of judgment they would ask Pineiro for clarification, which he typically provided . Pineiro would typically provide an explanation .
 After 27 October 1962, all meaningful discussion between the two intelligence communities came to an end . After that, the CIA and U.S. intelligence agencies were unable to discuss the matter again .
 If the United States had attempted a full-scale invasion of Cuba in 1961, it would have been impossible for Cuba to repel it . Given the imbalance in the size, resources, and technology of the two countries' military establishments, the U.S. and Cuba would not be
 Cuba could make an American invasion extremely painful for the U.S. The Cuban government could make it very difficult for the United States to invade . But Cuba could also make an invasion very painful for America .
 Immediately after Playa Giron, contingency planning intensified to inflict this pain on the world champions .
 First, in case of an aggression against Cuba, the U.S. would suffer retribution within its own borders . First, the United States would be retaliated against Cuba's aggression .
 Cuba would bring war and destruction to American homes, U.S. citizens abroad, says President Obama . President Obama has been criticized for his comments on Cuba .
 Cuba would ensure that the system of American domination in the Western Hemisphere, and the power structure of the United States' local Latin American allies, would also suffer . Second, Cuba would mean that the U.S. power structure in Latin America, and its allies, also suffer.
 Cuba would sow the seeds of social and political unrest throughout Latin America . Cuba would support groups of any kind willing to take up arms against the U.S. and their allies . The Cuban government would support any group willing to fight against the United States .
 Defensa Activa Revolucionaria was part of a large scale training program for irregular warfare . The program involved a large number of irregular warfare training .
 Cuba trained hundreds of groups from across Latin America between 1961 and 1962 . Cuba trained thousands of Latin American groups between 1961 to 1962 .
 Exfiltration and infiltration operations became matters of daily routine for Cuban intelligence . Ex-Cuban intelligence was a major focus of Cuban intelligence operations .
 Cuban intelligence became very adept at falsifying identities, forging documents, and other techniques of deception . Cuban intelligence is adept at forging identities and forging documents .
 The primary targets of these activities were Argentina, Peru, Venezuela, Brazil, Colombia, Nicaragua, Guatemala, Guatemala and the Dominican Republic . The main targets were . Argentina, . Peru, . Venezuela, . Colombia, . Nicaragua, and . Guatemala, among others .
 There was a clear and solemn understanding between the Cuban regime and groups operating in these countries that, in a case of U.S. aggression against Cuba, they would retaliate against United States personnel, interests, facilities, and military installations .
 Preparations for Operation 'Boomerang' began early in 1962 and were complete by mid-summer . Operation Boomerang was the first operation to take place in the Philippines .
 The Cuban Revolution was founded by the Cuban Revolution in 1959 . The revolution was inspired by a series of acts of terrorism against the regime . But the Cuban government was defeated by a coup d'Orlando .
 Castro requested a dramatic increase in Soviet military aid for purposes of both deterrence and defense . More important was the decision to request an increase in military aid from the Soviet Union .
 At a minimum, he sought advanced weapons for the FAR and Soviet advisers to train Cuban soldiers in the use of them . The Cuban president sought to use the weapons to train his troops .
 He was willing to contemplate the deployment of Soviet forces to Cuba . After Escalante affair, he was also willing to consider the deployment .
 Che's mission to Moscow in April 1962 was to communicate this request to Khrushchev . The chief purpose of Che's visit to Moscow was to make this request . Che's chief purpose was to send a message to the Soviet leader .
 In Moscow, Che expressed Cuba's desire for greater military aid, but left it up to Khrushchev to make a concrete proposal . Che expressed his desire to receive more military aid from Moscow . Che left the matter up to himself to make the proposal .
 At no point did Che suggest a deployment of Soviet nuclear missiles, nor did Khrushchev offer them at that time . Che suggested that the Soviet Union should deploy nuclear missiles . Che was not in touch with the Soviets at the time .
 Che did, however, seek to impress Khrushchev with the importance of providing Cuba with something qualitatively different from what had been provided previously . Che did not want to impress the Soviet leader .
 Khrushchev stated that the Soviet leadership would give very serious consideration to the Cuban request . The Soviet Union was willing to deter any attempt to destroy the Cuban Revolution . Khrushchev said the Soviet Union would consider the request .
 Khrushchev did not raise the Escalante affair or the expulsion of Kudriavtsev during his meetings with Che . Che was expelled from the Soviet Union in 1961 .
 Khrushchev proposed to Castro Castro the deployment of strategic nuclear missiles to Cuba . Shortly afterwards, the Soviet Union proposed to Cuba's Castro Castro .
 Khrushchev considered the idea in late April or May, sources say . It was only afterward that preparations for such a deployment began, sources tell CNN.com .
 Cuban intelligence concluded after the crisis that the Soviets must have conceived and begun planning the deployment much earlier than this . Cuba's intelligence concluded that the Soviet Union had begun planning for the deployment .
 The prevailing belief in the Cuban intelligence community was that planning for the deployment probably began in late 1961 . Cuban intelligence believed to have been planning for deployment .
 "This conclusion was buttressed by additional circumstantial considerations," says CNN.com.com . "It's a good idea that the government is trying to get the best out of the system"
 Khrushchev and Soviet intelligence knew they were playing the kind of music Fidel Castro wanted to hear . The music was the type of music he wanted to play for Fidel Castro .
 In April 1962 Aleksei Adzhubei brought the 'hard' confirmation of American intentions . Castro needed to be persuaded to accept a Soviet deployment .
 The Soviets knew that they were undermining the credibility of Cuban intelligence in the eyes of the Cuban leadership . The Soviet Union knew that it was undermining its credibility in Cuba .
 Khrushchev first broached with Castro the idea of a Soviet nuclear deployment in late May . Cuban intelligence later concluded that the operation must have been well under way .
 Cuba and the Soviet Union agreed upon a nuclear deployment . Castro and Khrushchev sought to enforce a severe compartmentalization of information relating to it .
 Cuban intelligence was not informed of the decision to deploy Soviet nuclear missiles to Cuba . As a result of this, Cuban intelligence did not know about the decision .
 It was not informed of the size and nature of the Soviet military buildup . Nor was informed of its size and the nature of its military buildup.
 "We discovered these in the course of our normal information-gathering activities in late August and early September," says CNN.com.com .
 In June 1962, Pineiro had given strict instructions not to reflect upon the topic of Soviet forces and missiles in Cuba in any Cuban assessments .
 Only in early September we received instructions to cover the controversial issue of missiles in Cuba in our survey of open sources . Only early September did we receive instructions from the government .
 Cuban intelligence challenged Pineiro's denial that a Soviet nuclear deployment was underway . As sound intelligence assessment the search for information; its analysis; and the formulation of recommendations required a clear picture of Soviet activities .
 Cuban intelligence became concerned that such a deployment might provoke a confrontation with the United States, prompting greater efforts to monitor and anticipate American actions .
 The campaign consisted of funneling information about the actual presence of missiles in Cuba through counter-revolutionary organizations and their press in the United States, especially in Miami . The campaign was primarily aimed at funneling pieces of information .
 This campaign presupposed quite correctly that the CIA would discount this information, because they would not consider the individuals and groups peddling it to be credible . The CIA would not have considered this information credible .
 The KGB leaked accurate information about the deployment so as to mask it . Thus, ironically, the KGB was able to mask the fact that it was deployed .
 The deception campaign was designed to exploit emigres' lack of credibility . It was buttressed by correspondence between Cubans and their friends and relatives in the U.S.
 The deployment took place while Cuba was still in a virtual state of civil war . While this may seem a surprising volume of commentary, it is important to note that it was during Cuba's civil war.
 In April 1961, the Cuban regime implemented a preventive mass arrest of 250,000 people who had been connected with the Batista regime or with counter-revolutionary organizations . Playa Giron was founded in 1961 .
 In the summer of 1962, armed bands of counter-revolutionary insurgents known as bandidos, or bandits, still operated in almost every province . Bandidos were still operating in almost all of the country's provinces .
 42,000 Soviet troops and missiles were deployed in Cuba by the Castro regime . In such a context, it was impossible for the deployment of the troops to escape the notice and comment of people opposed to Castro regime, or people merely anxious about, or intrigued by, the Soviet presence in
 In late September, word came down to permit these letters to arrive in Miami, as part of the deception campaign . As expected, CIA officials paid no attention to the letters .
 By early October 1962, Cuban intelligence had become amazed and baffled by the failure of the CIA, the Pentagon, and even a majority of members of Congress to acknowledge or respond to the Soviet nuclear deployment .
 President Kennedy indicated that he was unaware of the presence of Soviet forces and missiles in Cuba . Even President Kennedy, in public statements on 4 and 13 September, had indicated that .
 Either the CIA was truly ignorant of the deployment, or it was deliberately withholding its knowledge of it for some reason . The CIA was not entirely aware of the operation, or deliberately withholding it .
 If the CIA was unaware of it, then either this was the most impressive deception of the Cold War (and perhaps even of modern history) or the CIA is incompetent . The CIA was not aware of the deception .
 During September and October, Cuban intelligence concluded that a confrontation was brewing between Cuba and the United States over the presence of Soviet forces . The U.S. and Cuba were at odds over the situation .
 Open sources in the United States and reports from DSE on the work of CIA infiltration teams indicated that the U.S. was very close to discovering the Soviet deployment . DSE: The United States was very likely to discover the Soviet presence .
 Reports indicated US preparations at Guantanamo for something big . Empresa B reports indicated U.S. plans at Guantanamo were not big news .
 Soviet intelligence provided extensive reports on American military exercises in the Caribbean and redeployments of U.S. forces closer to Cuba . Soviet intelligence also provided extensive descriptive reports on exercises .
 Surveillance of foreign diplomats working for the CIA indicated that they were under severe pressure and becoming nervous . Foreign diplomats were under pressure and were becoming nervous, officials said .
 In mid-September, Cuban intelligence prepared a report assessing the risks to the Cuban Revolution of being perceived by the U.S. as a Soviet proxy in the bipolar superpower rivalry .
 "Bipolarity was very harmful to Cuba vis-a-vis the U.S. because it could drag Cuba into a superpower war," the authors said . The U.N. should not be bipolar, they said .
 The assessment was the subject of a very heated discussion with Pineiro . Pineiro says the assessment was a very difficult assessment .
 Pineiro's reluctance to submit to Cuban leadership assessments that would challenge or even contradict Fidel Castro's own thinking caused great discontent and resentment among many in the Cuban intelligence community . Pineiro had a policy of compartmentalization, which he knew rather well, causing resentment among Cuban intelligence staff .
 Cuban intelligence also sought to explain the CIA apparently had not become aware of the Soviet deployment . The CIA apparently did not know of the deployment .
 One hypothesis was that the CIA had simply been successfully fooled by the KGB deception campaign, and the deployment had been successfully masked by Soviet forces . The CIA had not been able to detect the deployment of Soviet forces in the area .
 Cuban intelligence was fully convinced that the CIA would detect what was going on, Cuban officials say . CIA was convinced that it would be able to find out what was happening in Cuba .
 The CIA was involved in the CIA's operation in September . It was too late for the CIA to miss the operation, it says .
 CIA was being careful not to tell President what he clearly did not want to hear . Another possibility was that the CIA was simply being careful to tell him .
 Report suggests Kennedy administration severely punished CIA for poor intelligence and operational inefficiency . CIA might be compensating by being extra cautious in its assessments, report says .
 CIA officials were prejudiced against their Cuban agents and against emigres in general . Also as a result of Playa Giron, the CIA was prejudiced on emigues in general.
 The CIA was unwilling to risk another clash with the White House, and simply echoed the Kennedy administration's line on the Soviet deployment of missiles in Cuba . The CIA did not want to risk further clashes .
 CIA was unwilling to see what the Kennedy administration did not want to see . In sum, the CIA did not see what it wanted to see.
 The first was that the CIA had discovered the deployment and was engaged in a game of counterdeception designed to give the U.S. the advantage of tactical surprise in its response . The other was that it was engaging in a counter-deception that gave the United States the advantage
 Outraged by its treatment after Playa Giron, the CIA may have seen an excellent opportunity to get even with a hostile liberal administration that was refusing to admit the possibility of Soviet deployment in Cuba .
 Holding back vital information and refraining from producing accurate assessments for a period of time would eventually force Kennedy into a position of dependence on the security establishment .
 Cuban intelligence community considered assassination a credible possibility . Kennedy's assassination in 1963 was considered highly credible by Cuban intelligence .
 Cuban intelligence during the October crisis began during the second week of October when U-2s renewed their flights . Now with more intrusive routes, more frequent schedules, and extended durations .
 At the same time, Empresa B indicated important changes at Guantanamo Bay, including the cancellation of leaves, the arrival of reinforcements, heightened base security, the activation of armories, and a trebling of air traffic . At the center of the changes are the cancellation and the arrival
 The base was evidently being put on a state of readiness far higher even than that implemented during Playa Giron . The base is being prepared to be ready for the World Cup in Spain .
 Cuban intelligence prepared a final assessment concerning the possibility of a confrontation, and possible scenarios for dealing with it . These indications, complemented by U.S. open sources, led Cuban intelligence to prepare a possible scenario .
 The final version of this report was submitted to Pineiro some time between 16 and 18 October . The final report will be submitted by Pineiro between October 16 and October 18 .
 Pineiro signed off on the report, and submitted copies only for the eyes of Fidel Castro, Raul Castro, and Che Guevara .
 Report assumed that as soon as the U.S. understood the full nature and magnitude of the Soviet deployment, Washington would attempt a preemptive first strike . The report assumed that the United States would try to preemptively strike .
 Khrushchev would yield to U.S. demands in less than a week without consultation with Fidel Castro . Neither did either consider it possible that Khrushchevitch would yield .
 On 17 October, all directorates and branches of the General Staff of the Armed Forces and of the Ministry of Interior were placed on a maximum 'state of war' alert . The move follows a series of incidents in the past month .
 The fact that the U.S. was not attacking, but instead enforcing a naval blockade, came as a surprise . The United States was not going to attack, but to enforce a blockade .
 Cuban intelligence concluded that Kennedy desired to avoid a confrontation, and was leaving the door open for some kind of bargain . Kennedy's decision to strike a deal with the U.S. was a mistake .
 Between 22 and 26 October, Cuban intelligence adopted a military character . Cuban intelligence took over from the military to become more of a military .
 This happened for the first time during the October crisis, although the procedure was not implemented completely . The procedure is not completely implemented completely, although it was first implemented in October .
 DGI and DSE personnel were issued arms and uniforms, but retained their separate institutional identities . The DSE and DGI were given separate arms, uniforms and uniforms .
 DGI became a special unit of 'Punto O', a military base which specialized in irregular warfare directly subordinate to Fidel Castro . DGI was created by the Castro government in 1961 .
 Reports and analyses from other centers and agents in the field were largely cut off because of communications difficulties, the suspension of regular flights, and the absence of couriers . Reports and analysis from other center and agents were mostly cut off .
 Cuban intelligence continued to make use of Soviet sources . DIM reports on Empresa B provided by DIM . The reports were based on reports from the Soviet Union .
 Cuban intelligence did not have any independent information to this effect, and it is unclear what led Fidel Castro to this conclusion .
 Castro made a similar claim to Khrushchev in his letter of that same night, it seems unlikely that his source was Soviet intelligence . Castro made the claim in the letter .
 Castro may have arrived at this conclusion on the basis of the extensive summaries of U.S. open source material that Castro read on a daily basis . One possibility is that Castro may be reading the material daily .
 There were remarks in the US press and in Congress indicating that the blockade would not result in the removal of Soviet missiles from Cuba . The United States would shortly have to mount an air strike or invasion in order to guarantee their elimination .
 We were all expecting an American attack in response to the Soviet deployment, and thus the prospect did not come as a surprise . Whatever the source of his judgment, we were expecting an attack .
 Castro immediately gave instructions to DGI, DSE, and DIM to organize a strict surveillance of Soviet bases and personnel . Castro was eager to monitor the Soviet reaction to the news .
 Fidel Castro's hard-line against compromise began to receive explicit support from Soviet commanders in Cuba and Soviet advisers attached to Cuban intelligence .
 Two consecutive editorials in Krasnaya zvezda (Red Star) took a hard line against withdrawing the missiles from Cuba . The editorials were published in the official journal of the Soviet Armed Forces .
 Cuban intelligence concluded that Khrushchev was being challenged from within, especially among the military . The Cuban government concluded that the Soviet Union was not being supported by the military.
 Soviet commanders in Cuban were siding with Fidel Castro against Moscow . Castro was siding in Cuba with Moscow . The Cuban government was overthrown by Moscow .
 The shooting down of a U-2 by a Soviet commander threatened to derail the process of negotiations . Even more surprising was the shooting down by a . Soviet commander, who threatened the . negotiations .
 Khrushchev was forced to move quickly and strike a deal with Kennedy as soon as possible . The deal was struck as a way to avoid further political turmoil .
 It was the view of Cuban intelligence at the time that Khrushchev's haste to conclude an agreement with Kennedy was not a response to diplomatic or strategic considerations, it was a reaction to challenges to his leadership . It was a response not to diplomatic considerations, but to challenges .
 After 27 October, Soviet, Czech, and East German intelligence dramatically reduced the flow of information and assessments to Cuban intelligence . The Soviets, Czechs and East Germans stopped sharing intelligence with Cuba .
 This was the beginning of a trend that would last until 1968, and which was only partially reversed thereafter . This is the first time since 1968 that the U.S. government has taken steps to reverse the trend .
 Cuban intelligence instructed not to withhold information or analysis from Soviet advisers, nor to express hostility or unfriendliness . Nevertheless, Cuban intelligence was instructed not withhold information .
 Soviet advisers were given instructions to make Soviet advisers feel welcome . To the contrary, instructions were given to make them feel comfortable and welcome .
 Cuba needs to keep the channels open to communicate with the U.S. government, Cuban officials say . Cuba's relationship with the United States is one of the world's most important countries .
 It was much more difficult to heal the rift between Castro and Khrushchev . It was not easy to heal between the two leaders . Castro was the leader of the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev faced the task of smoothing over relations with his own military commanders in Cuba . The Cuban government was overthrown in the 1960s .
 Khrushchev sent to Cuba in the immediate aftermath of the crisis led by First Deputy Premier Anastas I Mikoyan, who was accompanied by a team of marshals and generals .
 Their aim was not only to appease Fidel Castro, but also to neutralize Soviet commanders . Their aim is to appease Castro, and neutralize the Soviet commanders. The aim was to appease the Castro .
 He was absolutely furious with Khrushchev, and outraged at the US-Soviet agreement . He was also outraged by the agreement .
 He did not receive Mikoyan for five days, and when finally he did receive him, he criticized every decision made by Khrushchev . He refused to associate himself with the agreements .
 Neutralizing the Soviet commanders in Cuba was another matter, akin to putting down a rebellion . Neutralizing Soviet leaders in Cuba would be akin to ending a rebellion, he says .
 Soviet commanders who initially resisted Moscow's instructions to dismantle strategic nuclear missiles complied . Under personal pressure from Mikoyan and from the military delegation that accompanied him, Soviet commanders ultimately complied .
 Castro's anger at Khrushchev stemmed not only from his concern that, by withdrawing the missiles, the Soviet Union would be exposing Cuba to an American attack . Even more importantly, his willingness to engage in bilateral negotiations with the United States and explicitly exclude Castro was inconsistent with Cuba's dignity
 After 27 October, it became a priority to disassociate Cuba from the Kennedy-Khrushchev agreement . Thus, after 27 October,. it became . a priority .
 Castro was particularly anxious to signal Cuba's refusal to be treated like a Soviet puppet . Castro was especially anxious to send a message to the Soviet Union .
 Every possible channel would be used for such a purpose, and Cuban intelligence played a major role, says CNN's John Defterios .
 Through every station, and using every network, agent, collaborator, and friendly organization, Cuban intelligence launched a world-wide campaign to promote Cuba's independent stand, and to destroy the image of Cuba as a satellite of Soviet Union .
 This was the beginning of significant and lasting changes in Cuba's security and foreign policies, says President Obama . This was beginning to significant changes in Cuban security, foreign policy .
 Cuba would jealously guard its independence from foreign influence, Cuban president says . The Cuban government would not tolerate foreign influence .
 A crucial part of demonstrating Cuba's independence was increasing the capacity of the Cuban forces to make the U.S. pay a very high price for aggression against Cuba, the author says . The Cuban forces would make the United States pay a high price .
 Defensa Activa Revolucionaria and Operation 'Boomerang' became fixed features of Cuba's security doctrine, guiding the preparations of the FAR and Cuban intelligence for more than 30 years .
 The Cuban government spent vast resources to build up Cuba's ability to threaten U.S. interests and allies . These consumed vast resources, President Obama says .
 Castro sought to work out a settlement with the United States, independently from Moscow . At the same time, he sought to negotiate a deal with the U.S. independently from Russia .
 Details of Cuban overtures were held very closely by Cuban intelligence, and severe restrictions placed on who had access to information about them . Details of these overtures are held closely by the Cuban government .
 Cuban intelligence considered the signals Kennedy gave in response to these overtures highly positive . Kennedy's signals were considered to be highly positive by Cuban intelligence .
 Castro was very enthusiastic, and became convinced that a settlement was possible . Castro was convinced that the settlement could be possible, according to Castro .
 DGI officials were amazed at Kennedy's receptivity, and were optimistic in their assessments about the possibility of more normal relations between the U.S. and China .
 Fidel Castro's overture was unwelcome in certain quarters of the Cuban leadership, DGI says . However, it was also clear to DGI that the Cuban leader was not keen on Fidel's offer .
 Kennedy's assassination in November 1963 brought an end to this hopeful period . Kennedy was assassinated in 1963 . JFK's assassination was the end of this hopeful era .
 It was considered of vital importance not to let the approach to Washington lapse, but to continue efforts with the new President, Lyndon Johnson, in Washington .
 Cuba persisted for more than a year, but without result . Two important developments in the operations of Cuban intelligence in the U.S. in the past year .
 The United States ransomed the captured mercenarios of Playa Giron . These agents were transported to the United States alongside hundreds of Cuban families who traveled in empty ships .
 Cuba lost contact with a high percentage of those agents, and wrote them off as deserters . Cuba has since written off many of the agents as a deserter .
 A few managed to obtain key positions in counterrevolutionary organizations and started to provide valuable information relatively quickly . A few of these people managed to get key positions and start providing valuable information .
 Others remained as 'sleepers' for six or eight years before becoming active informants . Others remain as 'sleeper' for as long as eight years . Others became informants for years before they became informants .
 Castro began discussing with Pineiro the lessons of the crisis for Cuban intelligence, and its priorities for the future . As a result, its role and resources were considerably enhanced .
 Communications had proven to be the Achilles' heel of Cuban intelligence, especially after the clash with the Kremlin on the weekend of 27 October .
 Cuban intelligence relied too heavily on transmitting through Soviet channels . Cuban intelligence had limited communications capabilities of its own .
 An urgent program was implemented to equip Cuban intelligence with a variety of robust and secure communications, to design cipher systems, and to train personnel .
 Cuban intelligence had benefited from its interactions with Soviet, Czech, and East German intelligence . It had also proven itself too dependent upon them, too influenced by them, and too vulnerable to the withdrawal of their services .
 Cuba's intelligence cooperation with Socialist countries was completely reorganized, and many restrictions placed upon it . The Cuban government reorganized its cooperation with the Socialist countries in order to prevent it becoming more isolated .
 Cuban intelligence was also instructed to conduct systematic surveillance of these countries and of their internal developments . Cuba was also told to keep tabs on these countries' internal developments and surveillance of their countries .
 Liberation National's activities were dramatically accelerated. Under the slogan La Lucha Armada es el Unico Camino ('Armed Struggle is the only way') and the strategy of Defensa Activa Revolucionaria, the activities of Liberation National were sped up.
 LN conducted operations through Mexico, Bolivia, and various Caribbean countries . LN targeted Guatemala, Nicaragua, Dominican Republic, Guyana, Venezuela, Colombia, Peru, Argentina, and Brazil. LN also targeted Colombia, Argentina and Peru .
 Cuba expanded its activities in Africa and the Middle East, where regional conflicts provided excellent grounds for implementing the principles of Defensa Activa Revolucionaria in the field of guerrilla warfare . Cuba also expanded its military cooperation with newly independent countries .
 Armed support for anti-colonial struggles had legal and diplomatic sanction from African and Arab states . Armed support from African, Arab states was sanctioned by the Arab and African nations .
 Cuban intelligence was particularly active in Algeria, the Portuguese colonies, and Yemen . Cuban spies were active in Yemen, Algeria and Portugal's colonies .
 It is important to note the ascendance of intelligence within Cuba's power structure in the wake of the October crisis . The rise of intelligence in Cuba has been attributed to the rise in intelligence .
 Cuban intelligence played an increasingly important role in decision making . Manuel Pineiro became a member of Castro's inner circle in Cuba .
 Cuban intelligence became in addition to the most important institution in the field of foreign policy making, Cuban president says . Cuban intelligence is now the country's most important intelligence agency .
 Thirty-five years after the October crisis, we can see that Cuban intelligence played an important role at various stages . We can also see how international politics, internal politics, and resource constraints prevented Cuban intelligence from serving as a more effective guide to Cuban policy .
 From April 1961 to September 1962, Cuban intelligence insisted that there was no substantial evidence indicating that the U.S. was preparing for, or intended, an invasion .
 During this period, Soviet assessments consistently contradicted Cuban assessments, and coincided with Fidel Castro's personal views . The Soviet assessments were consistent with Castro's views .
 Cuban intelligence had difficulty having its distinctive voice heard in Cuba . The result was that Cuban intelligence was unable to hear its voice .
 Soviet assessments were skewed so as to increase the likelihood that Castro would agree to a nuclear deployment . The primary purpose was to challenge American nuclear supremacy, not to deter a U.S. invasion of Cuba .
 Cuban intelligence was essentially unable and frequently not permitted to challenge or contradict the strategic assumptions, beliefs, and intuitions of Fidel Castro . Fidel Castro was the Cuban leader of the late 1960s .
 Intelligence institutions commonly have limited influence over politicians . However, the Cuban experience is not necessarily unusual . Intelligence institutions often have little influence on politicians .
 It was all the more natural that the leadership and the intelligence apparatus would become very interdependent in Cuba since it was a small country extremely sensitive to national security concerns . Cuba's leadership and intelligence apparatus became very intertwined in Cuba .
 By breaking the official compartmentalization of information on the Soviet deployment, Cuban intelligence demonstrated that the nuclear deployment was easily detected, even at an early stage .
 Cuban intelligence officers found it very difficult to believe that the United States did not detect the deployment until 15 October . Cuban intelligence officials continue to find it difficult to think that the U.S. did not discover the deployment .
 Cuban intelligence officials in 1962 were convinced that if the U.S. intelligence community had performed more effectively, the United States could have prevented the Soviet deployment from taking place, they say .
 Cuban intelligence considered the American intelligence failure evidence of either ineptitude or conspiracy . Cuban intelligence believed the failure was either a conspiracy or ineptitude . The U.S. intelligence failure was considered a major intelligence failure .
 Cuban intelligence expected the U.S. would react to the discovery of the deployment with an all-out attack on Cuba . Cuba's intelligence expected that the United States would react with an attack .
 This expectation was based on the assumption that Washington would consider the deployment a threat of the first magnitude, and would urgently feel the need to remove such a threat from the U.S.
 As the crisis approached, Cuban intelligence attempted to warn the Cuban leadership of the dangers of being dragged into a superpower conflict as a proxy of the Soviet Union .
 Cuban intelligence became the most influential institution in national security and foreign policy decision making after the crisis . After the crisis and as a direct result of it, Cuban intelligence has become an important part of national security .
 Fidel Castro's strategic assumptions, personal convictions, and intuitions, were effectively off limits . Fidel Castro was always limited by the fact that his personal convictions were off limits to him . The Castro family is now living in Cuba .
 It is evident that U.S. officials evinced a persistent misunderstanding of the Cuban Revolution, of its leader Fidel Castro, and of Cuba's alliance with the Soviet Union . It was evident that before, during, and after the October crisis, U.N. officials had a
 Cuban intelligence was convinced that U.S. intelligence in general, and the CIA in particular, failed to understand Fidel Castro's independent behavior of Fidel Castro and the many important differences between the Soviet and Cuban agendas .
 They failed to grasp Khrushchev's motives at every stage, and failed to appreciate important tensions within the Kremlin . They also failed to understand important tensions between the Kremlin and the Soviet Union .
 Ignorance and misunderstanding caused the U.S. to fail to anticipate the possibility of a nuclear deployment . The policies of isolation, threat, confrontation, confrontation and covert action that helped bring it about were also contributed to the very policies that helped to bring about the crisis .
 If the U.S. government was truly deceived by Khrushchev and Fidel Castro in 1962, it must stand as the most remarkable deception in world history . If the United States government was . truly deceived, it would be the greatest deception in history .
 It is a deception that would owe more to these misunderstandings than to Soviet attempts to mask the size and nature of the deployment . But it is more to blame for the deception than to hide the size of the deployments .
 The Cuban intelligence community believed in 1962 that if American intelligence had performed more effectively, the United States could have prevented the Soviet deployment from taking place .
 The U.S. intelligence community had to know that such a deployment was taking place prior to 15 October . Cuban analysts say the United States intelligence community must have known of the deployment .
 It strains credulity to imagine that U.S. intelligence would miss such a massive operation first at the Soviet end and then also in Cuba, failing to confirm the presence of Soviet nuclear missiles .
 The October crisis had far-reaching effects not only on superpower relations, but on Cuba's relations with the U.S. and the Soviet Union . Whatever the explanation for the American failure might be, it is clear that the crisis had an impact on Cuban decision making .
 Cuban intelligence played a role sometimes a crucial role at every stage . Cuban intelligence was crucial to the success of the U.S. government in Cuba .
 Almost 42,000 Soviet troops were equipped with tactical nuclear weapons in addition to strategic nuclear missiles . This Soviet nuclear deployment was backed by almost half a million Soviet troops . The deployment was supported by almost 40,000 troops .
 Orlando Piedra and Melvin Manon, Operacion Estrella: Con Caamano, La Resistencia y la Inteligencia Cubana, 3rd ed. ed. El MNINT . Orlando and Daniel Efrain Raimundo, Habla el Coronel Orlando P
 Jaime Suchlicki, The Cuban Military under Castro (Coral Gables, FL: Inst. of Interamerican Studies, Graduate School of Int. A. M. E. C. Ediciones de Taller 1989) Jaime Suchricki also wrote The Cuban
 I have been aided in the preparation of this essay by individuals with extensive experience directly relevant to this topic who must, unfortunately, remain nameless, for personal security reasons .
 In addition to Gustavo Villoldo, a prominent Cuban agent working for the CIA, his recollections proved invaluable . He says he is grateful for his work with the CIA .
 Sources and records do not refer to the event as the 'Bay of Pigs', as is customary American parlance . Cuban sources and records don't refer to it as the Bay of Pigs .
 Playa Giron is the site of the final battle and victory . Cubans refer to it as Playa . Giron the site .
 Cuban intelligence made a crucial contribution to this victory . Through its operations in Miami, and through its collaboration with Guatemalan sources, Cuban intelligence helped .
 Soviet intelligence played an active role identifying the areas best suited for the landing to take place, and narrowing down the likely sites . Soviet intelligence worked with the Soviets to identify the likely landing sites .
 Three of the most important PSP operatives inside Batista's security establishment were Col. Col. Carlos S. Batista . Col. S. O'Neill was a key member of the Batista government .
 Osvaldo Sanchez Cabrera died in Jan.61 while trying to land at Varadero International Airport . Sanchez Cabrera was trying to make his way to the airport in Venezuela .
 The PGT, under a Central Committee member code-named 'Aragon', was able to monitor the training closely and report back to Cuba . The CIA chose Guatemala to train Assault Brigade 2506 .
 I personally reported on preparations at the Retalhuleu training site and on the coming uprising within the Guatemalan Armed Forces . The Guatemalan armed forces are preparing for a possible uprising .
 Miguel Angel Duque de Estrada was head of the Latin American department of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs . He was considered hard information at the time .
 It would have been more difficult for Cuba to monitor the activities of Brigade 2506 in almost any other Central American country . Cuba would have more difficult to monitor its activities in Central America .
 Soviet, Czech and East German intelligence provided information in response to requests from DGI . DGI routinely shared information and assessments that DGI considered potentially useful to Cuba .
 The role of Fidel Castro's brother Raul a committed Marxist in the PSP's power play remains shrouded in mystery . Raul Castro's role as a Communist Party leader is shrouded in secrecy .
 Raul had been promoting members of the PSP to prominent positions in the Revolutionary leadership since the middle of 1958 . At the very least, the PSP had been promoted .
 It is generally acknowledged that Raul was aware of Kudriavtsev's activities . It is also acknowledged that he was aware that he knew about the activities .
 PSP leaders disavowed Anibal Escalante and pledged loyalty to Fidel Castro . Other PSP leaders who were not directly involved disavowed Escalantes and pledged their loyalty to Castro .
 This group included Bias Roca; and Csar Escalante, Anbal's younger brother and the father of General Fabian Escalantes . This group of people included Cbal's brother and father-in-law . BiasRoca was
 The delegation traveled to Moscow in April 1962 and was led by Che Guevara . The delegation went to Moscow and traveled to the Soviet Union in 1962 .
 It included Cesar Escalante, Emilio Aragons, and an officer from DGI who went as a personal aide to Che . It was the first meeting of the Che family .
 The presence of Cesar Escalante was a clear indication to Moscow that the remaining PSP leadership in Havana backed Fidel Castro . Moscow believes that the presence of Escalantes was an indication that he backed Castro in Cuba .
 Aragones was a former civilian member of the 26th of July Movement from Cienfuegos . He was also a member of 26th July Movement .
 He was promoted by Fidel Castro and became an influential figure in the early 1960s .
 This access to influence did not always translate into influence, as I discuss further below . This access did not, however, always translate to influence .
 Rene had served with DSE and had worked very closely with Osvaldo Sanchez until the latter's death . Rene worked with Sanchez until he died .
 Pieiro himself had no Soviet adviser, jealous of his autonomy and of his strong personal ties to Castro . He was jealous as he was of his independence and of personal ties .
 Fidel Castro and Che Guevara were both eager to preserve the operational autonomy of Cuban intelligence from Soviet influence as far as possible . While at the same time retaining the benefits of professional Soviet assistance .
 DGI was actively supporting factions within Latin American communist parties who resisted Moscow's attempts to take a leading role in revolutionary activity in the Hemisphere . It is notable that during the period in question, DGI supported factions who publicly challenged Moscow's revolutionary doctrines .
 Second target was an Air Force installation at, or near, the site of, the Krome Avenue Holding Facility a Federal facility operated to hold Cuban refugees before clearance and release .
 At that time, Cuban refugees were held and cleared at Opa-Locka, and the installation in question had a military function . The installation was used to clear Cuban refugees and clear the area .
 On a smaller but nonetheless significant scale, the situation was similar in Western Europe . The situation is similar in Europe, but it is not the same in the United States .
 Cuban intelligence had no difficulty organizing the collection of information from people who were concerned to safeguard the Cuban Revolution . In places such as Madrid and Paris, it was no longer difficult to organize the collection .
 The Egyptian Marxist intellectual Henri Curiel worked independently from a base in Paris . Curiel provided first-class information on a variety of topics, including the U.S. military in Western Europe .
 After Playa Girn, the Cuban military formulated a plan for the rapid and complete destruction of the American base at Guantnamo Bay . The Cuban military also formulated a complementary plan to destroy the base .
 The Brazilian embassy had been conducting valuable intelligence work for the CIA prior to Playa Gir6n .
 This operation was conducted by the Brazilian SNI (National Information Service) under the direction of General Garraztazu Medici .
 We now know that the estimate of American military planners was considerably smaller . The estimate of U.S. planners was significantly smaller .
 In the spring of 1962, Khrushchev's son-in-law, Aleksei Adzhubei editor of Izvestiya visited Havana after talks in Washington with President Kennedy . Adzhubai visited Havana in spring 1962 .
 Adzhubei expressed to Castro his view that the U.S. was planning a major military attack . Castro expressed his view to Castro that the United States was planning to attack .
 Castro and his inner circle perceived this as a 'hard' intelligence confirmation . Castro's inner circle believed this was a confirmation of the CIA's intelligence .
 It was consistent with what the KGB had been insisting, but it stood in direct opposition to Cuban intelligence information and assessments . Cuban intelligence said week after week that nothing of that sort could be substantiated .
 Soviet threat assessments also served Castro's broader agenda, which was to secure higher levels of economic and military aid . The Soviet threat assessment was part of Castro's plan to secure more economic, military aid to the Soviet Union .
 From April 1961 to Sept.62, Cuban intelligence could find no indication that an American attack was imminent . The Cuban government found no indication of a U.S. attack .
 Castro interpreted this message to mean that Kennedy was unaware of the deployment at the time . Castro interpreted it to mean he was unaware that Kennedy knew about the deployment .
 Cuban intelligence instructed in June 1962 not to address in its assessments the topic of a Soviet deployment to Cuba . Cuban intelligence was instructed not to discuss the topic .
 Che voiced his concern that Khrushchev lacked the courage to undertake serious defensive measures on Cuba's behalf . This remark was significant because, in the privacy of his Moscow hotel room, Che had voiced his concerns . Che had expressed his concern in the private room in his hotel room that Kh
 The Cuban delegation was informed that the Soviets were recording their private conversations . Thus it was evident to the Cuban delegation that the Soviet Union was recording their conversations . The Soviets recorded the conversations in Cuba .
 Biryuzov, commander of the Strategic Rocket Forces, traveled to Cuba under the cover of an agricultural mission to make their proposal . The proposal was made by the commander of Russia's Strategic Rocket Force .
 Castro suspected that the Soviet deployment had ulterior geopolitical motives, but he did not find this disturbing in the least . Castro suspected the Soviet move was to protect his country from the Soviet Union .
 This was a confirmation of sorts; but still we were forbidden from using it in our estimates . This was still a confirmation that we could not use as much of it as a confirmation .
 Gustavo Villoldo notes that CIA officials generally distrusted emigres, as well as their own agents of Cuban origin . GustavoVilloldo: CIA officials were generally distrustful of emigreres .
 For a contrasting view, see the essay by Raymond Garthoff in this volume . For a contrast to this view, read the essay on the book, which was published in 2009 .
 According to Gustavo Villoldo, the CIA had more than 4,000 men in South Florida operating against Cuba . The CIA had 4,500 men in Florida, according to Villoldos .
 Beginning in Dec.61, monitoring the buildup of Soviet forces in Cuba became an intelligence priority for CIA informants and infiltration teams . The Cuban government became a priority for the CIA in December .
 Beginning in summer 1962, monitoring the activities of Fidel Castro became an additional priority, especially in the provinces of Pinar del Rio and La Habana . The Cuban government began monitoring Castro activities in 1962 .
 His weekend visits to La Deseada, where he would entertain Soviet generals, drew particular attention .
 Some missions visually observed, or obtained photos of, support equipment associated with the missile deployment, especially in Mariel-Cabafias . Some missions observed or obtained photographs of the equipment . The missiles were deployed in the southern part of the country .
 In early Sept., an agent by the name of Dionisio Pastrana obtained information that some in the CIA considered a hard confirmation of a nuclear deployment . The CIA considered the information to be hard confirmation .
 Cuban CIA agents Villoldo among them were infiltrated to reconnoiter and prepare for a possible landing by the 82nd Airborne Division just east of Viales Valley . In response to a high volume of information suggesting the possible presence of Soviet missiles in Pinar del Rio province,
 The CIA relied and acted upon information coming from its own agents and obtained through its own means . It discounted or ignored reports from the exile community, or even, some cases of its own infiltration teams manned by Cubans .
 One infiltration team led by Miguel Orozco with orders to sabotage a copper mine in Santa Lucia stumbled onto a huge Soviet base that they simply did not know was there .
 Cuban intelligence did not have information on the specifics of U.S. plans for military action against Cuba . But did assume that such plans existed .
 The number of Soviet advisers in Cuba rose dramatically after April 1962 . Soviet advisers were overseeing the creation of entirely new armed forces .
 Three independent armies were created with new corps, armored divisions, and artillery regiments . The air force was being expanded and its equipment was upgraded .
 Shipments of heavy military equipment and supplies increased dramatically . In the main Cuban ports everyone could see the amount of hardware that was being landed .
 Preparations in the Soviet Union must have begun long before the first missiles left Soviet ports for Cuba . Preparations for the missiles began long before they left the Soviet ports .
 For the Soviet Union to move 45,000 men, including four reinforced regiments, various kinds of missiles, airplanes, and ships, and to replace them within the Soviet defense system must have required considerable time and strain the Soviets' modest logistical capabilities .
 Naval and air traffic to Cuba increased dramatically over the period of question . Navy and air travel to the island nation increased dramatically .
 Cuban seaports and airports were not equipped to handle discreetly the volume of shipments arriving from the Soviet Union . Cuba was unable to cope with the growing number of Soviet Union shipments .
 Cuba had few roads suitable for the transportation of heavy equipment, and these could all be monitored relatively easily . Cuba has few roads that can be used to transport heavy equipment .
 Tens of thousands of people would witness the transshipment of military equipment as a matter of course . Thousands of Soviet soldiers, though dressed in civilian clothing, wore crew-cuts, moved in groups in military trucks .
 Cuba was unable to interdict infiltrations by the CIA's teams of Cuban agents because of insufficient naval resources and border controls . Cuban agents were unable to prevent infiltrations because of lack of naval resources .
 People leaving Cuba for the U.S. routinely commented on the Soviet presence in Cuba, which might have alerted American intelligence . The Soviet presence may have alerted Americans to intelligence .
 U-2s flew over Cuba from west to east and back again with only one brief interruption in early Oct. 2013 . U.2s were flying over Cuba in the early hours of October 31 .
 During part of this period, construction of bases and launching sites was in full swing . During this time, the U.S. was at the height of the Cold War .
 The Cuban countryside was mostly flat and covered with a dense forest canopy . Cuba's countryside was largely flat and was covered in dense forest .
 Each base or launching site involved the construction of new buildings, roads, and infrastructure . Each base was built on the base or launch site .
 Whether this interpretation was accurate is something scholars of American intelligence will be better able to determine .
 It would be interesting coincidence with Pieiro's unwillingness to risk his position by submitting to the Cuban leadership reports and estimates .
 In 1963, Cuban intelligence received a Soviet report on the activities of Col. Col. Carlos Cabarro . Cabarro was a member of the Cuban government .
 Oleg Penkovsky was a high-ranking officer in Soviet military intelligence . For some time he had been working both for the CIA and for MI6 .
 Penkovsky had given Western intelligence information that would have enabled it to anticipate and monitor the Soviet deployment, including information on civilian shirts issued as disguises to specific units of the Strategic Rocket Forces .
 Castro lobbied to shoot down U-2s early in the deployment, fearing the consequences of early detection . Castro began lobbying to shoot them down because he feared the consequences .
 The shoot-downs of U-2s over the Soviet Union and China indicated that the U.S. would curtail flights if they encountered hostile fire . He believed that the shoot-down of U.2s in the USSR indicated that U.N. might curtail U.K
 After an eight-month siege, the city capitulated, bringing to an end all serious resistance to Rome in the region . After eight months of siege, Rome capitulated . The city was the last bastion of resistance to the Italian capital .
 Khrushchev proposed a swap of Soviet missiles in Cuba for U.S. Jupiter missiles in Turkey . Moscow Radio carried the text of the letter to Kennedy .
 Cuban security forces on external perimeter duty merely kept a casual eye on activities within . Prior to 26 Oct. security forces kept an eye on the Cuban military .
 Of particular interest to Castro were signs of tension between Soviet military forces in Cuba and political leaders in Moscow -g.g., delays in executing, or behavior inconsistent with, Khrushchev's orders to dismantle missile sites .
 Castro shared the view of senior Soviet commanders that Soviet strategic nuclear capability provided an adequate deterrent against American attack . Castro: "It is noteworthy that Castro shared his view of . senior Soviet leaders that Soviet . strategic nuclear capabilities provided an . adequate deterrent"
 He had been urging Soviet commanders to shoot down marauding American U-2s in part precisely to enhance the Cuban/Soviet bargaining position . He applauded the shoot-down of 27 Oct. Oct. accordingly .
 As a Soviet rather than Cuban action, it reduced the danger that the U.S. would seek retribution from Cuba . Moreover, it also reduced the risk that the United States .
 Castro's best alternative contingency an attack against Guantanamo almost certainly would have frustrated a purely bilateral US-Soviet deal, but would have been highly provocative . An attack on Guantanamo would likely have frustrated the purely bilateral U.S. deal .
 Castro eschewed it, even though it would have gratified his outrage . Castro eschews it for this reason . For this reason, Castro opted not to engage in the protests .
 Castro was willing to take risks in pursuit of a more favorable resolution of the crisis . Castro was not entirely reckless, but he was not always reckless .
 Castro's hard line against the Kennedy-Khrushchev deal reflected in part his belief that Khrushchev's domestic challenges, and Kennedy's apparent reluctance to use force during the acute phase of the crisis opened up opportunities to secure an outcome to the crisis more favorable to Cuba's regional
 The more pressure Castro put on both Kennedy and Khrushchev in the endgame of the crisis, Castro believed, the better would bo the result for Cuba . Castro believed the more pressure he put on Kennedy and his government was to pressure them .
 For Emilio Aragons's account of the Mikoyan mission, see Allyn, Blight, and Welch, 'Essence of Revision' (note 2)l70n.l70s.l48.l
 The reluctance of Soviet commanders to comply with Khrushchev's order was reported to me by Raul Roa, who in turn had heard of it from Fidel Castro, Fidel Castro .
 Kennedy administration tacitly supported attempts by the Tractors for Freedom Committee to ransom prisoners captured at Playa Giron . The committee was headed by Eleanor Roosevelt .
 The group failed to raise the $28,000,000 needed for heavy construction equipment that Castro demanded as reparations . Castro demanded the equipment as a form of reparations, but it was not enough .
 Over the next several months Castro changed the conditions for ransom repeatedly . Castro's ransom demands were met with the help of the Cuban government .
 Castro agreed to release prisoners in exchange for $53,000,000 worth of food and medicines . The prisoner exchange was part of a deal with U.S. negotiator James B Donovan .
 The prisoners were returned to the U.S. between Dec.62 and July 1965 . They were sent back to the United States .
 The internal struggles connected to this topic are too complex to be dealt with in this essay . The internal struggle connected with this topic is too complicated to be discussed .
 Cuba's demarches finally came to an end when Johnson gave orders to cancel any further contacts in late 1964 .
 Liberation National was a department of DGI from 1961 to 1970, but Fidel Castro supervised it closely . DGI was the headquarters of the Cuban government .
 Pieiro was forced out of MININT under pressure from Raul Castro . He took with him the whole of LN and established it as an autonomous organization reporting directly to Fidel .
 All operations against the United States were carried out on the direct order, and were the personal responsibility, of the Commander-in Chief . Beginning in 1962, all operations against U.S. were conducted by the President .
 In Nov., these were exchanged for 23 CIA agents previously captured by Cuban forces . In Nov. 2013, these were swapped for 23 captured by the Cuban government .
 Cuba began coordinating with the Vietnamese government to provide military training for Latin American guerrillas in Vietnam after 1965 . In addition to military training, Cuba began providing military training to Latin American rebels .
 In 1989, Raul Castro took over DSE and DGI, destroying much of its accumulated organization, expertise, agents, and leaders, replacing it with new structures, methods, and personnel .