 WN the world stood seemingly on the brink of ultimate disaster and nuclear war . WN was the world at the height of the world's nuclear crisis . The end of the nuclear era was the end of nuclear war.
 The crisis ended with Khrushchev surrendering to the demands of U.S. president John F Kennedy . The crisis was the end of the Cold War .
 The Eisenhower administration was forced to own up to the mission, and Khrushchev canceled the Paris Summit .
 The Cold War between the United States and the So ... an agreement to ban nuclear testing in the atmosphere . As a result of the agreement, the U.S. and the South Korea agreed to test nuclear weapons .
 The U-2 incident opened tension between the U.S. and the Soviet Union . The incident opened tensions between the United States and Russia .
 Khrushchev saw the flying of the plane as an ""aggressive act"" and if repeated, ""it will be obliged t ... issile attack from Cuba would trigger an ""all-out"" attack on the Soviet Union . Khrushchen saw the flight as an "aggressive act"
 The first time that Eisenhower and Khrushchev met was at the Four-Power Summit . The two men agreed to work with each other, but it was still going to be a long hard road .
 "I don't think Khrushchev wanted to make it any harder than it had to be," says former president of Soviet Union . "I'm not sure what happened to me. I'm sure I'm not going to be surprised."
 Khrushchev had made three attempts to ease the tension after the Hungarian revolution . The Soviet Union had tried to ease tensions in Hungary after the revolution .
 Khrushchev proposed banning all nuclear missiles from Poland, Czechoslovakia and Germany . In December 1957 he proposed a ban on all nuclear missile launches from Poland .
 On Ja ... osed banning all nuclear missiles from Poland, Czechoslovakia and Germany . Then on Ja ... Osed banned all nuclear missile launches from Poland and Czechsoslovakia . Then banned from using nuclear weapons in Poland, Germany, Czechs and Slovakia .
 U.S. said to Cuba if weapons were not dismantled and removed, that they would invade . United States said if Cuba did not remove the weapons, they would take them to Cuba .
 stern European communist countries were proven efficient as long as he was in power . If control were defined as the ""ability to authorize, manage or direct"", the former time ... former time . If . defined as "ability to . authorize, managed or direct," the former . time was
 Under Khrushchev, most of the binds the USSR had on its lackeys were broken . However, under Khrushchev, under the former Soviet leader, those binds were not broken .
 Khrushchev was the leader of the Soviets after the death of Stalin and a short struggle for power wi ... owever the success of Sputnik made the Americans once again paranoid and afraid of the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev could not be consistent in all of his foreign policies during 1953 to 1960 . His involveme ... ssian people and protection for the nation, both were essential to the country's survival .
 Khrushchev did not inherit a Russia that was free from bondage, and thus he had to find a way to negotiate the Soviet sphere . The Soviet sphere is now the core of the Soviet Union .
 Everyone hoped that Khrushchev would bring a period of ""thaw"" in the Cold War . Khrushchchev was the leader of the Soviet Union in 1959 .
 Although his intentions were noble the United States ... n the Cold War. The United States. Although his . intentions were . noble the U.S. n the . Cold War . Although his. intentions were ... noble .
 Although his intentions were noble the United States remained cautious about the Soviet Union .
 Upon the death of Stalin in 1953, Khrushchev emerged as the Soviet Union's new political giant . He was the leader of the Soviet Soviet Union .
 The West needed to focus on the rebuilding of the USSR's war-torn economy, industries and cities . The dilemma that he faced was to eitheithe ... th the West .
 There was also a very short period of détente after the Korean War such as Khrushchev's secret speech in 1955 . Blockade, however, however there was also an extremely short period after Korean War .
 China and the Soviets already had some problems with each other before that . Actually before that, China and Soviet Union had problems .
 Khrushchev sent in 30,000 Russian troops on November 4th and installed a new government in Hungary . The uprising occurred in Budapest in October of 1956 .
 The reason this whole situation happened was because the U.S. would not ... ing the public it makes the situation intensify and puts each leader under extreme pressure to act . The United States would not be willing to do so, he says .
 Khrushchev's strong backing of his ally was a direct result of the invasion . The invasion of the Soviet Union in 1968 led to the collapse of the Cold War .
 Mao promised Khrushchev unrestrained supplies of food for nuclear submarines . Mao made claims that China was ""having too much food" Above all this, Mao claimed China was having too much .
 Fidel Castro accepted the argument that Cubans needed to accept missiles for their self... ly 90 miles away from the United States and was of much greater importance than one half of Berlin . Cuba was 90 miles from the U.S.