 The Shaping of Allied Military Strategy During the Crisis Years of WWII . The “Big Three” at Yalta .
 British Prime Minister Winston S Churchill, President Franklin D Roosevelt, and Soviet Premier Joseph Stalin attended the Argonaut Conference in February 1945 . Churchill, Roosevelt, Stalin, Stalin and Roosevelt attended the conference .
 The conferences documented within this series were led by senior military leaders from the United States and Great Britain working in concert to make vitally important decisions for the combined WWII effort during the period of uncertainty facing Allied Forces .
 Arcadia Conference was held in Washington, DC, from December 24, 1941 to January 14, 1942 . Two weeks after the U.S. entered World War II, the Arcadia conference was held .
 President Franklin D Roosevelt and Prime Minister Winston S Churchill made the initial crucial decisions for the combined war effort at this important meeting . Roosevelt and Churchill were able to work together for the first time in the war .
 The Combined Chiefs of Staff was established by the British and U.S. Joint Chiefs of Chiefs . One of the first joint chiefs of staffs established in the early 1900s . The United States and Britain were the first to hold joint chiefs .
 It was this consultative body of top military leaders that would refine the Allied military strategy and approve all significant military decisions for the duration of conflict . It would refine Allied military strategies and approve major military decisions .
 The most consequential decision reached at Arcadia was that of “Germany first,” making the defeat of Germany the prime Allied objective . Defeat of Germany was the prime Allies objective .
 Plans to invade North Africa were extensively studied and discussed . Operation Torch would come to fruition in November 1942 with Operation Torch .
 The Combined Chiefs of Staff convened for a series of twenty meetings between January 23 and May 19, 1942 . Only nine days after the Arcadia Conference was held in Washington, DC, the Combined Chiefs .
 During these meetings, the CCS focused on the situation in the Southwest Pacific area known as the American-British-Dutch-Australian area . The area included Burma, support of Chinese Nationalist leader Chiang Kai-Shek; and the possibility of a German attack on England .
 President Franklin D Roosevelt and British Prime Minister Winston S Churchill met at the Casablanca Conference on January 22, 1943 . Roosevelt and Churchill attended the conference in Morocco, Morocco .
 Franklin D Roosevelt and Winston S Churchill met at the Anfa Hotel in Casablanca in French Morocco for a ten-day conference to plan the next stages of the war against the Axis . Roosevelt and Churchill planned the next stage of the battle against the Nazis .
 Charles de Gaulle and Henri Giraud mapped out the grand strategy for both the European and the Pacific theaters . The two leaders were accompanied by the Combined Chiefs of Staff of Staff .
 Blogger contributor Trudy Hawkins is a Marketing and Promotions Specialist in GPO’s Publication and Information Sales program office .