 Waltz’ argument confuses correlation with causality . Waltz should be careful to note that correlation with correlation is not causation .
 It is true that we have not had a world war since nuclear weapons were developed in 1945, but it is equally true that the UN was initiated in 1945 . The UN was started in 1945 and the UK joined the UN in 1950 .
 Even if nuclear weapons have played a role in preventing a third world war, we need to know how long we can expect that to last . We need to ask how long nuclear weapons will last, and how long that will last?
 Five months later, BP’s Deepwater Horizon drilling rig exploded, killing 11 workers, creating an environmental catastrophe . The explosion was proof that 50 years of success was inadequate evidence for complacency .
 The Gulf of Mexico will eventually recover from the BP oil spill, but the same cannot be said for extrapolating 67 years without a nuclear exchange into the indefinite future . Hellman, “Nuclear Weapons, Risk and Hope”
 Where nuclear weapons are concerned, we cannot afford to wait for disaster to strike before realizing that complacency is unwarranted . We need to wait until disaster strikes to realize we are not complacent .
 quantitative risk analysis or QRA 2 can illuminate the danger by gleaning more information from the available data than might first appear possible . The risk analysis is a form of analysis that can reveal the danger .
 Hellman, “Nuclear Weapons, Risk and Hope,” Handout #6, STS152, AUT 2012-13, was published at an extremely tense time, just two months after a Korean airliner had been shot down after it strayed into Soviet airspace .
 The Soviets reasoned that the West would mask preparations for such an attack as a military exercise . The Soviets thought the West was preparing for an attack on the West . The West thought such a strike would mask such an exercise as an exercise .
 Yeltsin made the right decision and this false alarm did not occur during a crisis, such as the 2008 Georgian War, when it would have been more likely to be mistaken for the real thing . Fortunately Yeltsins made the decision and it did not happen in a crisis such as
 Most Americans are unaware that Georgia fired the first shots and Russia is not solely to blame for that war . The danger is compounded because most Americans don't know that Georgia fought the first shot .
 The majority of the above incidents occurred post-Cold War, challenging the widespread belief that the nuclear threat ended with the fall of the Berlin Wall . Hellman, “Nuclear Weapons, Risk and Hope,” Handout #6, STS152, 2012-13,
 These incidents show that the nuclear coin has teetered on edge far too often . Yet society’s lack of concern and resultant inaction demonstrate that nuclear optimism is a widespread illusion .
 Defusing the nuclear threat requires making society aware of the risk that it bears before catastrophe strikes, experts say . Defusing a nuclear threat must make society aware before it happens, they say .
 The July 2000 crash of the Concorde supersonic transport, which killed everyone on board, provides a good example of the value of risk analysis . The Concorde crash of July 2000 was a tragic accident that killed all aboard the aircraft .
 Risk analysis breaks down a catastrophic failure into a sequence of smaller mistakes, known as a fault tree . Risk analysis is broken down into a series of smaller errors known as fault trees . The risk tree is based on a risk of catastrophic failure .
 It then looks at how often the fault tree has been traversed and how close to catastrophe those excursions came . The fault tree is then shown how close it came to catastrophe .
 The fatal Concorde accident sequence started with runway debris striking a tire, which caused the tire to blow out, causing a fuel tank to rupture . The fuel tank ruptured, caused a fire, which led to loss of control of the aircraft and the crash .
 If more attention had been paid to these early warning signs, the fatal crash could probably have been averted . The crash could have been prevented by more attention being paid to the driver .
 In the same way, to date we have experienced no failures of nuclear deterrence, but need to look more carefully at nuclear near misses . We need to consider the possibility of nuclear failures, but must look more closely at near misses, he says .
 Risk analysis decomposes a catastrophic failure into a sequence of partial failures diagram, but occasionally, events occur which increase the risk and move us closer to the nuclear threshold . Hellman, “Nuclear Weapons, Risk and Hope,”
 The threshold is crossed the first time a nuclear weapon is used in anger, leading to possible further escalation, including to WW3 . The final state of WW3 is the final state denoted by the nuclear weapon's use in anger .
 To assess the level of risk, it is important to pay attention not just to the typical, safe states, but also to the rarely visited, dangerous ones . To correctly assess the risk, pay attention to the rare, dangerous states, says CNN.com .
 The next section then identifies six recent mistakes that came close to repeating 1962’s errors . That still retain that potential, and that still retains that potential .
 Fyodr Burlatsky was one of Khrushchev’s speechwriters . He was in the forefront of the Soviet reform movement of the 1980s .
 Hellman: U.S. strongarm policy was an underestimation of Soviet might . Hellman says it was not only an example of Americans’ traditional strongarm . policy, but also underestimated Soviet might, Hellman writes . The United States should not be afraid of the Soviet
 Our Turkish missiles had a similar purpose . Hellman, “Nuclear Weapons, Risk and Hope,” Handout #6, STS152, AUT 2012-13, .
 How much risk is involved in threatening nuclear war over much more minor issues? But that begs the question, addressed here, of the risk .
 The Soviets had battlefield nuclear weapons on Cuba designed to repel just such a U.S. invasion . The West learned in the West until many years later that the Soviets had the weapons . Those who argued for an invasion were ignorant of the fact .
 A Soviet submarine which was “hunted” and forced to surface by American destroyers carried a nuclear torpedo, and its captain considered using it against his American attackers . Also unknown to the American participants, a Soviet submarine was also carrying a torpedo .
 The 2008 Cuban Bomber Mini-Crisis stopped short of becoming a full-blown crisis . Most people are unaware of it, but most people are aware of it .
 We came within what might be characterized as “half a step” of once again staring at the nuclear abyss and wondering how we got there . But, as shown below, we came within a half a step of once being .
 Cuba still is an emotional land mine for many Americans . The conflict between America and Castro’s Cuba is still an emotional issue for Americans .
 D-Day ceremonies repeatedly give the impression that the West won World War II, overlooking the immense Soviet contribution in the victory over Nazism . An additional irritant is the fact that the Soviet contribution to the victory was overlooked .
 Hellman, “Nuclear Weapons, Risk and Hope,” Handout #6, STS152, AUT 2012-13 . Hellman: “The Soviets and the American electorate. The U.S. and the Soviet Union. And the Soviets.
 While Georgia’s 2012 parliamentary elections brought in a government less confrontational to Russia, some risk still exists . A long-term view needs to consider the possibility of future elections reviving, or increasing the risk .
 The missile defense system President George W Bush planned for Eastern Europe, with American missiles in Poland, bears an ominous similarity to our deploying nuclear armed missiles in Turkey . The American deployment of ballistic missiles in . Turkey .
 President Obama’s September 2009 decision to emphasize options that are less threatening to the Russians partly defused the danger . But basing part of the system in Romania leaves the issue far from resolved .
 Izvestia: If the U.S. proceeded with its Eastern European missile defense system, then nuclear-armed Russian bombers would be deployed to Cuba . That was a Russian newspaper often used for strategic governmental leaks .
 Russian Foreign Ministry later claimed that Izvestia’s report was unfounded . Some elements within the Russian Defense Ministry appear to be in a similar state of mind to the one that prompted Khrushchev to deploy missiles .
 The operation did not receive much public attention in the United States, and the crisis died down before reaching full blown proportions . Fortunately, the crisis did not reach full blown .
 Both Kennedy and McNamara agreed that the Cuban missiles did not upset the strategic balance, but were heavily influenced by domestic politics – including the upcoming midterm elections – .
 In some ways, these incidents in July 2008 stopped half a step short of a full-blown crisis, which is little cause for comfort . The crisis in 2008 was not as bad as it was in 2008, but it could have been worse, says CNN.com .
 We were – and still are – at a very dangerous point in the process and need to recognize complacency as our true enemy . We need to be aware of the dangers posed by complacent, complacent people .
 A Positive Role for Risk Analysis has been applied risk analysis to illuminate the risk posed by our nuclear weapons strategy . Hellman, “Nuclear Weapons, Risk and Hope,” is quoted by Hellman .
 The six steps which led to the 1962 Cuban crisis might tell us about the Cuban crisis . One approach is to revisit the modern day analogs of the six steps leading up to the crisis .
 In 1962, both Kennedy and Khrushchev were haunted by similar “red lines” they had drawn, but which were crossed . In 1962 the two leaders drew similar "red lines" but crossed, but not crossed .
 They faced the dilemma of either admitting that they had been bluffing, thereby losing all credibility in future nuclear standoffs, or following through with actions that would have risked hundreds of millions, or even billions of lives .
 Hellman, “Nuclear Weapons, Risk and Hope,” Handout #6, STS152, 2012-13, a result a result . Hellman: ‘Nuclear weapons, risk and hope,’ is a result.
 Americans should recognize that Georgia fired the first shots and Russia is not solely to blame . Taking the August 2008 Georgian War as an example, it would reduce the risk if Americans were to recognize Georgia fired first shots .
 This risk can be reduced by trying to put ourselves in the Russian’s shoes and see how our actions might make them respond, Hellman says . Hellman, “Nuclear Weapons, Risk and Hope,” Handout #6, STS152, 2012-
 President Barack Obama is moving toward an agreement with Turkey to take some Jupiter missiles . Such thinking did not block his administration’s movement toward the agreement . The deal would allow the U.S. to take the missiles .
 Hellman, “Nuclear Weapons, Risk and Hope,” Handout #6, STS152, 2012-13, and Page 14 of 17 as well . Hellman: ‘Nuclear weapons, risk and hope.’ Hellman .
 Should we ever find ourselves this close to the nuclear threshold, we still can reduce the risk by responding more rationally . But, if we find ourselves in danger, we can reduce it by responding rationally. We need to be more prepared to deal with the threat of nuclear weapons .
 Hellman, “Nuclear Weapons, Risk and Hope,” Handout #6, STS152, AUT 2012-13 . Hellman: The U-2 was downed by ground-to-air missiles that added pressure on Kennedy to take military action against Cuba .
 Given that Hillel had spent his whole life studying the Torah, asking him to condense the Torah into such a short summary was an insult, he said . Given that . asking him . condense . of such a brief summary, it was a insult . Given .
 Jews would be offended if the story were reversed, with a Jew asking a Christian saint to teach him the Gospels while he stood on one foot, and then made to look like a fool .