 Cubans did not join the rebellion as planned resulting in a quick defeat . The rebels were defeated by a quick victory .
 When President Kennedy took office he quickly increased the American nuclear arsenal to demonstrate American military strength . Missiles were found in Cuba .
 NATO placed missiles in Turkey aimed at the Soviet Union . NATO also placed missiles aimed at Turkey aimed directly at the USSR .
 It’s only fair that the Soviets can have missiles in Cuba since the U.S. has missiles in Turkey, it's only fair to have them in Cuba . It's not fair that it's fair for the Soviets to have missile bases in Cuba and Turkey, he says
 To prevent Soviet ships from transferring missiles to Cuba, the United States can set up a naval blockade . The U.S. can also block Soviet ships transferring missiles from Cuba .
 Suggest that the U.S. will remove missiles from Turkey if the Soviets remove their missiles from Cuba . Suggest that U.K. would remove missiles if it was removed from Turkey . Suggests that the United States would remove the missiles from the country if it were removed .
 Destroy the missile sites on Cuba with an air strike followed by an invasion of Cuba, says President Obama . The U.S. would then attack the missile bases in Cuba, he says . Destroy the missiles on Cuba .
 The artist uses a President Kennedy metaphor in this and Premier cartoon . Analyze the political cartoon to see how the artist uses it .
 Kennedy announced a strict quarantine of military equipment shipped to Cuba . Kennedy Announces Blockade on October 22 . Kennedy announced the quarantine .
 On October 23rd Krushchev wrote a letter to Kennedy expressing that he would NOT observe the blockade . The letter was written by the Russian Prime Minister .
 After 13 intense days, Krushchev told Kennedy that he would remove his missiles from Cuba if the U.S. withdrew the blockade . He promised never to invade Cuba and withdrew the missiles from Turkey . After 13 very intense days of negotiations, he made a deal .
 The Soviet Premier, Nikita Krushchev in the form of a dentist, is pictured in a dentist's pose .
 Krushchev agreed to remove the nuclear missiles the Russians put on the island of Cuba . The missiles were removed from the island after the Soviet Union removed them .