 In order to treat them with the appropriate respect, my children and I took very seriously the decision to publish them now, in connection with the fiftieth anniversary .
 The Kennedy presidency is still within living memory for many who will find her observations illuminating . The moment seems right—enough time has passed so that they can be appreciated for their unique insight .
 I hope younger generations will find these reminiscences a useful introduction to how history is made, and will be inspired to give back to this country that has given us all so much .
 When I was growing up, my mother spent much of her time meeting behind closed doors with members of the Kennedy administration, planning his gravesite at Arlington National Cemetery . She made countless decisions on the disposition of my father's official papers, personal effects, mementos, and memorabilia
 Kennedy Library will be a place where students would be inspired to pursue careers in public service, scholars would have access to the historical record, and families could learn about the ideals that animated my father's career and vision for America .
 These meetings were somewhat mysterious, but my brother and I had a sense that nothing was more important than the ""oral history"" that we heard about from time to time . These meetings are somewhat mysterious .
 To them, the past was not an academic concern, but a gathering of the most fascinating people you could ever hope to meet . The past is not academic concern for the past, but the present is the present .
 My mother thought there weren't enough women in American history to make it as interesting as reading novels and diaries from the courts of Europe . Her mother didn't think there were enough women to make history interesting .
 She read War and Peace during the Wisconsin primary, and maintained that reading the Memoirs of the Duc de Saint-Simon about life at Versailles was the most valuable preparation she received for life in the White House .
 After my father's death, my mother resolved to do everything she could to make sure that the record of his administration was preserved . After his death, his mother decided to try and preserve his administration .
 She had confidence that his decisions would stand the test of time . She said she wanted future generations to learn what an extraordinary man he was .
 She helped set in motion one of the most extensive oral history projects ever conducted . More than one thousand people were interviewed about their life and work with John F Kennedy .
 Although it was painful for my mother to relive the life since shattered, she knew it was important that she participate . "I'm not going to let my mother participate," she said. "It's important to know that she participated"
 She always told us that she chose to be interviewed by Arthur M Schlesinger, Jr., Pulitzer Prize-winning historian, former Harvard professor, and special assistant to President Kennedy, because she was doing this for future generations . She put the tapes in a vault to be sealed for fifty
 I first read transcripts of these conversations a few weeks after my mother's death in 1994 when the vault was opened and her lawyer gave me a copy . Her lawyer gave him a copy of the transcripts, which he first read after her death .
 Everything about that time was overwhelming for me as I found myself faced with the same sorts of decisions about her possessions that she had made thirty years earlier . I found herself faced making the same sort of decisions as I did thirty years ago . I was overwhelmed with her decisions about what she had
 "Although I found it fascinating, I put it back in the vault to await its time," she says . "I knew I was reading something that wasn't supposed to be seen yet," she adds .
 A few years ago, my family began thinking about how to commemorate the fiftieth anniversary of my father's presidency . My family is planning to mark the 50th anniversary of his presidency in New York City, New Jersey .
 "We decided to concentrate our efforts on projects that would make his legacy accessible worldwide," says the family .
 Kennedy led effort to create largest existing digital archive of a presidency . Online curricula, downloadable exhibits, and Web site intended to renew father's call to service for today's generation .
 The publication of these interviews is an important contribution to this commemorative effort, and one with its own story . The publication is important contributions to this commemoration effort .
 When the director of the Kennedy Library first approached me with the idea, I asked him to search the archives to confirm my mother's wishes regarding the date of publication . I asked for him to look at the archives in order to confirm his wishes .
 There were no deed of gift or transfer, nor a letter of intent regarding the date at which the interviews were to be opened . Surprisingly, given the importance of the material, there was no deed or transfer . The interviews will be conducted in the U.S.
 There are three significant interviews that my mother gave after my father's death . By way of background, there are three . Interviews were conducted by my mother after her death .
 The first was to Theodore H White in Hyannis Port on November 29, 1963, only a few days after my father's funeral . The second was a visit to Theodore White, who died in 1963 .
 My mother famously told White that she and my father used to listen to the record of the Broadway musical Camelot in the evening before they went to bed, and looking back, ""that one brief shining moment"" reminded her of his presidency . In that interview, my mother famously said she
 White's article was published a week later in Life magazine, but the notes of his interview were sealed until one year after my mother's death . White's piece was published in Life Magazine a week after his mother died .
 The second set of conversations was with William Manchester, who was writing a book called The Death of a President . William Manchester was writing The Death Of a President.
 During the sessions my mother said more about my father's assassination than she had intended, she said more than she'd intended . The sessions were held in memory of his assassination .
 She sued the author and publisher to keep personal memories out of the book . Subsequently, she became so upset at the thought of her personal memories becoming public that she sued them .
 Arthur Schlesinger spoke to his mother about her marriage and political career . His mother also shared her insights into her father's private and public personality .
 The archivist's notation regarding the date of publication was not consistent with my memory, nor did it seem to reflect my mother's wishes . The archivist's notation about the publication date of the book was incorrect .
 Former White House staffer: "I checked with former members of staff in the White House and afterward, as well as other friends and attorneys"
 No one had a recollection that differed from mine, and they were enthusiastic about the idea of publication, says author .
 I was faced with a dilemma that I have confronted numerous times in connection with my mother's personal papers and correspondence . So I was . faced with the dilemma that . I have faced numerous times, I have been faced with this dilemma many times .
 She requested in her will that her brother and I make every effort to prevent publication of her personal papers, letters, and writings . On one hand, she was a famously private person who gave no on-the-record interviews .
 She also saved every scrap of paper that came her way, including every birthday card or telegram, every letter from her parents, every date book and diary, every draft letter or memo she ever wrote .
 She knew that living in the White House was an enormous privilege and she was proud of the part she had played . She was proud to have lived in the Oval Office, a White House spokesman said .
 When she discovered that one of her secretaries was throwing Out notes and internal correspondence, she wrote a steaming rebuke . She directed everyone on her staff to save even the smallest scribbles .
 Her deep immersion in memoirs of the past informed her belief that she had an obligation to preserve everything that happened during her time in the White House . She said she felt she had a duty to preserve all that happened in her time as a White House.
 Few people have been written about more than my mother, and I grew up feeling I needed to protect her —just as she had protected us . She had protected her family from harm, but she had to protect them, he says .
 'I thought it best to leave these interviews sealed for another fifty years, rather than to expose her memory to one more round of gossip and speculation,' she says .
 I believe that open access to government is an important American value . But I also understand that the continuing interest in her life is a tribute to the immense admiration and goodwill she still commands, he says . Open access to the government is important American values .
 Over the years, I have received multiple requests to publish my mother's memos and correspondence . I have been asked to publish some of these memos and letters .
 At times, it has been difficult to balance her wish for privacy against her public role and pay proper respect to both . At times she has struggled to balance the privacy and public role .
 Although I agonize over each request, I know that my mother trusted my judgment and felt that I understood her outlook on life . "I know that I agonized about each request," she says .
 As the years pass, it has become less painful to share her with the world, and in fact, it is a privilege . "It is less painful now to share your daughter with me," she writes .
 As her child, it has sometimes been hard for me to reconcile that most people can identify my mother instantly, but they really don't know her at all . As her daughter, she says, it's hard for her daughter to reconcile .
 They may have a sense of her style and her dignified persona, but they don't always appreciate her intellectual curiosity, her sense of the ridiculous . Her unerring sense of what was right was right, she says .
 "I try to accommodate requests that pertain to my father's career, life in the White House, historic events and historic preservation," she says . "I have tried to draw the line between her public and private life much as I think she did," she adds .
 These conversations were recorded with the intention that they would be made accessible one day . These conversations are not in the same category as her personal writings, because they were recorded for the intention of making them accessible .
 It was not a question of whether to publish, but a decision was up to me, he says . So it was not an issue of not publishing but a matter of when, and that's up to him, he adds .
 "My experience with other requests informed my decision that the time was right," she said . "I'm glad to have the opportunity to make this happen," she added .
 In reaching this conclusion, I found it helpful to remember the context in which the interviews were conducted, and the timing of when they occurred .
 "The goal was to create a record of my father's life and career from the memories of those who knew and worked with him," says son .
 There are discussions about the central characters and events of the time in both domestic politics and international affairs . Along the way, there are discussions that reveal much about the events of that time .
 The decision was complicated by my conviction that if my mother had reviewed the transcripts, I have no doubt she would have made revisions . The decision is complicated by the fact that if she had reviewed her transcripts, she would make revisions .
 The interviews were conducted only four months after she had lost her husband, her home, and her sense of purpose . The interviews are conducted only .
 It isn't surprising that there were some statements she would later have considered too personal, and others too harsh . It's surprising that some of her statements were later considered too harsh, too personal .
 There are things I am sure she would have added, and her views certainly evolved over time . There are still things she would've added to her legacy, she says .
 I struggled with the question of whether to delete remarks that might be taken out of context . I struggled to decide if I would delete remarks I might not have taken out context .
 I was aware that my intentions might be misinterpreted, even if the edited version was a more ""accurate"" reflection of how she really felt, she said . The edited version of this article is a more accurate reflection of what she really feels .
 After much deliberation, I decided to maintain the integrity of the audio interviews as a . source while editing the text slightly for readability, not content, as has been done with other presidential transcripts .
 "My reservations were mitigated by the remarkable immediacy and the informality of the conversations," she says . "I was impressed with the remarkable immediate and the informality of the conversations"
 Knowing my mother so well, I can hear her voice in my mind when I read her words on a page . Knowing her voice well, she can hear it in her mind when she reads her words .
 I can tell when she is emotional, when she's enjoying herself, or is getting annoyed . She is unfailingly polite, though she is unfailingingly polite .
 By listening to the audio, people will learn a great deal about the person that she was . Even though most of her answers are about my father, most of the answers will be about her father .
 Much is revealed by her tone, and by her pauses as well as by her statements, the author says . Much of her tone is revealed in her tone .
 "I trust that readers and listeners will place her views in context to build an accurate and composite portrait of a person and a moment in time" "Her devotion to her husband will come through to others as it does to me," she writes .
 In addition to their passion for history, my parents shared a conviction that American civilization had come of age . My parents were passionate about American civilization, as well as history .
 At the time the United States was emerging as a global power, and people still looked to Europe for direction and leadership . Today this seems an unremarkable proposition, but at the time it was still important for the U.S.
 My parents believed America should lead with her ideals, not just with economic or military power . They wanted to share our artistic and cultural achievements with the world, they said .
 "She traveled with my father and on her own, often speaking the language of the countries she visited," says her daughter .
 The White House itself was a powerful symbol of our democracy, she said . She wanted to make sure it projected the best of America to students and families who visited .
 She worked hard not to "redecorate" the White House, but to "restore" the legacy of John Adams, Thomas Jefferson, James Madison, and Abraham Lincoln . The legacy of Adams, Jefferson, Madison and Lincoln would be visible, she says .
 She recast the White House Library to showcase classic works of American history and literature . The library will be housed in the National Museum of American History .
 She established the Fine Arts Committee and White House Historical Association to assemble a permanent collection of American paintings and decorative arts . The collection would become one of the nation's finest .
 She made the White House the world's greatest stage and invited world's foremost artists to perform there . She invited the world of the foremost performers to perform .
 She welcomed young musicians, emerging African-American opera singers, jazz musicians, and modern dancers . "All to awaken and expand appreciation of American arts and culture," she said .
 She felt strongly that as our capital city, Washington, D.C., should reflect America's newly prominent place in the world . She said she felt strongly .
 She fought to preserve Lafayette Square, and launched the effort to rehabilitate Pennsylvania Avenue . She also fought to save Lafayette Square and the area's Lafayette Square .
 My mother understood that the past was a source of pride for people around the world, just as it is in America . She convinced my father that the U.S. could build goodwill among countries like Egypt, with which we had political differences, by assisting in historic preservation efforts .
 Her persistence resulted in a generous U.S. contribution to the UNESCO rescue of the temples of Abu Simbel . The temples were threatened by the construction of the Aswan Dam, and favorably impressed the Nasser regime .
 In another example of cultural diplomacy, my mother was responsible for the Mona Lisa's visit to the U.S. The only time the painting has ever left the Louvre is the only time it has ever been seen in the United States .
 She believed her responsibility was to help my father in every way she could . Most important, she believed she had to help her father in the way she did .
 She never thought she deserved the title ""First Lady,"" which she disliked anyway, claiming it sounded like the name of a racehorse . Although she became a diplomatic and even a political asset, she never thought .
 "She was deeply patriotic and proud of what she accomplished, and my father was proud of her too," she says . But she was also deeply patriotic, she says, and her father was too .
 Given the important role Jacqueline Kennedy played in the presidency of John F Kennedy, it seemed a disservice to let her perspective remain absent from the public and scholarly debate that would accompany the fiftieth anniversary of the Kennedy administration .
 Fifty years seems to have cooled, yet recent enough that the world described still has much to teach us . Fifty years ago seems to be sufficient time for passions to cool down, but recent enough .
 "The sense of time passing was made more acute by the loss of my uncle Teddy and my aunt Eunice in 2009, by Ted Sorensen in 2010, and Ted in 2010 . My uncle Sarge in January 2011, and uncle Teddy died in 2011 .
 Before making the final decision, I asked my children to read the transcripts and tell me what they thought . But, before making the decision, he asked his children to help him make the decision .
 They found the conversations dated in many ways, but fascinating in many more . They found it interesting in some ways but also fascinating in others more .
 They loved the stories about their grandfather, and how insightful yet irreverent their grandmother was . They loved stories about how insightful and funny their grandfather was .
 Arthur Schlesinger's life-spanning interview with CNN.com's John Sutter.com hosts a panel of experts on his work . The panelists are puzzled by some of his questions, including personal rivalries he pursued .
 Michael Beschloss: "No one speaks better for my mother than she does herself" "There was no significant reason to put off publication," he says .
 John Fitzgerald Kennedy's life story is virtually absent from many books about his father . Kennedy's son was assassinated in 1968, but his father survived . Kennedy died in 1968 at the hands of President Kennedy .
 Her suntanned, Yale-educated, French-American father, John V Bouvier III, had followed his forefathers to Wall Street . His career never recovered from the stock market crash of 1929 .
 From her Park Avenue and Long Island childhood, Jackie liked to ride horses, create whimsical drawings, and read books . She preferred Jacqueline, but friends and family rarely used her full name .
 Jackie's parents were bitterly divorced when she was 12 . Her mother wed Hugh D Auchincloss, Jr., a Standard Oil heir, who made her and her sister, Lee, at home on his estates in McLean, Virginia and Newport, Rhode Island .
 As a student at Miss Porter's School in Connecticut, teachers found Jackie strong-willed, irreverent, and highly intelligent .
 She declined the offer, to the relief of her mother, who was inclined to take her daughter's strong interest in France as an unwelcome sign of allegiance to Jack Bouvier .
 Jackie took a job as an "Inquiring Photographer" for the Washington Times-Herald . Jackie took the job instead of taking a job with the paper .
 In the spring of 1951, Bartlett and his wife Martha's Georgetown dining room, Jack and Jackie had their official introduction . Bartlett married Jackie in 1952 .
 After what she called ""a spasmodic courtship,"" the Francophile aesthete and the fast-ascending senator from Massachusetts married in Newport on September 12, 1953, launching the decade of their life that you will read about .
 John Kennedy's widow found memories of their White House life, which she calls in this volume ""our happiest years,"" so traumatic that she asked her Secret Service drivers to arrange her trips so that she would never accidentally glimpse the old mansion .
 She intended to stay away from the White House for the rest of her life . But she did, with only one exception, she said: "I'm not going to be in the same place forever"
 Kennedy feared reminiscing at length about life with her husband would make her ""start to cry again,"" but she was determined to win Jack a fair hearing from historians . Kennedy feared that reminiscing about her life with Jack would cause her to start crying again .
 JFK had been deprived of the chance afforded other presidents of defending their historical record in books, articles, and public comments . She felt an overwhelming obligation to do whatever she could .
 Within days of Dallas, Jackie was already trying to imagine the architecture of a future Kennedy Library . The library was planned for Harvard, on a Charles River site selected by the President just a month before he died .
 The widow and her children had not yet departed their White House quarters . The aide's aide Arthur Schlesinger, Jr., amassed some of the most moving letters he had received about his late boss . The letters were sent upstairs to the widow .
 The bow-tied Schlesinger was an ex-Harvard history professor, author of award-winning books on the ""ages"" of Andrew Jackson and Franklin Roosevelt . He was a speechwriter during Adlai Stevenson's two campaigns for president .
 JFK asked Schlesinger to send him tactical advice through Jackie's advice during 1960 presidential campaign . He had known JFK since they were Harvard students together . JFK wished not to be seen encircled by liberal academics .
 JFK and his aides had always presumed that Schlesinger would one day write a book on the thirty-fifth presidency . Now, in the wake of the assassination, the historian was already planning research for the book .
 President Kennedy's leadership was often exercised on the telephone or in person, leaving no written record . Without a ""crash"" oral history program, capturing memories from New Frontiersmen while still recent, much of the Kennedy history would disappear, Schlesinger said .
 In January 1964, Jacqueline and Robert Kennedy approved a plan for scholars and members of the Kennedy circle to record the recollections of ""thousands"" of people who knew the President .
 Kennedy had bought this 1794 house, which stood across the street from what was once Robert Todd Lincoln's . Kennedy bought the house from Lincoln's widow .
 She was doing her best to provide a normal life for Caroline and John, six, and three-year-old John, which she saw as both her duty and her salvation . She saw it as both a duty and a salvation .
 Tourist buses stopped outside throughout the day, disgorging sightseers . Sightseers littered her steps, pointed Instamatic cameras at her front windows, and called out her children's names .
 President Kennedy gave Schlesinger artifacts from ancient Rome, Egypt, and Greece to Jacqueline Kennedy's home . President Kennedy had given her artifacts over the years . The Kennedy-Jacqueline Kennedy Center was founded in 1963 .
 Facing away from the front windows, she liked to sit on a crushed-velvet sofa . Facing out of the front window, she would sit on the sofa facing away from windows .
 Kennedy's right on a pale yellow chair he had seen upstairs at the White House . Kennedy was sitting in the chair he'd seen upstairs in the Oval Office . Kennedy sat in the yellow chair at the end of the day .
 Jacqueline unburdened herself as the tape machine also picked up the sounds of her lighting cigarettes, of ice cubes in glasses, dogs barking in the distance, trucks rumbling down N Street, and jets roaring overhead .
 For anyone who doubts Jacqueline Kennedy's emotional self-discipline, note that during these months of her greatest despair, she could will herself to speak about her vanished former life .
 In April 1964, she sat for hours at night in that same parlor to be questioned by William Manchester . William Manchester was researching his authorized book about the assassination .
 Schlesinger left the task to Manchester, leaving Kennedy the agony of twice recounting events .
 The day after she completed her final interview with Schlesinger, she was forced to sit in that same room to be questioned by members of the Warren Commission about her husband's final motorcade . Nevertheless, she sat in the same room that day to sit under scrutiny .
 The interviews in this book revise scene after scene of the history of the 1950s and early 1960s that we thought we knew . Read after almost a half century, the interviews in the book revise scenes after scene . The book is published by Simon Tisdall, a London-based
 This oral history constitutes a fresh internal narrative of John Kennedy's life as senator, candidate, and President, and his wife's experience of those years . It provides new detail on what JFK and Jacqueline privately said to each other .
 The close student of the Kennedy years knows how Jackie expanded her husband's range with her command of French and Spanish . Her knowledge about the history of Europe and its colonies, her background in the arts .
 Even today, many presume that she was relatively indifferent to political life . But even today, she is presumed to have been indifferent to politics .
 Well-bred young women of Jacqueline's generation were not encouraged to sound like intellectuals . This behavior was not surprising, because well-bred women of her generation weren't encouraged to be intellectuals .
 It would not help her husband for her to vent her more caustic opinions around anyone but their most trusted friends . Nor would it help his wife for her caustics to vent them around anyone except her husband .
 She knew considerably more about John Kennedy's political life than she let on to outsiders . Her influence on his official relationships was substantial . But as this oral history confirms, she knew a lot more .
 Jacqueline Kennedy would have been the last person to suggest that she was some kind of hidden White House policy guru . She would not have been a secret White House adviser .
 She considered it her role not to badger her husband about labor safety or international law, as Eleanor Roosevelt had with Franklin . She provided JFK with intriguing dinner guests, appealing food, and appealing food to help him escape the pressures .
 President and First Lady worried that voters would find her effete, but she became a huge political asset . President and first lady worried that she would be too effete for voters .
 Legions of American women wanted to walk, talk, dress, wear their hair, and furnish their homes like Jackie .
 In the fall of 1963, the President lobbied her to join him on campaign trips to Texas and California . It was not casually that in the fall, 1963, she joined him on a campaign trip to Texas .
 Betty Friedan's pathbreaking The Feminine Mystique was published in 1963, but the full-fledged women's movement was almost a decade away . Friedan: "The Feminine Mystique" was published by Friedan in 1963 .
 Despite such utterances, no one can argue that this First Lady did not make her own strong-minded choices about her life and work . The First Lady is a strong advocate for women in the United States .
 Her supreme job was not to attend charity events or political banquets but to raise her children well amid the blast of attention around a president's family . Resisting those who counseled her to emulate her more conventional predecessors, she said .
 She took over many of the nation's most public projects with no one's behest but her own . And other public projects she undertook at no one else's behest .
 Schlesinger's oral histories were intended to focus on her husband . This is because he regarded a First Lady's story as a side event, which caused him to treat Jacqueline primarily as a source on her .
 Among the First Ladies of the twentieth century, probably only Eleanor Roosevelt had a greater impact on the Americans of her time . This is unfortunate because of the impact she had on Americans .
 Jacqueline Kennedy's contributions were to herald the importance of historical preservation . One of Jacqueline's contributions was to heralding the need for historical preservation.
 The 1950s and 1960s were a period when American architects and city planners were eager to raze urban monuments and neighborhoods that seemed dated in order to make room for new highways, office buildings, stadiums and public housing .
 A plan was in fast motion to destroy almost all of the nineteenth-century houses and buildings on the east and west sides of Lafayette Park, including the mansion of Dolley Madison's widowhood . The 1861 building that had been the capital's first art museum was the 1861 building .
 In their place would go white marble white marble federal office towers that would dwarf the White House . White marble towers would dwarf White House. In place of them would be white marble offices .
 Jacqueline recalls learning while a student in Paris about how the French protected their vital buildings and places . Jacqueline recalled learning about how to protect vital buildings in the French .
 As she wrote in a letter, she could not sit still while America's monuments were "ripped down and horrible things put up in their place"
 Had someone else been First Lady, the vista seen from the Executive Mansion's north windows today might be very bleak . The vista from the executive mansion's north window may be a very bleak sight .
 Among other monuments she managed to protect was the old gray mansard-crowned Executive Office Building, built in the 1870s next to the White House . The building was once housed the Departments of State, War, and Navy .
 L'Enfant's design for a grand ceremonial mile from Capitol to White House had given way to dilapidated tattoo parlors and souvenir stores . In January 1961, the just-inaugurated President and his wife rode down Pennsylvania Avenue .
 The President established a commission for the boulevard's redevelopment . He oversaw it closely with his wife . The boulevard is now a major tourist attraction .
 Jacqueline recalled to Ted Kennedy that Pennsylvania Avenue was one of the last things she remembers Jack Kennedy spoke about with feeling before they left for Texas in November 1963 .
 She famously recast the White House as a treasure house of historic American furniture, painting, sculpture, and artifacts that would rival worldrenowned museums .
 Abigail and John Adams became its first residents 100 years ago . Presidential families had restyled the mansion's public rooms at their whim .
 The bad wallpaper and reproductions were ""early Statler,"" she said, almost devoid of American history . The bad wallpapers and reproductions were "early Statlers,"," she said .
 She drafted a plan to persuade wealthy collectors to donate important American pieces and remake the public rooms, with careful research, into proper historical venues . She also established a White House Historical Association to keep some future president's wife from revamping those rooms to her own ahistorical taste .
 Jacqueline's televised tour of the newly remade White House rooms in February 1962 was seen by fifty-six million viewers . The project helped make Americans more aware of their traditions in the decorative arts .
 Kennedy changed the contours of state dinners and other presidential ceremonies . Kennedy changed what she described as the setting in which the presidency is presented to the world .
 Resolute desk has since been used by five of her husband's successors . Five of her successors have used the desk since her death .
 Raymond Loewy invented the sky-blue and white design of today's presidential air fleet . It was at Jacqueline's request .
 Since her restoration of the White House, every president's wife has felt compelled to focus on some important public project . Her restoration was a project she conceived and assigned to herself, she says .
 Jacqueline knew it would be exhausting, but she knew it could prove exhausting . Jacqueline's work ethic is so strong that she decided to take on the project .
 She had a full-time job after graduation from college, unusual in her social group . She took on a real job as a book editor at Viking and Doubleday, with a reputation for quality volumes .
 Jackie's capacity for intellectual growth manifested itself in the 1970s with her embrace of the women's movement . Jackie was a strong advocate for women's rights in the 1960s and 1970s .
 She told a friend she had come to realize that she could not expect to live primarily through a husband . She said she had realized that she had to accept that she would not be able to live solely through her husband .
 Jacqueline Kennedy's future was in the early 1960s, but in the 1960s it was all in her future .
 She felt that equal importance to her White House restoration were her efforts as First Lady to save Abu Simbel .
 She wrote JFK in 1962 that floods were threatening the Egyptian monument . JFK wrote JFK, ""It is the major temple of the Nile—13th centuryc.c.d. Egypt"
 JFK insisted that congressmen would dismiss Abu Simbel as some ""Egyptian rocks" Despite JFK's insistence, the First Lady's personal appeal to Capitol Hill won Egypt the necessary funds .
 John Kennedy would have been quick to affirm that the cultural milestones of his presidency would most likely have been absent had he not married Jacqueline Bouvier . The American Ballet Theatre in the East Room, the Mona Lisa displayed in America, the dinner for Nobel laureates, the efforts
 Both Kennedys insisted that the arts must be included in any definition of a full American life . The arts is a vital part of a modern American life, the Kennedy said .
 The affluent society of the early 1960s was a propitious moment for such a statement . It was made by the affluent society in the 1960s .
 Many Americans, enjoying postwar prosperity, were pondering how to spend their newfound discretionary income in leisure hours that their struggling forebears could only have dreamt of . Many Americans enjoyed postwar prosperity .
 Jacqueline Kennedy's acute sense of how symbols and ceremony could shape American history was never more evident than during the long nightmare weekend after her husband's assassination . Jacqueline had a keen sense of the symbols and ceremonies of American history .
 After Dallas, all of this helped Americans win back at least some portion of their self-respect . After Dallas. After Dallas .
 From her new bedroom windows, she could see, across the street, the Metropolitan Museum of Art . The Temple of Dendur was being installed, and at night, the floodlights bothered her . At night, she said, "I don't want to live in Washington, D
 Kennedy never again mused in public about her husband . Not in 1965, when Queen Elizabeth II dedicated a memorial acre to him at the birthplace of the Magna Carta . In 1979, she witnessed the opening of the Kennedy Library .
 The author borrowed items from sealed conversations to describe the President's relationships with her and their children . She was upset to discover that the author had borrowed a number of items from their sealed conversations .
 Schlesinger complied, and by the time A Thousand Days was published, their friendship was restored . The two men were friends for more than 30 years .
 Jacqueline Kennedy never forgot her obligation to posterity . Despite her insistence on privacy, she never forgot what she had to do for posterity.
 She knew that when this oral history was published after her death, she would have what she expected to be the almost-final word on her life with her husband . The oral history will be published after she died .
 Jacqueline Kennedy became the first American president's wife to submit to hours of intensive recorded questioning about her public and private life . Jacqueline was the first wife of President Kennedy to be recorded .
 CNN.com will feature a new series of interviews with CNN iReporters starting at 9 p.m. ET on Monday night . The series focuses on the life of a woman whose life has been left behind by her family and friends .
 I think he was probably thinking about it for an awfully long time, long before I even knew, and I say this because I remember the first year we were married, I heard him at the Cape . I think it was probably because he was looking at it for a long time .
 He was in a room with his father, talking, and I came in and they were talking about something—about the vice presidency . He was talking to the vice president's father .
 "He never stopped at any plateau, he was always going on to something higher. But I think it was always ... he never stopped . He never went on to anything higher, he said .
 President Barack Obama has said he's aiming for the presidency . Obama was vice-presidential candidate in 2008 .
 CNN.com: "I think it would have been—I don't know, maybe when he first ran for the Senate. But I think it's probably when he was first running for a Senate seat."
 It was certainly before I knew him. I am sure it was always, in some sense, in his mind. It was before I know him. John F Kennedy Library and Museum, Boston .
 Kennedy would always produce this thing that Joe would have. That's the sort of trite story that all these people who used to go interview Mr Kennedy—you get so tired of people asking for anecdotes, and he'd always produce these things . You get tired of asking for stories,
 Joe would have run for politics, and then Jack, being so close to him, couldn't have run right on his heels in Massachusetts . And, obviously, I suppose Joe would ... well, he said . Jack, Jack, was so close that he couldn't run for political office
 "I've got a feeling, from what I think of Joe and everything, that he would have been so unimaginative, compared to Jack. Joe was a classmate of mine at Harvard, but— I'm a friend of Joe, but he would've been so  unimaginative,"
 I think he probably would have gotten to be a senator, and not much higher . He would never have—lI think he would have—L.A.
 "I don't think he had any of the sort of imagination that Jack did," he says . "I'm not sure if that's prejudiced, but I don't know if that is prejudiced," he adds .
 "I knew him moderately well, and he did not have the imagination or the intellectual force or intellectual interest," he says .
 He was an attractive, charming fellow and would have been, I think, very successful in politics, but I don't think he would ever have carried things to the point the President did . He was a most attractive and charming fellow .
 "They were talking about that in, I guess, around October— November 1953 at the Cape. Well, it's funny," he says . He says .
 The night Jack ran for the vice presidency in Chicago, he didn't want to then at all, he says . But yet he knows that Jack ran the night he ran for vice president .
 "No one was prepared. And you know, it was just a last-minute thing when Stevenson threw the convention open, and, all that taught them so much of how to do things in California in 1960," she says . "All that taught us so much"
 "I remember being in that office and Bobby trying to get someone to paint signs," he says . "And I remember being ... trying to ... paint signs. And I remember . Bobby was in the office. Bobby was there. Bobby still is there."
 He thought Stevenson would be defeated, and one of the reasons would be because he would have been a Catholic on the ticket with him, so it could only be a hindrance to him .
 "I don't know who said, ""Make a race for it,"" or what. But then when all that thing got thrown wide open, he said . "I'm not sure what I said, but I'm glad to be able to do it," he said. "
 Ted Sorensen came to see me on the Cape that summer, before the convention, and discussed this . I told Ted that I was for it and that I knew other people in the Stevenson circle were for it. There must have been some sense in his mind, because he
 The funny thing with Jack that would make it very hard in these interviews for me to sound as if I make sense, is that he never spoke of his sort of secret objectives, or of plotting things . Jack never spoke about plotting things, he says .
 "I mean, people say he never talked about politics at home with me, but that was all that was talked about. I mean ... that's all that he talked about," he says .
 Life with him was just so fast—that it isn't until you look back that you see what happened when . But he'd never sort of plot little goals and tell you when he was aiming for them then .
 Sen. John F Kennedy spoke at the 1956 DEMOCRATIC NATIONAL CONVENTION, CHICAGO, in Chicago . With people, life is not like that, anyway, anyway .
 "There are things organic in them which emerge as they continue living, and which are implanted and not sort of consciously striven for," she says .
 Nixon lived so intensely from day to day that his career was implicit in his career in both the shape of his consciousness and destiny, rather than, I imagine, explicit in his mind, or anything that he ever would talk about .
 I was out at the convention then with him in Chicago, but I was having a baby, and so I stayed with Eunice,® and he lived in a hotel with Torb . Or— Or — Or— I was . Stayed with E.Eunice and
 "You'd see him in the day at the convention, you'd have dinner, but it was such —I can't tell you the confusion—you should talk to Torb about that," she says .
 The worst fight in his life, which you should ask me about sometime, is when he got control of the Massachusetts legislature, he says . And every day was different, so I think it was when— every day -- was when he was in control .
 "I guess was, you know, to win that fight. So that was the big thing of all the spring, I guess was ... to win," he says .
 "I guess he had rather an unsatisfactory couple of meetings with Stevenson, and suddenly there was that night. So, anyway, then he went out there as sort of an important person, and I guess he'd had rather unsatisfactory meeting with Stevenson," he says .
 "I stayed up all night at the headquarters, and Bobby came running to me and said, ""We don't know anything. And I remember I stayed up . All I remember is I stayed all night. And Bobby came to me. And he said, "We didn't know
 "Nobody ever thought I had any political relatives or anything, but this uncle was a great friend of Pat McCarran. And nobody ever thought ... I'm not a political person," he says .
 Nash is married to Ogden Nash's stepfather's sister, Esther, who was, before that, married to Nash's brother . He's married to Esther Nash's husband, Ogden's brother, and Esther Nash is his stepfather .
 She married Norman Biltz, and lived in Reno for the rest of her life . Then she married her husband, Norman, and moved to Reno .
 "I don't know if he's ""shady,"" because I love him, but he's certainly someone to know in Nevada . You know, but Pat McCarran and all these sort of types were all, I don't want to know, rather—I love him
 The next day, all Nevada's votes were for Jack, the next day . "All of Nevada hadn't been for Jack. And he said, ""All right,","" because Nevada .
 Torb could tell you that, because he was closeted in the room with him. And before . And before—and before—Torb could say that, . He could . Tell you that .
 Stevenson's decision to throw it open, and then again Ted or someone from the President's staff got in touch with me about things, he says . "Obviously it was in the mind of some people around—before, I think, it had become dormant and then it was suddenly revived
 The great problem was the control of the Democratic state committee, and Burke had been . Burke had had been— And Lynch there was— There was Lynch, who was our man— Yeah. Yes, and again, you'd have to tell me about it .
 Neither had yet come on the senator's staff— Senate staff . But I think that neither of them yet had come on Sen. Ted Cruz .
 I think Kenny told me about that just now, just a couple of weeks ago. He told me just now—I mean, just two weeks ago," he said .
 Jack was traveling a lot then, but I can just remember every night talking. "Jack" was traveling, but he was always there talking. He says he's always had a good time with Jack, even though it's been a long way away .
 Jean came to her husband's wedding night before he got married . She had a dinner with him the night before her wedding . She was so busy up in Massachusetts, and she came .
 Even Jack was going all around at that dinner, talking to his father, Bobby, Torb, everyone, everyone. Well, even Jack was talking to everyone, talking all around .
 The only time in my life I've ever thought that Jack was a little bit thoughtless. Because it was going to be known—she was married on May 6—something like that—May 19 .
 "I didn't really think that, because you could see how worried he was," he says . "You could see him talking to everybody at the dinner about that fight," he adds .
 The Cuban president was calm on the night of the Cuban election . "That was just all that spring. I mean, it was just on his mind, and I've never seen him like that"
 "I just remember that was a terrible worry of all that spring. And as I have—you know, you musn't think it bad that I don't have all of these political memories, because I was really living another side of life with him"
 Kenny's told me from time to time when we've been talking about people in politics, and he would say, ""So and so, he was for us in the Burke fight,"" which meant, we forgive him everything else . Kenny's said: "So and . so,
 This became the standard of judgment, which, years later, in the presidential years, would still be very much in everyone's mind . And this became a standard of judgement, which ... would still ... still be in the mind .
 "I remember all the people -- it fascinated me because when I came back from my honeymoon, I was taken immediately to Boston to be registered as a Democrat by Patsy Mulkern, who was called ""the China Doll,"" because he was a prize fighter once . Pats
 Burke, named ""Juicy"" Grenara, was also a man with ""Onions"" Burke . Burke and Grenara were both men with onions . Burke was named Grenara and Burke .
 "You know, to sort of see that world, and then we'd go have dinner at the Ritz," she says . "We would go to Ritz and have dinner there," she adds .
 "We'd rent January until June, then we'd go live at my mother's house, which was in Virginia, for the summer, because we didn't have a child for four years," she says . "You know, we'd live in Virginia for the whole summer," she
 "We'd spend summers at her house, going up to the Cape when we could on weekends," she says . "In the fall, we'd stay with his father— you know, living right with our in-laws," she adds .
 'We would go away after Christmas or something for a few days to Jamaica or something. And then we'd go away to Jamaica,' she said .
 "Such a pace, when I think of how little we were alone, or always moving. Such a pace," she says .
 Hickory Hill turned out to be a mistake because it was so far out of town . And then we got Hickory Hills, but it was a mistake, because it's so far from town .
 "I thought it would be a place where he could rest on weekends the year where he would be recovering from his back. Well, again we spent a lot of money to buy this house," she said .
 "He didn't sort of sort of tell me what was ahead because once we got to the house, he was away every weekend, traveling," she said .
 "It was no good to him during the week—it was that much farther from his office," he said . "And it's no good for him to be away from the office. And it's not good to be off the job," he added .
 When I lost the baby —you know, that I had made nurseries and everything for there, I didn't want to live there anymore, so that's when we moved . And then, when I . lost the . baby, she said, "I didn't . want to
 "Some people have speculated, and I have written, that the operation and the sickness of the back was kind of a turning point," says Bob Greene . "I have written that I'm not sure what happened to my back," he says .
 I have never known whether there was anything in FDR's false knowledge of FDR, historian says . "There was something in that," he says of FDR's wartime knowledge .
 The winter of his back was awful, just to keep himself from going mad, he says . "Just as he was starting to walk, one of his crutches broke, so then he was back in"
 He started to search out other people, enough to make a book . He'd always thought of writing an article or something on that topic .
 He was just going through that winter like he did everything, getting through an awful winter of sickness and doing the book . He was going through it "like everything," he says .
 The year before we married, when he'd take me out, half the time it was on crutches . I mean, the year before I got married, he'd taken me out on cramps, she said .
 "When I went to watch him campaign, before we married, he was on crutches," she says . "You know, when I went . to see him campaigning, before . we married him, I think he's a great guy," she adds . "He was on
 "He'd be off it a lot, and then something would go wrong. And then, in our marriage, he would be off a lot," she says . "And then, then, he'd be out a lot. Then something would happen," she adds .
 "It was really —TI mean, the problem everyone found later—he didn't even need the operation," he said . "He was really fine. It was really a mistake. He didn't need it," he added .
 It was that he'd had a bad back since college, and then the war, and had a disk operation that he never needed, so all those muscles had gotten weak, had gone into spasm . That was what was giving him pain—the muscles .
 "I think if he went on crutches for four days, you know, he'd get everything better, but again that was only weakening it," he says . And so, then he'd go— then he would go— Then he would get better, he says. "
 Dr. Ephraim Shorr, who'd been his medical man, said to him after his back operation, "Now I think I am at liberty to tell you something which I wanted to say before, but I didn't think it was correct to do that to Dr.
 'This made me so mad how doctors just let people suffer, and don't say anything to hurt the other eminent physicians’ feelings’s feelings,' she said . This made her 'mad' at doctors letting people suffer .
 After a year of surgery and a year out, his back was weaker than ever . After surgery, he was back in the studio again for the first time .
 "Jack was being driven so crazy by this pain. But, you know, all those bone surgeons look at X-rays," he says . "Jack's life was going so crazy," he writes .
 I remember his father and I and he talked, and he said, "I don't care. He said, ""I don’t care. I remember him saying, "He said, and I don”t care," his father said .
 "It was, you know, one chance in a million, but he was going to take it. It was ... going to be ... a million," he said .
 Later on, it was apparent that what he should be doing was building up his back with exercises . Though later on, he was clearly more focused on his back .
 She was reluctant to let him leave her Novocain treatments, which by then were not doing any good . She was very reluctant to allow him leave the Novocaine treatments .
 He'd walk all around the Senate looking wonderful and tan in his gray suit, then he'd come home and go in a hospital bed . He'd walked all around looking wonderful, tan in a gray suit .
 "Around the White House, occasionally one could tell when he started to reach for something and then would stop or pull himself short, or he didn't want to stand too much. Because, you know, around the . White House," she said .
 "He was never—when you think how many people are hypochondriacs, or complain, he never liked you to ask him how he felt," he said . "He never liked to ask you how he feels," he added .
 You could tell when he wasn't feeling well—you'd take care of him and put him to bed or something— but he was never irritable . He made a conscious effort to get his mind off it by having friends for dinner or talking about going to see a movie, or
 The month before we were married, we both went bareback riding in a field in Newport on two unbroken work horses and galloped all around the golf course . And of course, this cut him off from sports, which must have been at one time— sailing—
 He played baseball with senators in Georgetown in the spring with the senators . "And then he played baseball all the time," he says .
 "He could run enough, but he could never be the one to run for the touchdown. And he always would play touch football, but ... he couldn't run," says coach Mike Downey . Downey: "I mean, he could . run enough. But he could run
 CNN.com: "I suppose it probably could come when he's tired. Now that you know it's a spasm, I suppose it might come when I'm tired."
 Some funny thing of dropping a pile of papers and stooping quickly to pick them up would set it off . And some funny thing, dropping a stack of papers, would set off .
 I never think of being married to an invalid or a cripple, and I don't want it to look as if—because it hampered him so long. But he wasn't in any way—lI never think . He wasn't an invalid, but he was not in any
 Bobby Kennedy had "extraordinary joy and vitality" in his life, he says . "It was just a tremendous spiritual victory of some sort," he adds .
 I always thought of him as this enormously glamorous figure whom I married when he was thirty-six . And I thought that was such a touching thing of him, he said . He married her at the age of 36 and she was a glamorous figure .
 I thought he'd had millions of gay trips to Europe, girls, dances, everything, everything. "I thought he had had millions, girls and dances," he said .
 He had also stomach trouble, which gave him a lot of pain sometimes, so it wasn't always his back . Morrissey said he had been in pain so much campaigning with Frank Morrissey,2° .
 "Oh, yeah. During campaigns and so on, did these things continue, and he just— Oh, yeah," he said .
 It was so pathetic to see him go up the steps of a plane, or the steps to a stage or something on his crutches, you know, because then he looked so vulnerable . "It's so pathetic," she says of the star .
 "Once he was up there and standing at the podium, then he looked so, you know, just in control of everything," he said . "Once you're up there, then you're just in charge of everything"
 He enjoyed it the way he loves to hear Teddy tell stories about Honey Fitz . Teddy loves to tell stories of Honey Fitz and Honey Fitz, who he says is a great writer .
 When I think now that he's dead and the different people who come to me—you'd think he belonged to so many people, and each one thought they had him completely, and he loved each one just the way love is infinite .
 If you have eight children, it doesn't mean you love them any less than if you just have just two, it's not that the love is diminished that much . If you love more than one child, you love your children more than you have two, she says .
 So he loved the Irish, he loved his family, loved people like you and Ken Galbraith . He said: "So he loved him. He loved you and people like Ken . He loved them like you"
 He loved me and my sister in the world that had nothing to do with politics, he looked to for pleasure and a letdown, his sister says . He loved her and her sister, she says . She says he loved them and loved them for pleasure, not politics .
 "He really kept his life so in compartments, and the wonderful thing is that everyone in every one of those compartments was ready to die for him," she said . "Everyone in every single of those . compartments" was ready for him, she added .
 We all loved everyone else because they all liked me, because they knew I would. And we all loved each other because we all liked everyone else . We all liked each other, and they knew they would. We all knew we would. They knew they'd like each other. We
 "It's just now that you see how Jack just knew in every side of his life what he wanted," he says of Jack . "It was just now ... how you see ... how Jack knew what you wanted," the actor says .
 "He never wanted to have the people in the evening that he worked with in the daytime," he said . He said he wanted to focus on his daytime job .
 He never wanted to see Bobby, and Bobby didn't want to come either, because they'd worked all day . But he never wanted them to see each other again . They'd work all day. They'd worked long hours to get back in the car .
 "It was sort of light—or I don't know—those parties that we used to have," says Bob Greene . Greene: "I don't think it was light-hearted"
 Best parties I've ever attended. The White House/John F Kennedy Library and Museum, Boston . The Kennedys with Ben and Tony Bradley in the White House's sitting room .
 "I just can't tell you how oppressive the strain of the White House can be," she says . "I worked so hard on those parties because I felt that I could get out," she adds .
 He thought I was getting depressed after losing Patrick. And then he sent me to Greece, which was, for a sad reason this year, this year . He thought it was for him to get depressed after he lost Patrick .
 Jack couldn't get out of the Twist, or something—not that you care about nightclubs—and I don't want to go more than once a year . You've heard of the twist, or . something . Jack . couldn't leave the Twist nightclubs .
 'I used to try to make these parties to bring gay, and new people, and music, and make it happy nights. So then I used to ... try to ... bring gay ... people, new people and music to these parties,' she says .
 "Just walked around, puffing his cigar. Danced very rarely, but loved to— just walked around," he said . "Danced very often, but often didn't dance very rarely"
 He did have an extraordinary range of acquaintance and ability to enter in—to, sympathetically, to people of the whole range of the spectrum, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 "Whatever you were interested in, Jack got interested in," she says of her husband . "I used to think about him, because the luckiest thing I used to say about him was that he was always interested in"
 "I started to collect drawings, and then he wanted to know about them," she says . "And I started collecting drawings, then he asked me about them. And I started to start collecting drawings"
 He'd snatch a book from me and read and know all of Louis XV's mistresses before I would . Or then, when I was reading all this eighteenth century, he'd snatch from me . He'd read and knew all of the XV's mistresses before me would. Or
 "All those men would ever talk to me about was themselves. So many of the senators, when we'd go out to dinner, all the men would talk to be themselves," she says .
 He thought his best quality was Curiosity, which, I think he was right, was Curiosity . And he thought he thought that Curiosity was Curiosity. He thought he had the best quality of Curiosity, and Curiosity, he said .
 "He thought his worst was irritability, but, I mean, he was never irritable with me," he said . He thought his best part of his life was being irritable, but he never was irritable . He said he was "never irritable"
 JFK 'didn't like to be bored, and if someone was boring, he'd pick up the newspaper, but he certainly wasn't irritable to live with' 'He was not irritable in the current White House sense,' says Kennedy .
 No, I've just not seen anyone—from South Boston through Harvard to Palm Beach—he was at home in a greater variety of things . He made people from each of these kind of segments feel that he was with them, says CNN's John Sutter .
 "It was an extraordinary— It was the extraordinary— Yeah, then they'd all get interested in politics and things," he says . "They all got interested, and things like politics, things. It was a very special moment"
 Alain Delon is a French actor who starred in the U.S. movie industry . He's a big name in Hollywood, but now he's a movie star in Washington .
 The drama critic went to interview him, and all he could talk about was Jack . Jack .
 "There's a little sexy young French movie actor and he's so wounded by Jack. And say, you know, how ""all we young people" -- well, I mean, there's a sexy young movie actor."
 "It's because Jack was young, and loved—you know—everything—elegance, girls, you know, in all the best senses of the word"
 It was like he had many things in common with that young man, the same way he'd have, you know, things with so many sides of you . "It's like he has many things that he has, the way he does," he says of his son .
 "Before that, politics was just left to all the corny old people who shouted on the Fourth of July," he says . "You know, all the things that made me so bored with politics. That's what I thought of politics," he writes .
 He gave youth and intellect and taste a world voice, which was felt all around the world . He had this extraordinary combination of idealism and realism, which he had . That's again—the Kennedys taught me all this, the Kennedy family taught me .
 "You know, if you didn't get on the offensive, they'd have you on the defensive all night," he says . "You didn't have to get to the offensive," he adds .
 "I saw that attributed to myself. Then once somebody asked me about him, and I said that," he said . Then once . somebody asked him about him. He said that—I said that--I saw . That was attributed to himself, he said that . He saw that
 The Symingtons, Smatherses, Coopers—they were always—funnily enough, John Sherman Cooper and Lorraine. The Coopers were always, funnally enough, with Lorraine and John Sherman .
 No, I never saw—the only ones I can remember having dinner at our house the first year we lived on Dent Place . The Symingtons, Smatherses, and Coopers are the only senators I can think of, and Mansfield sometimes .
 The year before, 1960, then you'd have others—I remember we had McCarthy—Eugene McCarthy* and a couple of others, I can't remember . "The year before" was 1960, "then you would have others," he says .
 You mentioned the Chicago convention—a couple of _ unsatisfactory conversations with Stevenson Stevenson . Stevenson: "I have had a couple of unsatisfactory discussions with Stevenson"
 Stevenson-Kennedy relationship has always been a puzzle and slightly a sadness to me . I think if Stevenson ever saw Stevenson in a genuinely relaxed mood, he would have quite liked him, because he can be awfully engaging .
 Stevenson would always freeze and become sort of prissy with the President . But somehow, Stevenson would never freeze and . become prissy, he said .
 Stevenson just let Jack down so many times. Well, this is all retrospect, but I always thought that every time Stevenson— Stevenson just . always thought . Every time Stevenson, he always thought, "every time Stevenson . let down so often times"
 "Jack really worked hard for him and everything, and he wasn't nice to him at that convention. So, you know, Jack really worked . So, he worked hard, and everything," says the author of the book .
 "Jack made them jealous. Then I think —TI don't know whether Stevenson—but I think this about so many people --Jack made me jealous," she says .
 Stevenson saw the President taking away not only the nomination, but also many of his own supporters and doing really better than he had ever been able to . Stevenson was "deeply jealous" of the President's success .
 CNN.com: 'I see that with more people who are bitter about Jack while he was President. Well, I see that . Well, he said .
 "Someone who was just Jack's age, and sitting behind some little bank clerk's desk and hanging around the bar at Bailey's Beach®® would just feel that he was a nothing when he saw all that Jack was doing. And then there was also a jealousy of contemporaries."
 "So he incited so many bitter jealousies, and they were the ones who'd say mean things about him," she says . "They were the people who would say mean words about him"
 "I thought Stevenson was really horrible to Jack at the convention in 1960," she says of Stevenson . Stevenson was 'horrible' to Jack, she says .
 Stevenson said he had told Lyndon Johnson in 1959 that he would remain neutral and would not come out for any candidate . Stevenson's answer was that he had to keep his word to Johnson .
 Jack Johnson thought Stevenson was hoping to be named as running mate with Johnson . But then, Jack came home and told him that Stevenson had told him what he thought was what Stevenson had said .
 Johnson had said to Stevenson the day before about Stevenson . Stevenson said Johnson said something insulting to him about him . Johnson said that Stevenson had been a good guy .
 Jack knew then, I think, that he knew that he was going to get the nomination . But Jack knew that, he said, "I think—I mean, he knew ... that he would get it," he said .
 Stevenson was holding out for a deadlock in which he would be the presidential candidate . Stevenson would not admit it to himself or to anybody else, he says . Stevenson held out for himself or anyone else, says historian .
 I doubt that he would have wanted to go on as a vice presidential candidate, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "I doubt that I would have chosen to be a vice president candidate"
 He wouldn't admit he was a candidate, so people who had been for him in '52 and '56, as I had, would ask him whether he was . But he would not admit this, and so we would ask . He would say yes, but he wouldn't say
 "He would say he was not a candidate, and that released me, I felt, from any obligation," she says . "That released me from any . obligation," the senator says .
 "If you've won twice, you keep hoping. But in all this period, you know, if you've . won again, you . keep hoping," she said .
 Kennedy was an Athenian and Stevenson from Thebes, he says . Kennedy was a Greek and Stevenson was a, well— Kennedy was Athenian . Stevenson was from the Thebes .
 "I mean, he was the first time anyone spoke anything in politics that you could listen," she says . "He was the . first . time anyone brought anything intellectual to politics," she adds .
 President Obama came along as a kind of climax. He helped open up the situation, and he helped open it up, he says .
 "Poor man. Poor man. Where he couldn't make decisions, or he'd go over his little papers," he says . He'd carefully take something typewritten and copy it in longhand .
 You know, Jack achieved all he dreamed of in his life, and it must be sad not to have. Jack achieved everything he dreamed about in his own life, it must have been .
 After the convention in '56, the President was quite relieved, was he—in not having got—immediately so—I know later, he would say often how pleased he was. President was. He would say later that he would be pleased with the outcome .
 "I'd gone to get a Coca-Cola or something, down underneath all those seats, and as I was coming back, suddenly that race started," he says . "All the blackboards, the numbers started changing. It was like a race started, and all the black boards
 "I bumped into Michael Forrestal, and he grabbed me into a Westinghouse exhibit," he says . "We watched the whole thing on television. We watched it on television," he adds . "It was a great experience," he said .
 "He was exhausted. He was just exhausted. Then we flew back," she says . "Then he wasn't anymore," she recalls .
 It was in that little room, you know, right out in back, and there was someone else there too—I have to think who—I can't remember. There was someone there too, and I can't think who .
 In '56, he ran for the Senate in '58, '58 and '60 . He was quite clearly going to try for the presidency in 1960, he says . In '60, he was going to run for president, but then ran for Senate, Senate .
 President Obama "never once said to me in all his life, before we started the primary year,"" or not. Well, he never once said, before . "I'm going to try for the presidency,"" he said .
 After convention, he flew to Europe to stay with his father and just rest in the South of France . But of course he was, because then he came back, because of course, because . He came back .
 "He was always on the move. Then we came down and lived at Hickory Hill that fall, while we were finding another house, but he was always moving . Then we moved back down to live in Hickory .
 "I guess he did decide then. Yeah, I guess he decided then. And so, obviously, all that speaking, speaking ... yes, he was aiming," he said .
 Sen. Mitch McConnell was determined to win the Massachusetts senatorial race in '58 by the largest possible margin . "I remember suddenly realizing it when he suddenly realized it," he says .
 'It was perfectly clear he was going to win, and therefore it wasn't very necessary for him to campaign, but he worked so hard in that campaign. It was so hard for him, he campaigned so hard,' he said. 'I'm not surprised that he didn't campaign
 Foster Furcolo2® was doing a poll of how he was doing in Europe . "I remember when we came back on the boat from Europe, someone met us with a poll," he says .
 Sen. Ted Cruz is running for the U.S. Senate seat in Texas . He says he's running the hardest Senate campaign of all his life . Cruz says it's the hardest campaign of his life: "It's been the hardest of ever"
 John F Kennedy: "I never can remember sleeping at home for however many months it was. You mean, just the extent of more— I mean just I never can sleep at home" JFK: "You mean just the ... extent of the more"
 Professor Burns,2/ and Jack telling him who to shake hands with on platforms, but all through the Berkshires, through Springfield, different hotels, you know. Oh yeah .
 "I love it when it's going wonderfully," she says . "You know, about the fifth day out, it's just sheer exhaustion, and then, you know ... exhaustion," she adds .
 "There's nothing more exciting than entering a crowded hall and watching the candidate come in, everyone going mad," says Hillary Clinton . "I'm not scared. There's a lot of excitement," she says .
 " Towards the end, it was getting better and better. Yeah, well, all that part I loved, and towards the end," she said .
 We ended up, I think, last time talking about the Senate, in which the President was reelected by this great majority and which, for the first time, made him sort of nationally spoken of as a possible contender for 1960 . The Second Conversation is Tuesday, March 3, 1964
 "I think we went somewhere in the sun or sometime, but then he started speaking all the time. Well, it was never spoken of out loud, but after election night in Boston! He says .
 "Every weekend he was always traveling. Again, all those years before the White House—every weekend he always traveled," he said . "I'm sure he's always traveling," he added .
 During these times when he was out, like the 1958 campaign and so on, how did he keep up reading? "He kept up reading," he said. "I would like to say yes."
 I mean, I could never read unless I'd have a rainy afternoon or a long evening in bed, or something like this . "I love reading, but I can't read without a rainy day or a rainy night," she says .
 "He'd read walking, he'd read at the table, at meals," he said . He'd read in the bathtub, he said, "I'd read—prop open a book on his desk—on his bureau—while doing his tie."
 "He'd just read in little, he'd open some book I'd be reading, you know, just devour it," she says . "You know, he would just eat in little," she recalls her father .
 "You'd be sitting next to him on some platform, and suddenly out would come come a sentence that two weeks ago in Georgetown he would have read out loud to you one night, just because it interested him," he said .
 He had the most fantastic and maddening memory for quotes, because—while he remembered the quotes, but he couldn't always remember where they were from .
 "TI asked his father to give them to him for Christmas, which, of course, he was delighted to do," he said .
 "That was a different winter. That's it, and well, well, all things through there, you know, he just—you know, just—a different winter," she says .
 He had asthma or blood trouble, anemia or something, when he went out to Arizona . Then one year, he had some—either asthma ...or blood trouble anemia or something, he said .
 "He'd always been reading— all these things—and he used to give me books when we were going out before we were married," she says . "Then there was another summer—you know, he'd always be reading—all these things"
 Sam Houston by Marquis James—The Raven . Marquis gave Sam Houston a copy of The Raven . Sam Houston was Sam Houston, the first one he gave to him .
 Listen, the only thrillers he ever read were about three Ian Fleming books . Listen, he said, "Listen, I don't know what's going on here."
 When they asked him his ten favorite books, he sort of made up a list, and he put in one sort of novel . Did he really like Ian Fleming much? Oh, well, it was sort of a press thing, because when asked him what he'd like to read,
 "He liked Ian Fleming®," he said . "I mean, if you were in a plane or you're in a hotel room and there's three books on your bedside table," she said .
 There was one book he gave me to read—something about ""time" -- it was a novel where someone goes back in the eighteenth century and uncovers a mystery .
 He was reading The Fall of the Dynasties® and Edmond Taylor . The last two books he told me to read this fall were the last two .
 "I was growing illiterate there. But you know, he was reading all that in the White House," he says . "But you know that . He was reading . All that he was doing was reading."
 'It is a matter of constant mystery, because he was surrounded by all these academics who supposedly read books all the time. It is a mystery,' he said .
 "None of us ever had time to read books, and he would say in a slightly accusatory way," she says . "He would ask us about books that had recently come out that none of us had read," she adds .
 Every Sunday, he'd rip three pages out of the Times book section, with an ""x" around what he was to get . Every Sunday he'd ripped three pages from the book section with an 'x' around what I was to receive .
 "It would be fascinating. And you know, on the weekends all the time, he'd be reading," she says . She says .
 President Obama stayed in bed in the afternoon at Camp David during a rainy day, he says . "What else would he do? He'd stay in bed," he adds .
 Bobby had been over to Baltimore and gotten all this equipment with a little card you put in and the line runs down it . Bobby came down with—Bobby had been ... getting all the equipment with the little cards you put into the equipment .
 You know, you're meant to speed up and answer questions about three crows— how many crows in the cabbage patch, or something. You know that you're supposed to speed speed up .
 I think we did it twice one Christmas vacation in Florida, then stopped . "We stopped. We did it again. We didn't want to do it again," she says .
 I think he was always looking for something in books, or something for a quote, or what . He was looking for history or something about history, or a quote .
 At Glen Ora, he was quoting Mao Tse-tung to me . He was quoting that to me. Oh, I said, 'Oh, I'm not sure what I was reading'
 "When an Army drinks, not it is thirsty,"" or something. Then we started to make up all these little parables like ""When an army drinks, "not it is thirst,""" or "when an Army is thirsty""
 "I told Jack what General Taylor said about him. He was in Blenheim and everything, everything, he said . He was there, and I told Jack, what I thought about him," she said .
 I was halfway through that book, and Jack took it away from me, and read the whole thing . "Jack took it from me and read it," he said . "I'm not going to let it slide down, but it's a good thing," he added .
 "If I'd ever say anything interesting in a book I was reading, he'd take it away and read it," she says . "You know, if you ever say something interesting, it would be interesting to him," she adds .
 He would rather go to a musical comedy or something heavy than something heavy .
 He didn't really read poetry, but he loved to read Byron, Byron and Shakespeare . He'd pick and read bits of Shakespeare, Shakespeare .
 We had a John Gielgud record that we used to play over and over—""The Ages of Man""2.2 or something. But we had to play it over and play over again .
 The Civil War was what interested him in American history, he says .
 "I took a course on it one year by a fascinating man, who—I got to do some research for him later, Dr. Dr. Martin. Then I took some of his research into it," he says .
 Obama spent very little time at the London School of Economics . He spent a summer and a term or so at the LSE, he says .
 I have all his books, that he always had, so when I get them out of crates, I just know . His mother can tell you some things about him, reading when he was six, asking some question .
 I think Marlborough was more than Churchill, says historian . Churchill was always a figure of meaning, he says . He says Churchill was a "figure of meaning" in Britain .
 "I really don't think he admired—well, of course, he admired Churchill and he wanted to meet him," she says . "He really didn't like Churchill," she adds .
 We did meet him one summer in the South of France but he was rather, you know, a little bit gone by then . We met him in the summer of the summer but he had already been gone by now .
 He never had a hero worship of any contemporary—it was more in the past . But he never had hero worship, any contemporary .
 "I'm not saying that he thought he was as great as Churchill, but he could see that he was up to coping with things and the failures of so many men who were alive now—and their shortcomings," she says .
 He was really looking for lessons in the past from history, but he did admire Churchill's prose, and he read all those memoirs that came out . So, he did—no, you're right . He was looking for history lessons from the past .
 It was Churchill as a writer which really excited him and piqued his curiosity . I think he really sought—it was Churchill, more than—I mean, he admired Churchill as statesman, but it was .
 You know, he'd be reading, and he'd read aloud a lot. And I can remember him reading me out loud two things from that—the court of Charles II, which is wonderful sort of seraglio prose and everything .
 Jefferson asked for four more gardeners for Monticello, but he wanted to be sure they knew how to play the violin, so that he could have chamber music concerts in the evening . Jefferson wanted to buy a letter he wanted so badly, but it was too expensive, and I
 "That letter had come up at Parke-Bernet, and it would have been $6,000 or something, so he hadn't bid on it," he said . That letter had been a letter that would have cost $5,000 .
 He was reading a book about Theodore Roosevelt this summer or winter . Oh, then he was reading about the president .
 He was saying to me, ""Listen to how fatuous Teddy Roosevelt was,"" and he'd, ""Look how—"" and then he'd describe several—read me several things where Roosevelt describes what he does .
 Always in a sort of throwaway way — ""And then I marched up San Juan Hill and killed five natives"" —and rather apologetic about it. Always in sort of a throwaway manner .
 President Roosevelt and Mrs. Kennedy told me that I should think of all the children in the cabinet, because how nice President Roosevelt was to Mrs. Roosevelt . President Kennedy said that he would be happy to have children in his cabinet . President Roosevelt told me how nice Mr. Kennedy was to
 He often thought he was rather a—charlatan is an unfair word—you know what I mean—a bit of a poseur, rather cleverly . But I don't think he thought he . was any . But he often thought himself a rather clever and cleverly,
 "I remember him telling me the time where Wilson had been wrong, or what their mistakes were, or how," he said . "But you know, all with hindsight. I remember telling him where Wilson was wrong, and how"
 "He just seemed to devour all of them and then, I suppose, it sifted around and came out—he used them all," says author . "He was just devouring all of the them," she says . "I suppose, he just seemed like he used them
 Winston Churchill, Franklin Roosevelt, and Joseph P Kennedy were great men, but not great men . Joseph Kennedy was a very successful man, a very talented man, but a talented man but not a great man . Winston Churchill and Franklin Roosevelt lived about the same time, but were not great
 The children of Churchill and Roosevelt have all been bright and talented, but somehow it all missed fire . And yet, the children of both have been bright but talented, they all missed the fire .
 Jack used to talk about that a lot of that credit to Mr Kennedy, says Mr Kennedy . "I really think you have to give a much of the credit to him," he says .
 When his children were doing something, he wrote them letters endlessly . He wrote them all over the world . When he was alive, he would write them letters .
 "Whenever they were doing anything important at school, he'd be there for it," she said . "He'd be always there for them," she added .
 "I always thought he was the tiger mother. If you just go on being a great man, and your children are sort of shunted aside, you know—he watched," he said .
 Kennedy, poor little thing, was running around, trying to keep up with this demon of energy, seeing if she had enough placemats in Palm Beach, or should she send the ones from Bronxville, or had she put the ones in storage .
 He did all, he made this conscious effort about the family, and I don't think those other two men did. "He did all," he said, "and he did all"
 Jack told me about Roosevelt's foreign policy: "His foreign policy had been wrong and how he hadn't been good there" Roosevelt had been good at foreign policy, he said .
 In relation to the Soviet Union, I suppose. I remember asking him once, "What do you think about Russia?" Kennedy's wife says .
 "How he underestimated or misestimated—whatever the word is—you know, the men he was dealing with," he says . "And how he underestimated ... how he mis-judged or mis-imated"
 He had a great detachment about things because he had to put himself in other people's positions and see what the problems were . He had great capacity for putting himself in others' positions and seeing the problems .
 Jim Burns, who never knew him, said he was detached and wondered if he had a heart . Maybe that's what makes some people —like Jim Burns — wonder if he has a heart?
 "He could take any case -- it could involve himself, or me or something, where you would look at it from all sides," he says . "Because he could take a case ... where you—with anyone else, your emotions would be so involved"
 "I remember him speaking that way about General de Gaulle one time, when everyone was so mad at General De Gaulle last year," he said . "Everyone is so mad" at the former French president, he added .
 John F Kennedy Library and Museum, Boston, is home to a collection of Kennedy memorabilia from the Kennedy family .
 There are those who always see other people's sides to such an extent that it severs the nerve of action for themselves . Those who see others' sides severs nerve to act for themselves can't do so .
 He understood political urgencies that drove other people doing mischievous things, but that—it never prevented him from reacting to it, he said . He understood the political urencies that drove him to react to them, he added .
 I wish I'd given him a wristwatch with a tape recorder in it or something, because if you could hear him explaining de Gaulle's objectives, and why he was so bitter, he says .
 De Gaulle was my hero when I married Jack, and he really sunk down. I mean, his analysis of that man—de Gaulle, de Gaulle . He really sank down, and that's what he really thought of the French leader .
 "He wasn't really my hero, but I sort of loved all that prose of some of his memoirs," she says . "I agree. I agree. He was rather Francophile, just a vague sort of sort of— I agree."
 I thought, you know, at the funeral, that he was—in spite of all the mischief he has made—will make—an immensely touching and charming figure. I thought ... he was ... an immensely touching, charming figure, I thought .
 "You know, he realized who Jack was, and that's why he came to the funeral," she says . "I think he just felt guilty—I don't know— You know, I think he felt guilty"
 He had a sense of history, which produces sort of magnanimity of judgment, he says . "He had a certain—the thing about de Gaulle and Churchill ... was that they had history," he adds .
 Although de Gaulle can be spiteful, he can also be very magnanimous and he recognized that the President . He saw him in the great stream of history, and that—of course, his memoirs are so marvelous in that respect .
 When Jack made his announcement that he was going to run at the Senate—no, run for president—I'd been reading him the beginning things of de Gaulle's memoirs .
 Churchill's father was Randolph Churchill, Winston Churchill's grandfather . Winston Churchill used to tell me a lot about Randolph Churchill . Randolph Churchill was Churchill's first father .
 There was some minister who resigned when Randolph Churchill was in the government, because he thought he was—it was on some point . Randolph Churchill thought that he was the prime minister of the day .
 Some man resigned and was immediately replaced, but this man thought that he couldn't be replaced, and they'd have to come around to do what he wanted, and right away, they appointed someone named Goschen . He'd given information . Not Thorneycroft .
 Hubert had Hubert, Lyndon and Stevenson in the wings. Well, I guess he had . Hubert . Lyndon had . Lyndon in the . wings. He had Lyndon .
 "You know, he liked Hubert before, but he always said when you get into a fight, it gets so bitter that you're just bound to sort of hate them at the end," he said .
 Lyndon was so tricky and he'd come home and tell me things, including that he could play squash and have sexual intercourse once a week. Well, Lyndon told me things—when Lyndon made an announcement up at the Senate that he was fit to run, he said he could .
 Lyndon—well, he'd just come over and—you know, he knew what he was dealing with there . Lyndon knew he was going to have to deal with .
 JFK and LBJ liked Lyndon. JFK liked Lyndon Lyndon. He liked Lyndon, he liked Lyndon .
 Lyndon was sort of ... He didn't particularly like him, but he could trade with him and not come off . It was kind of, when you saw them together, it was really like fencing, in political things .
 "Jack was sort of parrying with such amusement, and he always sort of bested him," he said . "I always thought Lyndon was arguing with him or being rude, but Jack was parrying with such humour," he added .
 "I think he was amused, rather delighted by Johnson as a kind of American phenomenon, and at the same time, often quite irritated by a particular thing he would do at any point," she says .
 Lyndon was the majority leader and he did get the position he wanted in the Senate, but I know he had to trade or really pester hard for that—for Foreign Relations and Labor . You know, Lyndon—I mean he just . just—what were his things—of Lyndon
 In the primaries, it was more what you could do in Wisconsin, and who you could get to see, and then whether Hubert would go into West Virginia or not, more than the people . In West Virginia, Hubert's popularity was more important than whether he could go into
 He never thought any of them were better than him, but, I mean, he wasn't ever conceited . "He was never conceited. He wasn't conceited," she says .
 "If he could just get it --get over this Catholic hurdle and this youth hurdle," he says . "Then everything would be fine. I mean, if he could ... get it," he adds .
 At the end of '59, there is a—perhaps around Thanksgiving at Hyannis Port, there was sort of a meeting to plan strategy . "There is a sort of meeting to sort of plan strategy," he says of the meeting .
 Everybody was closeted for two days in Ethel and Bobby's house, and all these men came up . Kenny, Larry, Bobby, everyone, and huddled away and planned. We had one house there .
 He'd come home, and then it would be fish chowder, or what would he like for dinner, or records, or then someone there to laugh . He would come home and then he would say what he wanted for dinner or dinner .
 I mean, I would have been a terrible wife if I tried to pick his brains about that. So that's—that's—I mean, it's—a terrible wife," she said .
 Both Roosevelt and Kennedy were master politicians, but politics was one part of their lives . The difference between them is that they were masters politicians, not master politicians .
 "I think a woman always adapts, and especially if you're very young when you get married and, you know, are unformed, you really become the kind of wife you can see that your husband wants"
 "Lee doesn't understand that. So, if he'd wanted to ... he would have wanted to bring his problems home, and they're all business," she says .
 "I'd be asking him questions. But, you know, if Jack wanted to talk about things at home," he says .
 "I mean, it was always, you'd have to read the papers and everything. But other things of his life ... he was always there, always," he says . "You would have to ... read the newspapers and everything"
 At this meeting, as I recall it, in Hyannis Port, was—the real thing, which kind of changed the whole place, in the sense that Ted,*4 who up to that time had been handling both, worked both on the speeches and the political side . Ted
 Ted didn't like whatever slot he'd been put into, and deprived—you know, there was a bit of friction there . "Ted" was "devastated" by being put into a slot, "Ted's" role .
 Jack behaved like a great gentleman to Ted then, because Ted didn't behave very well that year . Jack behaved as a great Gentleman to Ted, says the actor .
 "I couldn't look at Ted Sorensen for about two years after that. I mean, I'm sure that's not why he gave Ted the speeches or something, but I must say, I couldn't . I mean . I was sure that was not why . He
 President Obama used to make a conscious effort to show off things he'd crossed out and added to his books . "Of course, the poor boy, he was just starting," he said .
 Jack had saved all these pages of yellow legal pad that he'd written himself . Clark Clifford came and defended him in the lawsuit against Drew Pearson .
 Clark might have been under the impression that Ted really had written most of the book . Jack loved Clark Clifford then, because he asked Clark to defend him, he said .
 "These are the most valuable things you have. But he never asked that question, and then Jack got all those yellow pages and showed them to Clark, and Clark was just amazed . Clark was amazed and said, ""These were the most valued things you . have.
 Ted would send down fifty books on Lucius Lamar from the Library of Congress . Jack would sketch it through, drawing it through. Ted would then send it to Jack .
 President Obama's life was all around himself, but he got to love one other person beside himself, she says . "I think just in the White House, just in Washington, I think ... Jack," she writes .
 As he had more to do, he didn't need to prove his little things . But then, as he had . more than . do . He had more than a job to do .
 Jack gave him all the money from Profiles in Courage, because he felt Ted worked so hard—and he would work and stay up at night . Jack gave Ted the money, and then gave him the money he felt he needed to do so much .
 "He always seemed to have to stay up until two or three in the morning to get something done. As I said, he worked slowly," he said .
 The book is now a bestseller, bestseller and bestseller . It has been a huge success in the U.S.
 "Ted's gotten every bit of money from that book until the memorial edition with Bobby's preface came out," says Ted . "Ted has had a lot of money since that book came out. Ted's gotten all of the money since then."
 "Jack was such a gentleman. Jack wanted to give him something extra besides his salary," she said . "But Jack was such an ... gentleman," she added .
 "Bobby was in Washington, in this period, all the time, but he really wasn't, until ‘59, sort of day-to-day involved. Bobby was in D.C. All the time."
 "Before we were matried, we always lived in Georgetown, we were at dinner with them once or twice a week," she says . "We always lived with them," she adds .
 Bobby Kennedy was on the McClellan committee, the McCarthy committee, and the committee of the McCarthy Committee . Kennedy was a prominent member of the House of Representatives .
 Bobby was always sort of sort of—well, they were both so caring of what the other was doing. Teddy was supposedly in '52, and Teddy, supposedly, in '58.28 But, you know, Bobby was .
 "I suppose, at that Thanksgiving meeting, Bobby just gave up everything else and did everything for Jack from then on," he says . "Then I guess, I suppose, Bobby just gave ... everything else"
 "I don't remember what Bobby was doing in '58 that he couldn't run the campaign," says Sen. Bobby Kennedy . "I'm not sure what Bobby would be doing in 1958," says Kennedy .
 My impression is that Teddy was nominally the campaign manager, but maybe not . Teddy was nominated for the Democratic presidential nomination in 2008, but may not .
 "Jack's life was a major thing, I remember, in Jack's life, but I can't remember what year it was," he says .
 Arthur Goldberg would appear every morning for breakfast, Arthur Goldberg’s "Arthur Goldberg" would appear . “Arthur Goldberg” would appear. “I can remember every morning,” he said .
 Jack and George Meany and someone else all went crashing to the floor at one of the first breakfasts . "That was the year '57 when we moved in our house, because the first breakfast, I bought these creaky old dining room chairs, and I bought them,"
 The summer before we married, he gave me all these French books, and asked me to translate them . Because the summer . That summer, that was the summer before . We were married, she translated them .
 "I was working alone at my mother's house in Virginia. And I was working for the TimesHerald,“ living alone at his mother’s house .“
 "Yeah, he could read French, but you know, but not enough to trust himself for a lot of facts and things," he said . "He didn't trust himself too much," he added .
 "We were seeing a lot of French people then, and then they'd give some book. And then he would see—we were seeing ... then, they'd given some book," she says .
 The Algeria speech was particularly so, because the whole Council on Foreign Relations crowd were all outraged by it . The whole Council of Foreign Relations (CFR) crowd was outraged by the speech .
 L'Express claims to be the first magazine in the world which put the President on the cover of its own magazine .
 He wouldn't take me when he went to Poland, because he thought it wasn't serious to travel with your wife . Oh, yeah, I remember . I remember when he would not take me, he wouldn't .
 "He was always more interested—well, so interested in foreign things," she says . "But, you know, he was always interested," she adds .
 "I can remember him being so disgusted, because once we had dinner with my mother and my stepfather," she says . "It was simply appalling to think that the minimum wage should be a dollar twenty-five," she adds .
 "All those things show that he did have a heart, because he was really shocked by those things," she says .
 "He had a heart and he had a—in fact, you know, it wasn't on his sleeve," she says . "People had been so used to a certain style of expression"
 The fact that Hubert, whom I love, who is an admirable man, can't connect with as many people as the President could, because Hubert is still—is in an earlier phase of reaction to this kind of thing . Hubert: "The fact that he was,
 You don't know the exhaustion of the primaries, and he often said that the four days we took in Jamaica between Wisconsin and West Virginia were what made it possible for him to be president . The four days in Jamaica were what he said that made him possible for president, he said .
 "He just worked himself into exhaustion, and then the second wind and the third wind, and when you get that tired, you don't enjoy them," he says . "When you get the that tired ... you can't enjoy it," he adds .
 "I don't think anyone enjoys working out of sheer exhaustion. I suppose, when you stay that tired for that long, he'd lose his voice," he says . "I suppose, he would be tired when he stayed that tired, but then he'd lost his voice"
 In Wisconsin, we'd go into a tencent store or something, three people in it, three times in it . And in Wisconsin, it'd go in tencent stores or  three people in one, it would have been three .
 "Little rallies in a town, where you'd have a band and everything there and nobody'd show up," he says . Or little rallies in town, he says, "where you'd be in a place where nobody would show up and nobody would come"
 "All that literature they were passing out about nuns and priests," he says . "Yeah, and all that . Yeah, and . all that literature passed out about . priests and everything," he adds .
 "Because the people are alone all winter long, and cold, and just with animals, and they're so suspicious," she says . "They are so suspicious. Because of the people ... they're alone all . winter long"
 In Wisconsin, they're just suspicious of anyone sort of gregarious. I think that in Wisconsin. They just think that they just . are just suspicious . of anyone . sort of a gregararious. person. "They just think they are suspicious of people being greg
 "I don't think they like someone coming up, or a band, or anything. I mean, I don't like them coming up," he says .
 West Virginia is "a bit gayer, even though they're so poor," President Obama says . "In West Virginia, you know, they're a bit gara," he says .
 "I never met one person in West Virginia I didn't like, except this strange man running around with his handbills wherever we spoke," she says . "I loved — I loved — West Virginia," she writes .
 "I never met one person in Wisconsin I did like, except for the people who were working for Jack. And I never met a person I didn't like," she says .
 "Oh, yeah, you'd stumble into some hotel bed and you'd get up at six in the moming. Oh, yeah," she said . "You'd stumble in some hotel beds and get up in the morning"
 He could have a day home and just sleep all through it, and you'd get all his laundry done or something in the daytime, and pack him at night, and off he'd go or off we'd both go . He would sleep all day, and then pack him up at
 Clem Norton®!—I don't know if you've heard the tape of his tape, said Teddy has a street personality, the President didn't have a . street personality . Clem Norton norton: "I'm not a politician, I'm
 Jack never said, ""Hi, fella,"" or put his fat palm under your armpit, or, you know, any of that sort of business. But Jack never—he never—never said, "Hi, falla," or "Fat fella"
 "I mean, if you asked him his three favorite things he can do in a day, I don't think he'd say campaigning," he says . "I'm not going to say campaigning. I mean, I'm going to do it," he adds .
 "When he got caught up in it, and when it was going well, then he really liked it and responded," he said . "But when he got . caught up with it, then when it . went well, he said. But when he . got caught . up in
 "As time went on, he was doing better and better. And the last— you know, as time went . went on," says President Obama . "And the last ... he was ... doing better, better," he says .
 He loved the people who really were glad to see him -- the little old ladies, or children, or what. Or what. What. He loved was he loved . He loved people who were glad he was there, whether old ladies or children .
 JFK 'always felt that when he went out as President on a trip and saw crowds, he'd really come back very refreshed' 'I always felt that . when he . went out on a . trip and . saw crowds I always felt . that when . he went . out on
 Didn't you feel him filled with new energy and confidence? "Yes, it was so good for him. Yes, it's so good," says CNN.com's John Sutter . "I'm so proud of him," he says .
 CNN's John Sutter says it's "good to get out of Washington, where it's this little group that just writes—in and out and in and in . And he'd say how good it was to get away from Washington .
 The President's view of his opponents and problems is reflected in this week's discussion . This is the third time we've discussed the convention in 1964 .
 No one obviously has done more for intellectuals in the White House since Jefferson . It sounds very odd now, because no one has done so much for intellectuals since Jefferson.
 "I suppose one of the big reasons for it was the whole McCarthy business. I suppose ... McCarthy business," he said .
 He'd apparently been to the Cape once or twice and never when we were there . Never when we visited the Cape, he said . He said he had been there at least once .
 "I just went out of complete curiosity once to see those hearings, and saw that man, who was rather frightening," she says .
 Few members of the Senate, including Hubert Humphrey and Paul Douglas, attacked McCarthy . "I think that was part of it and also the fact that he didn't attack McCarthy, though, as a matter of fact," he says .
 I think when the actual vote came, he was pretty sick and I don't think any statement was issued at that time . "I think when he was ... sick," he said. "I'm not sure what happened."
 He thought of McCarthy—well, you know, poor McC—I mean, if you saw McCarthy, then you'd see a man in his last—I remember, I think he was coming in and out of the elevator when I was standing there . Well, the man was just
 Every single one of his voters in Boston—anyone whose name was McAnything they thought was wonderful. Every single voter in Boston thought McAnything would be wonderful, he says .
 Most of them or a lot of them thought McCarthy was probably a Democrat . "Most of them (McCarthy) thought McCarthy would probably be a Democrat," she says . Most of the time, she says, McCarthy was a Democrat.
 At one time he started an attack on Communists at Harvard, particularly on me, he said . "At one time, he started a attack on Communism at Harvard," he added .
 Jack was in town and went up and explained to him that I probably wasn't a Communist, and I shouldn't be attacked . "Jack" explained to Jack that he was probably not a Communist and that he should not be attacked."
 He was counsel for the Democrats on the committee but he had originally worked with McCarthy and then he couldn't stand Cohn's methods . He was associated with Symington, Jackson, and the opponents of Jackson .
 This was before everything bad happened—because he was Irish, because he was Catholic, and because everyone else was down on him . So, I'm sure Mr Kennedy was rather conservative—you know, he might have just liked Joe McCarthy out of—this was before . Joe McCarthy might
 "It was a messy situation Jack was in," he says . "They hated it in Boston. They hated it," he adds .
 Senate wives have to go roll bandages every Tuesday and vice president's wife is always the chairman of it . "You know, you know, the Senate wives . You know, I don't like it," she said .
 Wisconsin primaries were the hardest of the 1960s primaries in the state . CNN's John Sutter recalls the primaries in 1960s Wisconsin .
 Well, you just had to work so hard. You had to do so hard, you had to be very hard to get ahead of him . He was up and down, but it was a fairly successful career .
 "You know, when you're really in a campaign, you don't almost have time to think of the outcome," he says . "You don't have time" to think about the outcome, though he'd be going over polls and the this and the that district," he adds
 CNN's John Sutter recalls primary night in the Hotel Pfister in Milwaukee, Wisconsin . Sutter: "I remember election—primary night in a hotel in Milwaukee"
 Well, it was just so awful because there everybody had put all they had into a fight and you were just left exhausted . You were left exhausted. You were just exhausted. It was so awful .
 Miles McMillin, who wrote for the paper in Madison, who is married to—the girl he's married to, Rockefeller, was married to Proxmire . Oh, and I remember that awful man, Miles .
 He came cruising through the apartment that night when we were all in there counting the returns and—oh, it was awful of me—I walked by him twice without saying hello—cutting him dead . "I walked past him twice before saying hello"
 "I'd go off with someone on my own little tour of little shops or a little bar or all those little mining towns. And you know, you went slugging along again, but—oh, and then there, for the first time, we separated, and I'd go
 Sen. Kennedy met coal miners in West Virginia during the West Virginia presidential campaign . Kennedy: "I'd just say hello to them all, and talk to them. You know, just tiny, littlh"
 Franklin Franklin would speak every night at Franklin rallies . Franklin would be at some big rally, where Franklin would talk. Then every night, we'd be at a big rally. Franklin would also speak .
 CNN's John Drexler says he started to have John in the middle of his presidential campaign . He says he is now married to Hillary Clinton, who he says was a good guy .
 "They were always running around and busy and everything, but they'd always liked each other. You know, they—they—they--always, they always like each other," she said .
 "You could always laugh with him and he—you know, he amused me," she said . "He and Jack amused each other," she added . "You can always laugh, but you could always smile with him"
 We went all through one colored district together, all through supermarkets where no one looked up at us . We went through supermarkets with no one looking up to us .
 "West Virginia is where we saw the most of him and from then on, he was a very good friend," he said . But West Virginia was where he was most of his West Virginia career .
 The Humphrey people were saying the Kennedys were buying the election, and the Kennedy people had any military service, and I forget what else it was . Humphrey had not been military service .
 President Barack Obama visited Washington with the Bradlees on Thanksgiving Day . He had dinner with them and went to a movie with them .
 It was some awful, sordid thing about some murder in California—really, I mean, just morbid . "Just morbid," she said of the case . "I mean, it was just morbid"
 "We came home to our house, terribly depressed by this movie, and waited for the phone to ring" "And then we came home ... terribly depressed," she says .
 "They'd called Jack and it was, well, you know, just fantastic in West Virginia, so then we all got in a plane and flew down there, and got there in the middle of the night"
 "He was so nervous about it, he just didn't want to be there," she says . "But you know, he was . so nervous," she adds .
 "We had this strange little evening of not wanting to be by the radio, the phone, anything," she says . "We didn't want to be bothered by anything. So we had a strange little night," she adds .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots at CNN iReport.com/Travel next Thursday .
 President Truman's attack was in May, and then in June there was President Harry Truman's . Well, that was May, then June, and that was June, when Truman attacked .
 "It was just one more thing to, you know, swat down like a buzzing fly," she says . "I mean, it was just another thing to swat down," she adds .
 President Obama answered the question on his way out to the convention . "I remember when he answered that, because that was on my way out," he said. "But I remember when . He answered that."
 It was earlier because the Democrats were out of office and then he came back and the special session began in August . The special session started in August because of the Democrats' time out .
 "You should have seen our little house. Then whenever he'd come up to the Cape for a weekend—oh, or a day," she said . "He'd come and spend time with us," she says of her husband .
 There'd be fifty Lithuanians arriving with folk dolls for Caroline or something at eleven-a-morning, then they'd go. Then they would go. There'd been fifty Lithuanianians arriving at eleven at eleven a.m.
 I'd started to build a stockade at the convention, but I only had it half finished, that split fence . And everyone on the street outside—I'd started the stockade, but it wasn't finished, he said .
 "You see, I was at home at the Cape with my mother and stepfather and Janet," he says . "I was at . home at . the Cape," he said .
 Jack would always call me up, usually terribly late late night, or say something would be all right, or not to worry, or this or that . Well, Jack would often call me ... late night .
 "I guess they weren't as worried out there, because Bobby told me that once he got to the convention, he knew they'd get— you know, he'd get the nomination," he said . "But I guess . I guess they were as worried as he told me,"
 Jacqueline Kennedy sat down for interview with Jacqueline in 1960 . She said: "I just saw it on television. So you missed the sort of business of the great Stevenson act"
 President Obama and Lyndon Johnson faced off in a debate on the economy . The debate was between the President and President Lyndon Johnson . The president and vice-presidential son of Lyndon Johnson was assassinated .
 We were sort of sleeping in a single bed in a tiny littlke guest room . We were sleeping in the tiny guest room in this tiny room .
 Lyndon famously plunked himself down in Mr Kennedy's chair at the Kennedy's next day .
 "She always had these three green notebooks just filled with everything. Yeah, well, you know, just—she always had ... everything," she says .
 We talked about this the other day but it was not on the tape so you were—about the problem of Lyndon's going on the ticket . You were also talking about the possibility of Lyndon Johnson running for president .
 "You never thought he was any great statesman or anything, but he was just such a gentleman the way he did that," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 He wrote back that he burned it, saying I wish he had been the vice president . And he wrote him back saying he wished he'd been the VP .
 Lyndon Johnson would have been "enormously enraged and blocking Jack in every way," he says . Johnson: "I know Jack had to do it because—have Lyndon as his running mate"
 "Jack couldn't get out and campaign and do more things. Yeah, that was it, so Jack couldn't ... get out," he said .
 "I mean, he'd done something before," he said . "It was really difficult for him. He'd made it really difficult," he added. "He'd done it before"
 If you'd had him up there with that enormous ego, and thwarted and bitter—so nobody was happy about it. Well, he certainly didn't make—If you'd . Had you had him . If you had had him ... well, he would have been very bitter, very
 Phil Graham was a great go-between and told me—I have notes somewhere— that he gave me a great account of his role as kingmaker-intermediary . Phil Graham gave me notes somewhere .
 All I know is that a call was placed at something like eight o'clock in the morning and Lady Bird answered . "Lady Bird answered. She answered," the author says .
 Lyndon said he'd come up but Jack said no, he'd go down to his apartment and Lyndon just accepted right away . Lyndon was the first person to accept Jack's invitation .
 "I don't know what had gone back and forth, and they all were rather surprised," she says . But she says she's "rather surprised" by the outcome .
 Joe and Phil waited on Senator Kennedy on the Tuesday and said he had to put Johnson on the ticket . Kennedy was in the middle of the night to speak to the couple .
 "Phil was called in to kind of put it together. Then later later the thing seemed to get off the tracks and Phil was called . Then later, Phil was kind of called in .
 President Barack Obama has been in the spotlight for more than a decade . He says he's proud of his work in politics, but that's not all he says about it .
 "If I saw him in the street I was going to make a point to just glare at him and cross over to avoid him," she says . "No, no, that was three weeks ago. You know, no," she recalls .
 Jack would never get in anything so deep that you've lost all chance of conciliation. Now he's done x,"" You know, I mean, in politics things do change so quickly," Jack would often say that .
 Palmerston used to say there are no permanent friendships or alliances, there are only permanent interests . Palmerston said there were no permanent alliances or friendships, there were only permanent interest .
 Bob Greene: I'd get terribly emotional about anyone, whether it was a politician or a newspaper person who would be unfair, but he always treated it so objectively, as if they were people on a chess board . Greene: "He never got—I mean, I would get terribly
 "How could you if you were mad at all those people, then you may need to work with them again later," he said .
 'I think women should never be in politics. So, it's the only way to be effective,' says Hillary Clinton . 'It's one reason I think women shouldn't be politicians,' she says .
 In Los Angeles, everyone felt as soon as Lyndon attacked the ambassador, that this finished him. He was a great realist in that way, because I remember in Los Angeles,. Everyone felt . as soon . as . soon as he attacked the . ambassador, he said .
 Too many people had seen John Ford films, which I didn't—*2 John Connally was the one who was going around about saying Mr Ken—about Addison's disease too . Too many of the films had been seen by people who had seen them .
 "I just can't stand Governor Connally. The day before Jack died in Texas, I said to him, he said, "I just . can't . stand Governor Connally. And then, you know, the day before he died, he told him, "
 "He was so pleased with himself and he'd spend all our times in the car telling Jack, I guess, how far he'd run ahead of him in Texas," he said . "He'd spend most of our times talking to Jack, he'd tell Jack, a guess,
 Jack said, "Oh, well, he's been making up with a lot of businessmen down here" Jack said Jack said he had "a lot of support he didn't have before" President Obama said he has "made up"
 Nellie Connally was refusing to ride with Yarborough . Connally and Yarborough refused to ride together . Yarborough was the star of the show .
 Stevenson drive at Los Angeles were George Ball, Bill Wirtz, and Tom Finletter . Ball, Finletter were the top three men on the Stevenson drive . Ball and Finletter worked together in the early 1950s .
 'It's hard for men to make up first in a family, in a rather intimate way,' she says . 'And he loved that, because I think it was hard for him to make it up first,' she adds .
 "I can't do it in my life outside marriage, but he did that same thing outside. But he did it outside marriage," she says . "He did the same thing," she adds .
 "Oh, his temperament was terribly even, except when he'd be in pain for a long period of time," he says . "He'd done the three or four usual things, which is go stay on crutches four days," he adds .
 "If it just seemed to stay on and on, he couldn't shake it, then he'd get very low, but just because of that," he said . He said he'd "get very low" if he could not shake it off .
 "I guess, after the Senate thing, it didn't seem to be as much of a problem anymore," he says . "I'm not sure how long it will be a problem," he adds .
 When he got in the White House, he took this nap every day—it was just forty-five minutes, he said . When he was in the House, Obama took a nap a day .
 He'd come—who could be bothered to get in your pajamas for forty-five minutes? —and he'd hit that pillow and go to sleep and wake up again . He'd go to bed and go home again .
 "It would take me forty-five minutes to doze off, but it was so good for him. I mean, I couldn't sleep," she says . "I couldn't doze," she adds .
 "Then all his back and his stomach and everything weren't always plaguing him," he said . "Then then all the back and the stomach" was plaguing .
 He never was in better health or spirits than all his White House years . And so he never seemed to be in a better health .
 Sometimes, in a campaign, he would take one tiny little sleeping pill . Never—just always— always— never— just always, he said .
 "If you got in late and you had to get up early, you were in some awful smelly hotel bedroom," he says . "You had to be in some smelly, smelly rooms," he adds .
 The American Legion had had a convention in that hotel there before and there were whiskey bottles under all our mattresses . I remember once there was a whiskey bottle under the mattress because of the American Legion .
 "Well, you know, just to make sure he got to sleep so he'd be awake the next day," she says .
 I remember I tried not to take any, and you'd toss and turn, so then I'd borrow one of his sometimes . I remember trying to not take any of them, and I'd borrowed one of them sometimes. I remember not taking any .
 You were in Hyannis Port all the summer of '60, during the special session . You were there all summer of that summer .
 The first debate I saw in my house in Hyannis and had people down from Boston. People from Boston also came to Hyannis to watch it .
 "He wasn't moaning or groaning or worried or anything. And, you know, was so confident— no, not so confident," he said .
 Nixon called me up at the one in Washington the minute it was over, because he said on the phone they had the temperature here down to thirty degrees below zero, or something, because I guess Nixon had perspired in the first one—sort of laughing .
 Jack always told me the thing that changed his '52 campaign was his appearance on Meet the Press with Lodge with Lodge, Lodge . "Jack told me that he changed his campaign in '52," Lodge said .
 The first debate was—lI always thought it, but I was so glad that it was just so obvious. Well, that first debate .
 "Because you could just see he'd won it, and hear it in the street and everywhere," he said . "Because of the way he won it. Because of the win, he said. Because you could . just see him winning it," he added .
 President Kennedy thought that the debate would be a great opportunity, if he could get it, but didn't suppose that Nixon would go along . Was there any talk before that about the debate? "I mean, the President obviously thought that . The President obviously didn't think that Nixon .
 This was his great miscalculation. No, I don't know what made Nixon finally decide to— Nixon finally decided to . This was Nixon's great mistake. No. I don’t know what led Nixon to decide to .
 He'd been a champion debater at Whittier College and thought that he could win. And I think he did it because he'd been champion debaters . He thought he could do it, and he thought he would win .
 "I think he thought that this would make the experience for him, if he would get up there with this young kid. I'm sure there was no . I think he . thought that . this would be an experience for me, if I would get . up there, I think
 "I remember all those evenings when they were hashing out—a lot of people would come and they'd decide how the debates would be made up. But I remember the talk in evenings of which debate would be—wasn't one foreign policy, one domestic?—I remember the
 CNN's John D.A. Clinton: "You weren't around, along, all the time on the campaign. I know you weren't, because of John, weren't"
 "I mean, he'd be telling people what to do. Because whenever he was home you'd hear him calling," she says . "Whenever he was . home you would hear him call," she adds . "He'd be . telling people how to do," she said .
 "I think he always wanted to see what Bobby reacted — how Bobby would react. Didn't always take it, as in the case of Lyndon Johnson, but he did," she says . "He always wanted the president to see how Bobby reacted," she adds .
 "I was so glad Mr Kennedy had a chance to do something. Then his father was always—you know, I was so proud of him," she says .
 He'd talk to his father too, but more to hear what his father reported . But he'd talk with him too, too, to see what his dad reported .
 "Jack made a speech in Connecticut. That's the first place we ever went when we married, and Jack made it in Connecticut," she says .
 "It seemed to me he was really running the whole show himself. As far as whatever I saw, it seemed to be him running the show himself"
 There'd be two chairmen and which one would be the one . Ted Sorensen would have been the chairman, but not the one who had a fight .
 "All those things Bobby would have to do, so that those people wouldn't get mad at Jack," he says . "Jack" would do those things to keep Bobby from getting mad at the people .
 Jack had to be so tough for Jack. That's another reason . He got the sort of image of being someone people disliked, but he had to work hard .
 "It's so nice to have someone for you who can fight your fight," she says . "Be the one that people get mad at—not at you," she recalls Bobby Kennedy .
 The candidate could never be the one to leave the room, so Frank Morrissey would have to haul him out of the room . Just the way Frank . Morrissey used to tell me that the candidate could not be the . one to . leave the . room, he said .
 "We woke up in Boston so we must have slept there the night before. Oh, no," he says . "Oh, no" He says he slept in Boston .
 Cornelius Ryan had written The Longest Day, with a print of a picture of the longest day .
 Jack started questioning him all about The Longest Day and the this and the that part of it . So then Jack started asking him all of the things he had to do with the film .
 President Obama's son-in-law is the president of the U.S. House of Representatives in New York City, New Jersey, on Capitol Hill .
 "I know we lay out on the porch with blankets on us, sort of in the afternoon in the sun," she says . But she says she and her family lay out in the evening sun in front of the house .
 "Bobby's house had been turned into just a, you know, command post," he says . "I mean, radios, telephones, boards, workers. Then he'd go over," he adds .
 "Oh, no, he wouldn't talk about it. He wouldn't speculate about things anymore," he said . "He wouldn't say anything anymore," she said .
 He was picking Cornelius Ryan's brains about The Longest Day . "It was—you had what he loves -- his fish chowder," he said .
 "You knew that the really bad part wasn't going to get until night. Then we'd take a little walk," she says . "Then we'd go out for a walk because you know that the real bad part was going to be night."
 "I forget which house we had dinner at, but afterwards we were all watching it in our house," she said . "And then—then—then, afterwards, we all had dinner," she added .
 President Jack Nixon said to Jack, "Oh, you know, now you're President now,"" and he said, ""No, no"" very quietly .
 "I watched until, I guess, about 11:30 or twelve and then everyone knew that it would be an all-night thing," he says . "So I watched until ... about 11,30 or 12," he adds .
 "Jack came up and sort of kissed me goodnight," she says . "One by one we just sort of hugged each other, and they were all going to wait up all night," she adds .
 When I woke up in the morning, I went flying into his room to see— just to hear the good news—to hear that he'd heard sometime while he'd been awake . "No, there wasn't anything. So when I woke . I went . up in his room
 Yes, he went to bed I think about four or something, and this was about a quarter of nine or eight thirty . Yes, yes, yes. Yes, I think I did . He had gone to bed at about four .
 "Everybody walked around in raincoats. Then you'd get up and then everybody walked around" Then you would get up, then everybody would walk around . Then they'd get out of the room and get back into the room .
 "I guess it was about noon or one o'clock that the word finally came. Then the press people were sort of gathering," he says . "Then the press began to gather and I guess the press ... gathered"
 Mr Kennedy didn't want to come down to the Armory and Mr Kennedy did not want to go . Then we were all going to go down to . The Armory . Mr Kennedy was going to be there, but he didn't like to come .
 "I often used to think whether it was superstition or not, I mean he wasn't quite sure, but if it was that way, he wanted to have that on his side," she says .
 "I think you couldn't be brought up the way he was without just thinking— Well, obviously he accepted the religious sort of structure of existence and belief in a God and he believed that . He liked his children to be raised as good Catholics, and believed in Sunday Mass, and
 "You don't really start to think about those things until something terrible happens to you. No, he did believe in God but he didn't—He didn't think about God," he said .
 "It was really a little ritualistic thing. Yeah, but he'd do it so quickly it was really ritualistic," she said .
 He'd come in and kneel on the edge of the bed and say them, you know. He would kneel . He would say them on top of bed . He'd say them .
 "It was obviously just like a little childish mannerism, I suppose like brushing your teeth or something. But, you know, it was obviously—it was obviously ... like brushing or something."
 Bishop Hannan "always liked the one he always liked the most," says Bishop . "I guess that was more because of politics and everything down here," he says .
 Father Cavanaugh was a great friend of his father's and, you know, was a rather liberal priest . Oh, and then Father Cavanavanic was a very liberal priest, he says .
 "In the beginning when we got married, I know they were having a big fight, but by the time he was President he liked him," she said . "He liked him. In the beginning," she added .
 Cardinal Spellman "really changed" during his time with Jack, President Obama says . "He really changed. He really changed," he says .
 "He said all the things—the right things—what a Catholic should be saying," says Pope Francis . "Yeah, and he said the right things," he says .
 No, that was my impression because I significantly recall hearing him on Cardinal Spellman. No. That was not the impression of him, it was the impression he had of him .
 "Last Hurrah" is "last Hurrah-ish and the crusty way he speaks," she says . "He's sort of Last Hurrahishish," she adds .
 This came on later, didn't it, because as you say at the beginning Cushing was not that way . But this came on along later, he says, because it was not the same thing .
 "You know, he really was trying to just slit Jack's throat all the time and wouldn't be a help," he says . "He really was ... trying to ... slit his throat every time," she says .
 Cushing would make the right statement and answer to that, but Spellman never would . Put out a big—Cushing would be the right answer and answer, he says . Spellman would make a big statement, but he never would.
 So many of the Catholics were so to the right—to the right of Goldwater, Goldwater . So many Catholics were . to the . right . Goldwater was so right that Goldwater would have been .
 When Jack would go to confession, there'd be long lines at Christmas and Easter, and he'd have to have a Secret Service man go stand in line for him . Jack would have to wait for him at Christmas or Easter .
 You'd have to stand about an hour, then he'd come over and just slip in the line, so nobody really knew who he was . Nobody really knew what he was, but he would slip into the line . He would slip over and slip in line .
 It would be at a little church in West Palm Beach, Florida, not the church that we usually went to on Sundays . "We would go to a church," she says. "Not the church we usually go to on Sunday."
 "You wouldn't want some men in front of the whole room. It's amazing how it was done without," he says . "I forgot my noon prayers,"" and "I missed Mass on Wednesday"
 "It always seemed to me that Bobby was more religious than the President," says President Obama . "Bobby was always more religious," says White House aide. "I'm not sure what happened to Bobby," he says .
 The FOURTH Conversation will take place at Hyannis Port on the day of the election . I think we stopped last time on the same day .
 "I know Marian and I came down for luncheon on the Friday after the election," she says . "We're going to have lunch with Marian," she adds. "I'm going to be very happy to have a friend in the U.S.
 I guess Jack went to Palm Beach and I went back to Washington because I was going to have John any minute . "Jack and John were going to be together at Palm Beach," he says . "I guess Jack ... went back and went to Washington," he adds .
 He must have gone to Florida for a couple of days for a rest, then he'd come back to Washington, D.C. He says .
 "Yes, and then when he came back Thanksgiving," he says . "He was back and forth all the time," he adds . "Yes. Yes. Yes, yes," he said .
 "Jjust turned around his plane and then he stayed at our house in Georgetown all the time, forming his cabinet and everything and marching over to the hospital about three times a day," she says .
 The President was for a long time uncertain as between Rusk and Bill Fulbright . Rusk was the President of the United States. Fulbright was the Secretary of State of the State of America . Fulbright died in a plane crash in 1964 .
 Caroline walked in with her shoes on at the start of a conference in Florida . Caroline walked out with shoes on .
 JFK opposed Fulbright on the ground that Fulbright, because of his position on segregation, wouldn't be, you know, hot for Africa. I think that Bobby was opposed to Fulbright . The White House was inaugurated January 21, 1961 .
 The Kennedys all came back and then it was just a madhouse. You see, that's a time that I won't be very good on because I was really quite weak and we had one little bedroom in the back of the house. We had one small bedroom .
 "I was really in bed most of the time. So I'd really see Jack in our room," she says . "We were in bed in our rooms," she adds .
 Dean Rusk, you know, I thought he was ... a rather compassionate man. He seems to be a compassionate man, I said . He said, "He seemed to be the sort of compassionate man"
 "When you meet him, you think much more of him than when you know things he could have done and isn't doing," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 "He gives the impression of great intelligence and he's always awfully good in defining a situation. That's absolutely right," he said .
 Former President Barack Obama spoke of how it used to drive him crazy in the White House when he asked for answers about the Russians .
 Dean Rusk seemed to be overtaken by that apathy and fear of making the wrong decision . Rusk seems to be overcome by apathy, fear, and apathy .
 Jack just felt a terrible guilt—I mean, he wondered how he could get him out of the next time without hurting him . But Jack was loyal and, you know, Jack felt terrible guilt .
 Former Secretary of State John Kerry says he's always wondering who he could have as secretary of state the next time .
 McNamara was one, but that wasn't really definite—Bundy?—but just someone strong there . McNamara is one of a few strong personalities in the U.S. history .
 He didn't want to hurt the man, but he just knew something had to be done there . The man was arrested and charged with robbery .
 "I don't know if it's true or not—that Lyndon loves Dean Rusk. And now I keep reading in the papers," he says . He says he doesn't know whether he loves Rusk .
 McNamara always has the capacity, first, to control his own department and then to make recommendations . Rusk will find the same thing and that—the trouble is the contrast between Rusk and McNamara, he says .
 He was going to get rid of J Edgar Hoover—who's just been signed up again again . He's just signed up with the FBI again, but he's just got back on the job .
 "That just seed of doubt. And which again shows ... that's why I told you I was so angry at Ted Sorensen," she said .
 McNamara really had this worship for Jack, and then he said, well fine, that he'd love to be it . McNamara said, "Well, well, that's fine, but he'd rather be it"
 "I mean, he didn't like having to do it or anything, but he wasn't going to give him the State Department," he said .
 Governor Stevenson would get the UN and not State, which he wanted . Governor Stevenson wanted the UN, but he wanted State of State .
 "I remember their conference on the doorstep was rather vague or Stevenson said he didn't have anything to say, or something funny," she says .
 Stevenson had never lifted one finger to help him, he said . Well, why should he give him? He said . Stevenson never lifted a finger .
 Jack took on all the people who had been against him or for someone else . But yet, it wasn't just bitterness or that, because look at all of the people he took on was against .
 He thought Stevenson had a real disease of being unable to make up his mind . Stevenson irritated him. He thought that man had a . real disease . of being . unable to . make up a mind and that irritated him .
 "I don't think he could have borne to have him around every day coming in complaining as secretary of state about something," says Hillary Clinton .
 "I really don't think Stevenson would have been as good as Fulbright," he says . "I think it would have just driven Jack crazy," he adds. "I mean, it would've been an awfully difficult relationship"
 The White House has been in touch with the White House since President Obama took office in 2009 . President Obama has been criticized for his lack of transparency in his administration .
 Fulbright appealed to him because he thought the fact that the Senate knew Fulbright would mean that they'd have confidence . And I think that's one reason why Fulbright appeals to him, he said .
 If only he'd been picked—yeah, then Lyndon would like him and everything . "Yeah, then he'd like him," he thought. "If only he had been picked, Lyndon would have liked him"
 "Apparently at the second meeting he thought it might be all right, but you know, he sort of agreed at the end," he said . "He sort of . agreed at . the end. Though apparently at the . second meeting, he thought . it might . be OK,
 I mean, we'd been to their house for dinner for dinner a few times and I knew Phyllis Dillon. "I mean, I knew [Dillon] a little bit," he said .
 "They were one of the few people whose house we went to dinner to—occasionally, as sort of a friend, but never terribly close. So they were ... not terribly close," he says .
 President Barack Obama's cabinet members were "really our best friends," he says . Obama says of all the cabinet members, "they were really our best friend"
 "The only ones we really saw in the evening or at our private parties were them and McNamara," the McNamaras. "They were the only ones I really saw," he says .
 The Dillons were the only ones we ever had dinner with just the four of us . But the Dillons weren't the first time we had dinner together .
 The McNamaras and the Dillons would come to the private parties— those dances and things . The McNamaraas and Dillons were among those who attended private parties . The Dillons' daughter says she is proud of her father's legacy .
 Did putting Bobby in the cabinet cause a lot of anger? "Oh, that was awful because—I suppose that was Mr Kennedy completely," he said . "That was Mr . Kennedy completely"
 Bobby told me that once, after November, that he would not be surprised if he was leaving the White House . "Bobby told me about this in the weeks before leaving," he said .
 He said it was Mr Kennedy who really did it—and he said Bobby didn't think it would be good for Jack and Jack could see the problems it presented, though he never would say that to Bobby .
 Bobby really went into this sort of slump that people say he was in since Jack's death . "Bobby really went really into this kind of slump," he said. "And Bobby really ... went into ... slump"
 He didn't know what he wanted to do and again wanted to go away and teach . "He wanted to be able to go and teach," he said. "He didn't want to know what to do"
 He just didn't want it and finally—you know, he'd keep saying no or, he hadn't decided, or this or that . One day Jack just called him in and said, ""Well, you have to,"" or something, and it was decided .
 Eunice was pestering Jack to death to make Sargent head of HEW because she wanted to be a cabinet wife . That shows you what Bobby is like and how he was just doing everything he could to get out of it .
 "It shows you some people are ambitious for themselves and Bobby wasn't," she said . "You know, it shows ... some people were ambitious," she added .
 Abbie Rowe, National Park Service/John F Kennedy Library and Museum, Boston . What do you think the President would have had a mind for Bobby, if not the Justice—bringing him into the White House in some way? I don't know .
 "He was so used to working with Bobby and having him sound out decisions with, so I suppose it might have been that domestic," she says . "I suppose it was that domestic—sort of like Bundy, only not. But he was used to work with Bobby"
 He was absolutely definite that he wanted Mac down with him and he decided in the course of December down in Palm Beach he decided that he would be the man for that job .
 President Obama ordered troops to Cuba after the Bay of Pigs in Cuba . The U.S. Army arrived in Cuba in 1961, Cuba broke up the Cuban blockade of Cuba . President Bush ordered troops from Cuba to Cuba in 1962 .
 The interregnum in Florida was rather a painful day, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 "Mr Kennedy's charm" was before West Virginia, but that was before that, sorry. You know, again Mr Kennedy's charming," she said. "Oh, no, no ... sorry."
 Franklin wanted to be secretary of the navy and McNamara said that he couldn't have him . McNamara refused to have him because he wanted to work in the Navy .
 Franklin always thinks that Henry Ford told McNamara he couldn't have him . Henry Ford always thinks McNamara told him he wouldn't be able to have him, he says . Franklin: "Some convoluted reasoning there. Some convoluted reasoning"
 Henry Ford or McNamara had a meeting with Franklin Franklin, historian says . "I do think it might have been," he says . Henry Ford and McNamara met with Franklin in the 1930s .
 Franklin is bright and he's capable of hard work and I think he's been—all I hear of him is the good job in Commerce . Franklin is a bright kid and capable of working hard, he says. He says he has been good at Commerce .
 Jack was so happy to see—you know, at last there was something Franklin wanted, he said . So, on the way home in the car, Jack said, "At last there were things Franklin wanted" Franklin was happy to find a new home .
 Jack owed him a lot for Arizona, which he took away from Lyndon and brought to Jack . Jack owed Lyndon a lot of Arizona .
 Jack said he's one of the best secretaries of the interior. And he was bright and he really was bright, says President Obama .
 When Jack interviewed him, he just had no ideas or was just "just" depressed . Jack was really depressed after that. He said he had no idea what he was going on .
 I wonder why Jack just didn't make him that in the beginning. Yeah, but I mean, I wonder ... why Jack didn't just make him famous? "Yeah, but ... I wonder," she says .
 He had a sense that the agricultural problem was insoluble and that was the last cabinet office filled, he says . He says that was a sense of urgency .
 I mean, a couple of people like Loveless and— yes—particularly Middle Westerners. I think yes, yes . I mean . I'm not just a Middle Westerner, but I'm a good guy, I think .
 "I don't remember any problem or anyone else they were considering besides Hodges," she says . "Well, I don't think there was any problem," she adds .
 A southerner business would trust, or something. Nice old man, he says . A nice old man would trust a business that would trust .
 I can't remember any comments he ever made and what kind of secretary of commerce Hodges was . Hodges is a former Secretary of Commerce Secretary . He says Hodges' comments were never made public .
 I mean, I don't know about being postmaster general, but just corny and just—I don't think—corny, he says . "I'm not sure. I mean ... I'm just trying to be corny," he adds .
 President knew Douglas Douglas, Douglas, and Stewart Udall, before . Now all of the members of the cabinet, really the only ones whom the President knew moderately before, besides Bobby, were Douglas and Douglas Udall .
 Rusk and McNamara and Hodges and Day, of course, we forgot . But Rusk, McNamara, Hodges, Day, Day and Goldberg, we forget .
 "There was never any doubt in his mind that he wanted Arthur for that job. Yes, and he knew Goldberg," he said . Goldberg knew Goldberg, and there was no doubt he wanted the job .
 John Sutter: "I remember how sad he was when . He thought Wirtz was wonderful—a wonderful man. And he was sad when he was appointed to the Supreme Court .
 "You know, he really hated to lose Arthur in Labor but he really cared about his appointments to the Supreme Court," he says . "He really hated . losing Arthur in . Labor but cared about appointing him to Supreme Court"
 Arthur just thinks he's just the way all the Supreme Court justices get to think of themselves . Arthur just thought he's a Supreme Court justice . Arthur thinks that's the way he thinks of himself .
 "I was so amazed that Arthur would rule that way and—that thing they just passed, where you can write anything about people in public office," she says . "I'm so amazed," she recalls .
 When you think, ads like that in the paper was partly what killed Jack, it's not what killed him, he says . "When you think of Jack, you can't say what happened to him," he says. "You can't blame Jack for his death."
 In the early days when he used to come for breakfast all the time, for the labor bill, they were obviously talking about the labor law . Has that always been so or is it? Well, it's not always so true .
 Arthur Goldberg started to see much of Arthur Goldberg after the presidency . But he didn't see a lot of him as a president until after the White House, he says .
 Apart from Rusk and from Day, the President is fairly well satisfied with the cabinet, says the President .
 Day was just sort of a—I don't know—he was always being in little skits at the multiple sclerosis ball. Yeah, Day was sort of ... a ... kind of a ... sort of an ... a little bit of a comedian, he says .
 President's instinct for people is his capacity to pick people whom he knew rather slightly, even Lovett and McCloy, for example . One of the interesting things is the President's instincts for people because he knew very little about them .
 "Dean Rusk comes over so marvelously when you're talking to him. He could tell so much by talking to them, though I guess, with Dean Rusk, he made a mistake, but as you say, he did."
 "He'd talk to them— that'd be the main thing, of course, then he'd get a lot of reports from Sarge," he said . He'd get to them, he said. He'd talk . That's what he'd do .
 He'd have all these reports and things, and things . other people would say about them, and then they'd come . Then they would come, he'd have these reports, and they would be published . He would have all the reports, things, that other people . would say
 "It's like an interview if you're going to be accepted in a school or something," she says . "I'm like a kid who's going to get accepted in school," she said. "I want to be able to go to school. It's like a school interview
 "I mean, he'd be in that living room with them for a couple of hours and they'd just talk," he says . "They would just talk. I mean, they would talk. They would talk."
 "I know how disillusioned he was with Loveless. Later I told you what he said about McNamara," he said . And then when he'd come over to see me in the hospital, he would— he would .
 "I should have asked him all that, but when you live with a man who's so busy and everything, you don't want to just question him, question him," she says .
 "You pick it up by what he tells someone else or what he wants to tell you," he says . "I might have been dying to know. So you pick up on what he's telling someone else," he adds .
 "Now my mind has gone blank about so many things that I know I remembered before. Now my mind is blank," she says .
 Clark had been looking into it, you know, making great things, so that everybody who was appointed to something spent those months between November and January literally at the desk of the man they would succeed . So, Clark .
 "It'll be a goldfish bowl, the Secret Service, I'll never see my husband," she says . It'll be "a gold fish bowl," she adds . "It will be a Goldfish bowl," the actress says .
 "Then once Jack was nominated and everything, then you were so happy for him. Then once once ... then you got so proud of him," she said .
 "It was really the happiest time of my life. And then once you got in it, I mean, you were just so happy for him," she says .
 "I didn't realize the physical closeness of having his office in the same building and seeing him so many times a day. It was when we were the closest," he says .
 "I used to worry all the time about getting out of it. Then once we were in the White House, I used to think all of the time," he says .
 "In the beginning, he used to sort of treat it as a joke and didn't like to talk about it," he says . "Oh, I'll be an ambassador to Italy,"" he'll say, "Oh,"" or something .
 "I told Bobby that I was so worried and that if only Jack could run for the Senate, you know, have Teddy's seat," he says . "Jack said they wouldn't take two brothers from there," Bobby says .
 Bobby went and spoke to Teddy and came back and told me that Teddy said that he would not run when Johnny—that's what the brothers always called him—was out, which is so touching because that was the highest thing that I think Teddy could ever have hoped for. So Bobby
 I told Jack that because I always remember him saying how John Quincy Adams came back and was a congressman all his life, and I thought he could be a senator and have a base and do all his other things from there . And anyway, I told him that because he always remembers him
 "No, I never, never would do that. And he was touched that I cared so much to be so worried," she said . "He said, 'No, he said, "I never, would never do that."
 Jack, BOBBY, and TEDy, joined by Ted Kennedy in the 1960s . Yes.
 There is Bobby making Teddy give up his prize, which Teddy does gladly, and then Jack refusing . Bobby makes Teddy give away his prize and Jack refuses to . Teddy gives up the prize, but Jack refuses .
 "Jack was thinking about being either publisher of a great paper or—I don't know. And just towards the end of the end, Jack was thinking ... of being a good paper or a great man," he said .
 Bundy said to me the other night that he thought he might have ended up in television or something . Bundy said he thought that he might end up in TV or something. Bundy thought he was going to be in television . Bundy: "I'm not sure what I'm going to do
 "Think we could buy the Washington Post?" asked Ben Bradlee . Or something, rather jovially, but you could always tell when he was toying with an idea that pleased him in his mind . Sometimes he talked to him about it .
 "I think he would have gone around the world, written a book, done something with his library, and then really entered into that," says the author of the novel .
 Well, I just assumed we'd have lived in Cambridge, but maybe we wouldn't have. Well, maybe we would have. Maybe not . Well, it's not so easy to say .
 CNN.com: "I thought we should still live in Washington, but now I know that would have been completely wrong. Or then I thought we would still live here," she says . She says it's time to get back to Washington .
 It would be too hard for an ex-president to live in this city, he says . The city is so oriented to the new president that it would be difficult for him to live there .
 He spoke to me about living in Cambridge part of the time . So maybe we'd have lived in Cambridge, maybe maybe we would have lived there .
 The newspaper too he also also— You know, that would have been— Considered as a possibility. The newspaper also would be a possibility, he said .
 "It just made me so sad, because Jack could have had his happiest years later," Bundy said . Bundy said to me the other night: "Jack could have [Bundy] had a happy life," she said .
 "Anything he said people would have listened to so. And you know, anywhere he went, he would have been," he says .
 Bundy said Bundy said after a while there would have been such a demand for him to come back that they might have had to do something about seeing if you could have a third term . Bundy said that after a . while there . would have such a . demand for such a return that
 The president just has to be watching everyone, everywhere, which only someone young and brilliant like Jack can do . The president has to watch everyone and everyone in the White House .
 'You'd have been just scared all the time, and knowing you had no power to do anything. So you'd have had to do nothing,' she said .
 Lincoln's burdens, the way you look at Lincoln's pictures, over the years, and how much tireder and older he got. Then you could see that it really did . Lincoln was tired and tired when he died, he said .
 "Though he never spoke about—he would sometimes speak of the cares of it, but he'd never, you know, moan or feel sorry for himself," he said . "He would speak of ... the cares, but never, ever speak of himself"
 "I think once Jack was elected, or maybe whenever I thought I might be the president's wife," she says . "Yeah, I think once ... maybe whenever ... I thought ... I might have been the wife"
 President-electial candidate says he had a lot of books and things from the Library of Congress sent to Florida .
 David Finley and John Walker were in bed in the Queen's Room after inauguration . "I was in bed for about a week in the queen's room after inauguration, but I can remember seeing David . Finley in bed and maybe John Walker,22 so it started right away,"
 President Barack Obama visited the White House on a tour with Mrs. Michelle Obama . President Obama has been in Washington since 2009 .
 The first lady was supposed to show the new one around, but it's not customary for her to show it around, she says . "Well, this might be rather interesting, but—I'd read in the paper that it was customary for the first lady to show her new one
 "It was the last thing I wanted because, as I say, I was about to have this child," she said . "I was going to be having this child. And it was the first thing I had ever wanted," she added .
 Tish knew her or somehow, so she used to meet Mary Jane, sneak away for lunch somewhere . Tish used to sneak away from Mary Jane to meet her for lunch . But Tish was too scared to go out with Mary Jane .
 Tish liked Mary Jane very much, and she'd tell her, you know, things that you ought to know, she said . Tish was very fond of Mary Jane, and Mary Jane was a good friend .
 "This is my house, and nobody's going to see it," she says of Eisenhower's visit to the U.S. President . "Nobody will see it. Nobody will see that," she said .
 I was in the hospital and I had John and it was all rather dramatic. So then I was  in the . hospital and . had John . It was all quite dramatic. It was a rather dramatic thing to do.
 "I got out of the hospital about noon and we were to leave, I think, at two-thirty for Florida. And I got out about noon about noon," he says .
 I'd never done anything but walk around the room and, just to be boring, after a caesarean it's very hard to walk and all that for a while . I'd had to do nothing but walk, and I was very proud of my daughter .
 There was never any wheelchair and you just were dragged around every floor, and not even asked to sit down, and brought in and out of the—past all the press. And there was never even a wheelchair, and there were never any .
 "I couldn't stop crying for about two days. And when I got back, I really had a weeping fit," she said . "I really had to stop crying," she added .
 "It was something that takes away your last strength when you don't have any left," he says of his suicide . "It's something you take away when you have no strength," he adds .
 "People used to say she'd go crazy when she'd hear all the things that we were doing," she says . "Then, I guess, people used to ... go crazy," she adds .
 The first lady is doing things that you should have done, or something else . She's not always nice to hear about her .
 I don't blame her for that, but you'd think she might have been a little sympathetic before . She might be more sympathetic now, but she might not have been sympathetic before, she says .
 President EISENHOWER MEETS with President-Election KENNEDY in the Oval Office . Abbie Rowe, National Park Service/John F Kennedy Library and Museum, Boston .
 President Eisenhower was fine when they went -- the first meeting . How did the President and President Eisenhower go together?
 "He pressed a button and they were there in three minutes and we flew away," he said . "We flew away. And he pressed the button," he added .
 "I don't think he thought much of him. You know, Jack saw that all that could have been done, I mean, how really he kept us standing still and gave away," she says .
 In the White House, in the door of Jack's -- the sill to Jack's office in his bedroom -- we thought there were termites . In the Oval Office, Jack's bedroom window was filled with termites, says President Obama . The termites were thought to be termites
 I think that must have been when I was either in the hospital or— That would have been before, right after the election. That must have happened before or after, he says . He says he's not sure what happened to him .
 "How terribly bitter she was was. Nixon was and that she was just lying like a cadaver in, you know, this chair, just not moving, with this bitter, desperate face"
 I mean, I remember him telling me about it, but now I can't remember what he said . "I'm not sure what he told me," she says of her father's death .
 Kennedy told me to write everything down the first year I was married and I did, which is all just nothing . "Arthur Krock said to Dean Acheson, or something," he says . Kennedy told him to write down what Arthur Krock had to say to Dean .
 "All the years when I should have been writing things down, I wasn't," he says . "I wasn't. And all the years ... I was not. And that's why I'm not. It's a shame," he adds .
 Of the White House. He was interested in it . He was also interested in the library's East Room .
 "He'd always get so interested in anything that I cared about, but then he was nervous about it," she says . He'd always be nervous about anything that he cared about .
 I mean, he wanted to be sure it was done the right way, so he sent Clark Clifford to see me, he said . "I'm not going to let it happen, but I'm going to do it right now," he said. "It's a good thing to
 Everyone, America feels so strangely about it, and look at the Truman Balcony. Look at it, everyone feels so strange about it. Everyone, everyone, feels so differently about it .
 "It won't be like the Truman Balcony,""22 and then I told him all about Harry du Pont2 and all the people we hoped to get," he said . And I said, ""It won’t be like a Truman Balcony.22
 "People weren't going to give up good pieces of furniture, or you'd have ninety-nine cups of tea with some old lady and she'd give you fifty dollars," he said . "You know, people weren't . going to be giving up good furniture or you would have
 Jack McNally in charge of tours of the White House said it would be an "absolute outrage and desecrate our nation's" White House, he says . McNally said it was "an absolute outrage" to have money exchanging hands there and everything .
 McNally often teased McNally about the success of his guidebook . McNally's guidebook was selling a lot of books, but McNally would tease him .
 "I was so happy that I had ...could do something that made him proud of me," she said . "I'm so proud of him. I'm so happy"
 I was never any different once I was in the White House than I was before, but the press made you different . I was really—I was never really different. I was just a normal person, but I was a normal guy .
 Everyone thought I was a snob and hated politics. Suddenly, everything that'd been a liability before— your hair, that you spoke French, and you didn't bake bread with flour up to your arms— was a liability . Suddenly, everyone thought that you were a snobby and
 Jack never made me feel that I was a liability to him, but I was. Well, Jack never . Jack never said that he didn't want to be a liability, but he was .
 "I was so happy for Jack, especially now that it was only three years together that he could be proud of me then," she said . "Anything the First Lady does that's different, everyone seizes on"
 John F Kennedy Library and Museum, Boston, purchased the images as gifts for his wife . He was terribly proud of his work .
 "He liked to sort of talk about furniture and paintings, which are things that he didn't—had not known a great deal about at one point in his life"
 The first thing he saw was that he really started to care about himself. And then it was the first thing that he saw ... he really cared about himself, he said . He said: "I'm not going to be afraid of it. I'm not scared of it."
 A thing about his taste—when Boudin, the French—much more than decorator—he's really a scholar, from Jansen would be around, he'd say how to arrange a room or hang pictures,“ I'd be in doubt about.“
 I'd ask Jack what he thought without telling him what Boudin thought. Then I'd tell Jack what I thought . Then I would ask Jack if he thought, then tell him what he was thinking. Then he'd ask him what Jack thought .
 Jack, about five or six different times, which I have written down, would say the same as Boudin . Jack would say "Boudin" five or more times. Jack would have said the same thing. And Jack would not have said that .
 "He just had taste in every facet of his character," he says . "He had taste for people, for books, for sculpture, for furniture, for rooms, for houses," he adds .
 He bought our house in Georgetown because the doorknob was old, which he liked, and he liked the sort of old look of it . He bought the house because he liked it, and it was old .
 They were all from Klejman, except for one, who knew I used to collect drawings so he had gotten a couple of drawings from Wildenstein . Wildenstein is a well-known artist who has a long line of admirers .
 When I think that when we were first married, he always used to give me things he liked, like a letter of Byron or John Quincy Adams or something, which was fine . And when I think . I think when I . think that . when we . first . marriage, he
 "I could see the present that he wanted me to choose the most was this Alexandrian bracelet," she said . "And I could see it was this bracelet," the mother-of-one said .
 'I could just see how he loved it. And it was the simplest thing of all,' she says . 'It was the simple thing that all of us can do'
 He wouldn't say which one he wanted to give me, but I could tell so I chose it . So, you know, that was a special present, he said .
 "He wouldn't— Oh, well, I think he had Klejman send him," he says . "He'd talk to him on the phone and had him send up a lot of things," he adds .
 "All through dinner, he was locked in his room. And then he had about fifty things up in his . room because he'd been through," he said .
 Assyrian horse bit had been used in the wars against the Persians or something—Persian horse bit, maybe . And one of them was an Assyrian bit .
 He wanted to take it down and try it on Caroline's pony the next day to see if it really worked . The next day he wanted to try it out on his pony .
 "The next morning I was just laid out in the Queen's bed. With Dr. —well, the next morning, I was . laid out there in the queen's bed," she said .
 We were living at that end of the house then because our end was being painted . We were in the house at the time of the painting of the walls .
 Jack and President Truman burst in the door to President Truman . President Truman just turned scarlet. Jack and Truman burst into the door .
 'I don't think he'd ever seen a woman but his wife in bed in a nightgown before. I'm not sure what he'd seen before,' he said. 'I think he didn't think it was his wife'
 At night, we'd have supper always in the Lincoln Sitting Room on trays . And then at night, they would have supper in the little Lincoln sitting room . We would have trays in trays, not trays.
 "I never heard him really read the whole thing until Inauguration Day, but each part I remember listening, knowing that I'd heard it before," she says .
 "I was in bed most of the time. We had this small bedroom in Florida and there were so many people in the other part of the house," she says .
 Jack would come in with his cigar, puffing away, with a big pad of yellow pages . He'd sit on the edge of my bed and he'd read me some things he'd written . Then he'd flip them over, scribble something, and then he'd pile it
 He was just so happy then—he looked so well, you know, they were such happy days for him. He was so happy when he was alive, he said .
 "No, what he was doing then is solving everything that was coming up, he was dealing with it," he said . "No. No, what I was doing was solving everything . He was dealing it. He was solving it," the president said .
 "We'd get up for supper and then he might read some part in the library or ask his—the rest of his family or whoever was there," she says . "But then at night, we'd get ... there would be a lot of reading," she adds .
 Sam Rayburn® and Lyndon and Lady Bird came down once . There was always someone -- then there were always someone . Lyndon Johnson came down with Lady Bird .
 Jack would "grab up those big pages and stuff them in his briefcase" when he went back to Washington. So then Jack would grab up . Jack would then put them in a briefcase, he says .
 He came back early that week, as I recall, and you came up on Wednesday, probably, probably . "You came up, probably. You came up," he said. "I remember you coming up"
 You know, it was such a festive evening and I thought that snow was so pretty. You know that snow, you said, is so pretty, she said .
 "I just thought that's so sad when comedians do that. He was telling all these horrible jokes about marriage," she said . "I mean, the wife is a shrew, and the—the wife is the shrew," she added .
 "Well, it was like children waiting for Christmas or something that night that night," she said . "It was like a Christmas Eve," she added .
 "It was just such a night to share together because that night we were, you know, in the same bed," she says .
 "All the excitement, leaving our house. Then the next morning getting up and getting dressed, and the snowstorm," she says . "Then the next day getting up, getting dressed ... and the excitement"
 President Barack Obama has been in the White House since 2009 . The president and his staff had coffee in the Red Room before the inauguration . President Obama has had coffee with the president's staff before and after the election .
 Eisenhower: "Everybody was there drinking coffee and things. Eisenhower—it was very nice, you know, everybody was drinking coffee" Eisenhower says . Eisenhower: 'It's very nice to have everybody drinking coffee'
 As we left, I rode with Styles Bridges22 and Mamie Eisenhower to the Capitol . And as we left the Capitol.
 President Eisenhower and Jack came out afterwards or something and she said, "Look at Ike in his top hat" President Eisenhower . She said she was sitting in the car .
 "I kept thinking how those people have been taken care of all their lives," she said . "But anyway, anyway. I kept thinking ... how those [people] have been ... taken care," she added. "but anyway. But anyway."
 Robert Frost died at the hands of Cardinal Cushing and the lectern burning . Frost died in a house fire in Washington, D.C. He was killed in a firehouse fire .
 It was such a glare from the snow that he really couldn't see what was written on the paper . Well, you could see him, it was such an icy glare that he couldn't read .
 Lyndon got up and held his hat over it, but the poor man still couldn't see . Lyndon held it over, and then Lyndon held the hat over . Lyndon got it over .
 "Why didn't Jack kiss you after?" is one of the questions . "I never had a chance," he says . "Jack would never do there. He would never kiss there," he adds .
 "You had to march out in such order that I was about eight behind him —with women, or something," he says . "I was about 8 behind him --with women," he adds .
 'I so badly wanted to see him before the lunch, just to . see him alone,' she said . 'And I so badly . wanted him alone. And I . badly wanted him to see me alone. Just to see them alone'
 I went to a room with all the ladies, where they had sherry and coffee, and he was with the men. I went there with the ladies and there were sherry, coffee and sherry . The men were having coffee, while the women were having sherry with the
 "I caught up to him in the Capitol and, oh, I was just so proud of him," she said . "Oh, I'm just so so proud," she added .
 "There really were tears in his eyes. And there's a picture where I have my hand on his chin and he's just looking at me," she says .
 "I mean, that was so much more emotional than any kiss because his eyes really did fill with tears," she said . "He really did really do that. I mean, he really did that."
 I remember everybody was sending their little menu card around to be autographed, it was very jolly . It was a jolly time for the fans to send their menu cards around to get autographed .
 "We sort of sort of not quite knowing how to wave. Then we got in the car for that parade," she says . "I sort of didn't quite know how I wave," she adds .
 President Barack Obama visited the White House in 2008 . The president has been in office since 2009 .
 "He wanted to see every single bit of that parade. They had hot soup or something in that stand," he said . "They were having hot soup ... and he wanted to eat it"
 "They'd keep telling us how it would be running late and I left after a couple of hours because again, I was really so tired that day," she said . "He was just so proud and he was ... so proud," she added .
 He was the last person there, you know, and came in and there was a big reception downstairs . And, but he stayed until just nightfall . He stayed .
 "About 9 o'clock or something, when it was time to start getting dressed, again I couldn't get out of bed," she says . "I'm not going to be able to go to bed. And about 9:30am or something," she writes .
 She had two pills, a green one and an orange one, and she told me to take the orange one . And she had a green green one, she said to take it, and then she gave it to her .
 Dexadrine, which I'd never taken in my life, is a drug that I never take again . "Dexadrine" is a form of anti-depressants . "I never have taken it again," she says of the drug .
 "Thank God, it really did its trick because then you could get dressed. But thank God, I really did it," she said . "Thank you, thank you, but then you can get dressed"
 Jack came upstairs and he brought me down to the Red Room . And then Jack came, and he came upstairs . He brought me downstairs to meet with Jack .
 "He liked how I looked and he said something so nice and we went off to that ball. We all had a toast of champagne and he did—he liked how he looked," she said .
 The White House aide kept trying to be with Jack all evening and the other three were jumping in and out . "It was so funny with the aides, because the old aide, the head of the White House aides, kept trying, because of Jack," she said .
 Lyndon was right next to us at that one. Then we went to one at the Mayflower where Lyndon was . Lyndon Johnson was right beside us at the one .
 "I guess that pill wore off because I just couldn't get out of the car. And then we went to a third one at the Wardman Park and just on the way, it was like Cinderella and the clock striking midnight," she says .
 Jack said, ""You go home now,"" and sent home with that aide . And so Jack told him, "Go home now" and he sent home .
 Joe Alsop's first ball was the ball, and then he went on to Joe's . And I guess he went to all the other balls, then went to Joe Alop's .
 Kennedy was staying with Joe Kennedy when he was in Boston . Kennedy: "I was staying in with Joe then. I was staying there then. Joe was a good friend"
 "Sometimes I thought later I wish I'd been able to sort of share all that night with him," she says . "I'm not sure what happened to him, but I'm glad he was there," she writes .
 "He had such a wonderful time, and then he must have gotten home about three or four, but he came in and woke me up," she said . "But he had such an wonderful time," she added .
 Lincoln slept in the Lincoln Room then, so that was his first night in Lincoln's bed . Lincoln's first night was the first night he slept in his bed, Lincoln's room .
 The next morning when he woke up, very early, well, I was awake too, and so I went in that room and it's the sunniest room . Then the next morning, he said, 'I was awake. Well, I'm awake too. So I went
 "He'd come crashing back with Truman and Robert Frost," he says . "He went off with that wonderful springing step to his office," he adds .
 Jack was so like his father in that he hated to leave his house, whether it was Georgetown, the Cape, or even in the White House . "Jack hated to go out. He hated to . go out," his father said .
 "His father loved to stay home and he thought he had the best food and everything that's best in your house," she says of her father .
 Jack was brought up as long as everything was nice at home, he says . Jack was raised up in a loving home, his mother says .
 You'd have the Bartletts, or David Gore, who was around just after inauguration . You'd also have David Gore and David Bartlettts, who were around just before inauguration .
 "You went out more that first winter than later. Or if any of his family were down or ... Or if ... his family was down or— his family members were down," he said .
 "Jack loved Cooper. Once to Lorraine Cooper's because Jack—it was the first time we ever went out and Jack loved Cooper," she said .
 He didn't really want to go to that dinner because Lorraine's dinners were always so big, he said . He said he didn't want to attend that dinner .
 Jock Whitney was at Rowlie's and everybody—they found out about that because of the snowplows came and scraped off the street before or something . Snowplows had already scraped the street .
 "You'd think we went out every night, those were the only three times. So, because those three things caused such commotion—you'd think ... we went ... every night," she says . "You would think we were out all the time," she adds .
 "Maybe once in the spring again, we went to Joe's. Then we really stopped," she says . "We really stopped" "Joe's"
 "It proved such a production and everything. But we hardly ever went out after—you know, it proved such an enormous production," she said .
 He'd always work very late and you'd always have to juggle the children's naps or something so they'd be there when he came home . He worked very late, and you would have to do it so they could be there at the time .
 "If you were going out and you want to take a bath and change and leave, it was just a nuisance," she said . "And well, well, if you were ... going out ... it was a nuisance. And well, it's a nuisance."
 "I can only think of about four or five that we saw the whole time there. Really, not very many," he said . "I'm not sure how many of the things we saw were there."
 I remember the French—oh, The Last Year at Marienbad —oh, he hated that. He hated that . I remember . The French . The last year at Mariensbad was the last year of the French .
 Sometimes there'd be a USIA thing he'd want me to see or something, you know, something he'd done . Yeah, or sometimes there would be something he wanted to see .
 The children would come in and it was so incredible because they'd rush to tur on the television set and you'd hear this roar, full blast, of cartoons or that exercise man . And then the children would rush to watch cartoons or exercise man. And then they'd come in .
 Jack would be sitting in a chair with a tray in front of him, reading the morning papers or sheafs of all those briefing books to go over with Bundy . Bundy was "reading the fifty morning papers" Bundy would have been sitting in the chair reading the papers or briefing books
 "It was the bathroom that men could use after dinner. And I always thought it was so funny for people who used his bathroom," she says .
 All along his tub were all these little floating animals, ducks and pink pigs, things . Because all along his bathtub were all . The tub was filled with pink pigs and ducks .
 "He'd always come in before he went over to the office— come into my room," she says . "I mean, I'd only be half asleep or else I'd be having breakfast—and see me," she recalls .
 President Kennedy used to take Caroline over to the office with him every day . That would be about 9:30. And he used to play with her at the White House .
 "He'd be, I guess, over an hour having breakfast, reading the papers and taking a bath. He'd be ... having breakfast ... and then having a bath," she said .
 It used to be John's treat to walk to the office with him every day . And later on, he used to walk with him . He used to take him to his office every day.
 "He wasn't with us at Hickory Hill. Then he came back to us," he says . "He came back '57 and he was with us ever since," he adds .
 President Obama asked George W. Bush if he wanted to work in the White House, but he's just too old, he dropped . "Poor George, he really got the shakes," he said .
 He'd open the door so that some other slave could carry in Jack's breakfast tray . The door would be opened to let in some other slaves to carry in the tray .
 The only thing he did was pull open the curtains and then turn on the bath, and then he'd go up and all the little White House Mess boys were shining his shoes and everything . The White House mess boys would shine his shoes, and everything.
 "Never, unless he had a business lunch, you know, in the family dining room downstairs," she says . "Never" unless he was having a business lunge downstairs .
 He always kept our floor—we put in the dining room—downstairs . He'd keep all his business lunches downstairs downstairs .
 "It's so different from now, where everyone gets the tour of the bathrooms and things things," she says . "It was so different," she adds .
 He preferred to see people in his office rather than have luncheons, he said . "It seemed to be very—he was very ... he was very— he was ... very ... very quiet," he said. "He was very quiet"
 The White House is a very busy White House, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com senior editor.com.com .
 "He'd come up afterwards and still try to take whatever little nap he could. And then he would come up afterward," he said . "And then he'd come ... try to nap," he added. "Then he would try to sleep afterwards."
 He never took a nap before, but in the White House, he made up his mind he would because it was so good for his health . "I think he decided to take a nap in order to get his health back on track," he said .
 He'd always said Winston Churchill used to do it and he'd often say how much more, you know, staying power it gave him . He'd often said that Winston Churchill often said he used to use it to stay power . And he'd always always said he did it .
 "He'd get completely undressed and into his pajamas and into bed and go to bed and then wake up again. Well, it'd be forty-five minutes and he'd go to sleep," he says . "Well, it would be forty -five minutes," he
 "It would take me forty-five minutes to just snuggle down and start to doze off," she says . "I would take forty-seven minutes to snuggle into bed. It would take a forty-six-minute effort to get to sleep."
 I'd have lunch in there with him and then I'd close the curtains and open the window for his nap . I'd then wake him up from it from it . He would have lunch with him before he was woken up .
 "Forty-five minutes and he'd be back in his office. It would just be like clockwork," he says . It would have been like clock-work, he says. He says .
 He came to the White House in the best physical condition that he was ever in in in his life . Would he swim every day or was that only the later part after? "I don't think he did it," he said .
 "He played golf, sort of eighteen holes— all these things he hadn't been able to do for a long time. He played golf," he said . "He was able to play golf and do everything he'd never done before."
 "Suddenly his back went bad. He didn't walk around the driveway, he didn't swim, and suddenly he went bad" "He didn't get out of the house, he went to the pool, but suddenly he had a bad back," he said .
 "For the first time in his life, he'd really had from election to inauguration a lot of it in Florida, to play golf, to swim, to walk on the beach," he says .
 "I got so mad at her because then other doctors were trying to bring in Hans Kraus, who could build you up through exercises," she says . "You know, it wasn't until the next October," she recalls .
 Doctors are jealous of each other and she wouldn't let Kraus come in, she says . Well, all these doctors are so jealous of her, Kraus says . Kraus: "All these doctors were so jealous that she wouldn’t let him come in. Well,
 "I'd sat by so many times while doctors did things to Jack, well, doctors just pushed Jack all over the place," she says . "I really got mad and got in there and got the back surgeon and the other—everybody"
 Kraus started these series of exercises which he did every evening with the navy chief . Kraus: "Kraus and Kraus did these exercises with each other every evening"
 "You know, like lift—trying to touch your toes or . lying on your stomach and trying to raise one leg," she says . "I'm trying to lift. You know that lift is like lifting your toes."
 "I mean, he still was in pain a lot that winter," he says . "Oh, and it went out really badly, in May in Canada. And you could just see ... And you can just see — you can't see — the pain, he said .
 It wasn't the planting the tree in Canada which caused it all, it was really the lack of exercise that really did it . In other words, it wasn't just the planting of the tree that caused it .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots at CNN iReport . Send your photos of your favorite destinations to iReport.com/Travel next week .
 You know, sort of sitting-up exercises or then they'd hold your legs so you'd have to try to lift it up against it . You would have to sit down and try to get your legs to move against it. You know how to sit up .
 He could do everything, but you'd just notice when you'd see him trying to reach for something he'd dropped on the floor, how stiff he was . So, as I say, he wasn't a cripple—that sounds funny—he could do all .
 "My Lord, at the end, in a couple of months, he could touch his toes," she says . "He could do all these things he'd never been able to do—knee bends— So then once once Kraus started, then that was, you know,
 Travell had given him the tenth treatment and before she always helped . Travell always helped. Travell gave him the help he needed .
 Your White House parties -- the best parties I've ever gone to -- were they? Well, I'll tell you why I thought of having them. Well, he said, "Well, I'm not sure what I think of having a party."
 "You couldn't cut all that off from him and just leave his life full of worry," she says . "We were young and we were gay and you couldn't ... cut all of that off," she adds .
 "We only had about five in all. So then he'd say, well, let's have—every now, then— every now and then," she says . "I think we only had a couple of about five," she adds. "So then he would say, let
 "It's sort of a way to renew yourself. And, well, he just loved them because then he was ... a way of renew yourself," she says .
 "When we came in there, I was very weak and plus all the thing of the campaign, plus the baby," he says . "To hit that place running and start to do all the work of running the house," he adds .
 'You wanted to be so cheerful for Jack when he came home, which I nearly always was' 'He could see when it was getting to be too much. Sometimes at the end of the day you'd just feel one jump away from tears'
 "I always think our whole married life was renewals of love after, you know, brief separations," she says . She says she and her husband have been married for more than 20 years .
 We didn't use—it's funny, he never thought of using Camp David, either, either . Cecil Stoughton, White House/John F Kennedy Library and Museum, Boston .
 "I'd sort of had this thing about having to get a house in the country," he says . "He'd hated Camp David when he went there with Eisenhower," he adds . "Camp David" is a favorite of Camp David .
 He said, ""It's the most depressinglooking place" -- which it is, from the outside . He also said, "It's a most depressing place"
 Taz Shepard, his naval aide, kept pestering him to go there . "Taz Shepard" was "pestering" him to visit the U.S. Navy base .
 Glen Ora®2 mostly on weekends, which he didn't like really, at all, at first . Then he got to rather love it because it is comfortable, so then we'd go there a bit of a bit, but go there there a lot of the time .
 "Exercise and fresh air, which is true. Well, in a way, the thing that that . that means is exercise and . fresh air," she said .
 You make an extra effort every day every day to go out and play tennis, though I couldn't play it. You make the extra effort . You make a extra effort, even if you can't play, you make the effort .
 "If you just stay indoors and smoke cigarettes and work at your desk and talk on the telephone until you know your throat is all tight, you can't be gay for anyone. Because if you just . stay indoors, smoke cigarettes, work on the phone and talk to your . desk
 "I think rarely he came Friday evening, he'd always come Saturday, sort of at lunchtime," he says . "He'd come Saturday ... sort of lunchtime. He'd come Friday evening," he adds .
 He'd sleep all Saturday afternoon and then he'd watch, all the afternoon, television or something from his bed . He'd then sleep all the Saturday afternoon, then he would watch from bed . "He'd watch from the bed. He'd watch something from bed. And then he
 "We'd always have a friend for the weekend, have dinner, go to bed early, church the next day, papers, another nap," she says . "And we'd always be with friends for a weekend," she adds .
 "He was off on trips a couple of times. And then this fall, we did have two or three weekends at our new house in Virginia—and—4," she says .
 She was with Mrs. Bruce at the embassy in Rome and then when she was in Rome, she was with her mother .
 "I can't go in there unless I have Tish," she says of her nomination . "I remember just thinking, ""I . can't call her up right after Jack was nominated," she recalls .
 Tish is great and I love her but, so much of her energy was rather extra that I—now that I think of it, she really made me tireder than I'd had had to be .
 She would send you so many extra things that you really didn't have to answer . Because she'd send you extra things to answer, she'd ask you if you had any extra questions .
 "Jack and Jack" will be reunited in the U.S. for the first time since 2004 .
 Jack told me that I must stop using my desk in the East Hall—the West Hall, where we sat. You know, it began to drive me crazy, and then Jack . He told me to stop using the desk in West Hall .
 "It was so good because often, when we'd be alone in the evening, he'd be looking at a book or doing some of his papers, and I'd go grab a folder off my desk and try to check off all the little things I had to do"
 "It would just put you in not the right atmosphere that you should be in when your husband comes home," she says . But it would just be not the best atmosphere for your husband to be in, she adds .
 Nancy was my roommate and ever since she came, life was the difference that life was. Nancy was Nancy's roommate . Nancy's life changed dramatically since she moved into the U.S.
 How much more time there was to be able to enjoy—to make yourself so that Jack would enjoy you more, she said . She said: "How much more . There was no time to enjoy" how much more than you could enjoy."
 She used to tell me she loved to have lunch in the White House Mess so she could argue with men . She told me she used to eat lunch with men in the Mess Mess .
 "She was so different from me and just exhausted me so. She was great, but she was so much different," she said .
 Pam was fantastic because in the beginning I didn't think I'd need a press secretary and other people, the one person had done them both . Pam was 'fantastic' because she had done both. Pam was "the one person who'd done both"
 Tish had her own press conference before inauguration at the Sulgrave Club . Tish will be sworn in as president of the United States .
 She was laughing and saying, ""Yes, we're going to hang pictures on all the walls upside down" "Modern, this, that," she said of her new home . She said, "We will hang pictures upside down and hang them upside down."
 It was the first set of bad, sensational headlines, and Jack said, ""Not one of my cabinet officers has had an interview," he said . Not one of his cabinet officers had ever been interviewed .
 "She just loved the press so that I saw that if I was to keep any privacy of our life," she was always saying, "We got to have Betty Beale to the first state dinner" "I must get someone who had the same reactions I did," she said .
 Lizzie Condon, Pam, and Nini2 are now in my office . Jack had gotten three of them jobs in the Senate one summer, and Pam had been in his office .
 She was going over to work somewhere in the White House anyway, but asked if she'd be my press secretary . She was terrified and she didn't want to, says President Obama's son .
 I told her if she did a good job, the press would always think she was no good, and if they thought she was good, she wouldn't be helping me the way I wanted, so it was very difficult for her because she's very sensitive .
 Abbie Rowe, National Park Service/John F Kennedy Library and Museum, Boston . She's a great girl, she says .
 "He was one of the people who contributed most to being happy in that place," he said . "He contributed most of the things he did to be happy," he added .
 Robert Knudsen, White House/John F Kennedy Library and Museum, Boston . Mrs. Kennedy: "Mrs. Kennedy's life is in her own hands"
 Ms West was a curator at Winterthur, Switzerland, and a curator of Winterthur . Mr West explained to me what happened to her, and how she died .
 "This young little girl came, and so excited about what she was doing, suddenly she'd stop working and letters wouldn't be answered," she said . "Because here, this young girl came ... and suddenly she would stop working," she added . "She would stop work and letters
 Someone would have given a fifty thousand dollars something, or someone would have written six months ago, or six weeks ago, not gotten an answer . "She was always having tea with other curators," she said .
 Mr West said to her, "There was something I think I ought to tell you, Mrs. West"
 Jack was on the floor of his private floor, looking under his table or bed . But there, in Jack's bedroom, he was looking under the bed or table .
 She'd say, unless she could have them inspect the marquetry or something, she was going to write to the President herself . Well, she'd get outraged and she'd say she'd write to them herself, she said .
 'She just got so grand that, after a while, she stopped being useful and you had to get rid of her,' she said . 'After a while of being useful, she had to stop being useful'
 Bill Elder took over as the curator of the Museum of Wales . Elder was a "quieter-mouse registrar" before Elder took charge of the museum . Elder is now the museum's first curator .
 "He never wanted any publicity, but he was also so in love with looking at the bottom of furniture and stuff that he never answered a letter or the telephone either. He never answered any of the phone or the phone either," he said .
 Lorraine, with me pressuring her, got things together and, I suppose, she and I wrote the guidebook. But finally Lorraine finally got together, and I suppose we wrote a guidebook . Lorraine and Lorraine have been together for years .
 She'd send a batch of illustrations and do part of the text and I'd pick all the ones I wanted in . She'd then pick the ones she wanted in, and she'd send them in .
 Tish loved to pick up the phone and have ""White House calling"" or ""Send all the White House china on the plane to Costa Rica"" or tell them that they had to fly string beans in to a state dinner .
 You can see which of your friends it affects that suddenly start to treat you differently . You can also see how it affects your friends who suddenly start treating you differently.
 I used to think if I ever wrote a book, it would be called ""The Poison of the Presidency"" because it poisoned so many relationships with people outside . "I used to write a book about the President's relationship with the outside," she says .
 "Some people who don't see you as much as they'd like would say terrible things about you. Well, some people don't like to see you," she said .
 People who suddenly never spoke to you before, but start calling you up or trying to send you some marvelous present . Or the other people who suddenly . suddenly never speak to you . or call you up . Or call you to see if you want to buy you a present .
 When Jack died, he came with a check for $250,000 for the library before we'd almost even said anything about it . Jack died 10 days later, he gave the library a $250k check .
 President Barack Obama said when he left the White House many people who you think were your friends will no longer be. I'd just like to go down and have dinner with him and he said, "You will see, when you leave the . White House." Obama said, ""You
 "Everybody's still a friend, but you see the ones who get so excited about power and go over to the new, which is fine," she says . "Everybody still friends. Everybody's still friends"
 Mr Kennedy always said you can always count your friends on five fingers of one hand, you're lucky . You see it in what some people write, well, you always know .
 "I was having dinner with Mendes France, who was also staying at the Carlyle," says Mendes . "I'm having dinner at Carlyle, and I'm staying there," Mendes says .
 Until he loves you and then—and he loved and admired Jack so, without hardly ever knowing him, he loved him . Until he love you, you can't know you love you until you know him .
 He always said he was the only Dem. He said, ""I am so ashamed of my colleagues in Wall Street. I am ashamed of them," he said . He said he is ashamed of his colleagues .
 Daring the campaign, Cuba emerged as an issue . The PLP UH Conversation TUESDAY, March 24 1964 .
 We knew Earl Smith then, who'd been Eisenhower's ambassador at the time . Earl Smith was the president of the U.S. in the 1950s .
 Former Secretary of State John Kerry says he has 'troubled times' with the State Department . He says a man named Mr Rubottom kept talking about his troubles with the department .
 "How hard it was—warning against Castro and how just it was like, I don't know, dropping pennies down an endless well," she says .
 President's view then was that, as you say, our policy was wrong in not letting it happen. And the President was right, he says. And that was the case, he said .
 Remember when Allen Dulles came to Hyannis after the campaign? "Yeah. And then after after the ... campaign," he said. "Yeah."
 The stories began to appear in March saying that an invasion was likely, or something like that . The stories started to appear on March 1 . They began to be published in March .
 "Jack would keep having to say United States troops won't be committed, sort of dodging everything that way," he says . "And then all the time at his press conferences, Jack would ... sort of dodge everything," he adds . "Jack" was "d dodging everything"
 "Keating was going on every week about something that the missiles weren't out or there were more missiles there. But I just remember, well, it was like the second time, when Keating was ... there were missiles there . He says he just remembers, well .
 The time I really remember well was the weekend before, which would be April 13 and 14 . The time was April 13, 14, and April 14, when the Olympics took place in New Jersey .
 Dean Rusk "looked so depressed when it was over" Rusk was "depressed" when he got a call from Rusk, "he looked so depressed"
 I guess that was a decisive phone call .42 I think this was the phone call about the air strike . 42: "I think this is the phone . call about air strike"
 Jack just sat there on his bed and then he shook his head and just wandered around that room, really looking—in pain almost, and went downstairs, and you just knew he knew what had happened was wrong . So anyway— then Jack went downstairs and sat there, and then shook
 Usually, as I said, he made his decisions easily and would think about them before or once he'd made them, he was happy with them . Usually, he would think of them before, or after they were made, they were happy .
 "That's the one time I just saw him, you know, terribly, really low," she says . "That was the only time I saw him," she recalls .
 The invasion in the beginning and then no air strike—half doing it and not doing it all the way, or should—TI don't know, he says . I mean, the invasion in . the beginning . Then no air strikes .
 "Just some awful thing that had landed in his lap that there wasn't time to get out of. Just some awful things that had been landed in my lap," he said .
 President Eisenhower would say, "You know, at least I leave that to the next President" -- or "If Eisenhower had left me someone like that," he'd say . And then later on, when . Taylor was made chief of staff, he'd said, "I leave that
 "He especially came out with Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. especially, I was on the lawn with the children," she says .
 Cardona came back and took him in late Wednesday afternoon, and he brought him out and introduced him to you . Cardona has been in and out of the hospital for a week .
 He'd shake his head and say Cardona had been wonderful . And then he'd keep shaking his head, and said Cardona was wonderful .
 Cuba is a nation of Cuba, but it's not the first time it's been seen in Cuba . Cuba is now the only nation to be seen in the U.S.
 "Jack was called away in the middle of the reception, and went over to his office and didn't come back until I was in bed. Then Tuesday we had the congressional reception," she said . "Jack went over and went into his office, and didn’t come back
 The next year at a Congressional reception, he was called away for something else of a crisis, he said . "You know, it was funny, because the next year ... he was ... called away," he said.
 "Last year it just seemed those receptions were always nights something awful happened. But last year, it seemed those nights always seemed to always come with something awful happening," says CNN.com .
 I think it was Wednesday we had to have our pictures taken—or maybe it was Thursday . And I think the pictures were taken ... or maybe Thursday. It was Wednesday, or Thursday, when we had the pictures taken .
 It was with Mark Shaw and he just came up and sat down for about ten minutes— we didn't have any picture of the two of us together that you could mail out . We didn't even have any pictures of Mark Shaw that could be sent out .
 KENNEDY took part in the Bay of Pigs DeBACLE . She had to go to a Greek dinner in the midst of all this .
 "We'd had lunch for them one of those days, either the day before or the day after. We'd had dinner for them," she said . "We had lunch with them either the morning or the night before," she added .
 "He came back over to the White House to his bedroom and he started to cry, just with me," she says . "I remember so well when it happened, whatever day it was, it was in the morning," she recalls .
 You know, just for one—just for one, just put his head in his hands and sort of wept. "You just put your head in your hands," he said. "Just for one ... sort of ... wept"
 "Just out of sheer discouragement, he wouldn't weep but some tears would fill his eyes and roll down his cheek. About twice, the winter he was sick in the hospital, you know, he would weep," she says .
 Patrick came back from Boston to me in the hospital and he walked in the morning about eight, in my room, and just sobbed and put his arms around me . And then that time, and then when Patrick, this summer, he came back to me this summer to .
 "All his first hundred days and all his dreams, and then this awful thing to happen. And it was so sad, because all his first 100 days ... he was so happy," she said . "He was so proud of his life and his dreams," she added .
 "He didn't care about his hundred days, but all those poor men who you'd sent off with all their hopes high and promises that we'd back them and there they were, shot down like dogs or going to die in jail," he said .
 "Don't leave anywhere. If I was going to take the children out, don't," she says .
 CNN.com: "I suppose he just thought politically that would be too— too risky. Well, then I suppose he thought politically, too— Too risky"
 We could see if it's in Mao Tse-tung, because I told you he had an awful lot of Chinese proverbs . Mao had a lot of proverbs in Chinese, and we could find them in Mao's book .
 Lemnitzer, the Joint Chiefs he held more responsible privately than anyone else, my impression. Lemnitz was more responsible, he says, than any other member of staff . The Joint Chiefs were more responsible than any of the other members of staff, he adds .
 "Yes, you know, he never really spoke unkindly about them, but with sort of hopeless, wry laughter, he'd talk about Curtis LeMay," she says .
 "I remember the time of the second Cuba, he got a picture of all our airplanes in Florida, or all over the country just standing on all the runways," he says . "He got a photo of all of our airplanes," he adds .
 "There that man was shouting to go and bomb everything and have a little war and had left all our planes out. But, you know, there were no planes out," he said .
 The Joint Chiefs, and then, I guess, poor Allen Dulles. But, it was the whole thing— the Joint Chiefs and then Dulles .
 "It seems to me if you're going to do it, you should have had air cover," he says . "I don't know if I should have," he adds . "You should have air cover. It seems to be a good idea," he asks .
 "I just wished if he had to do it, they'd let him alone," she says of Dean Rusk . "Jack coming in so late to something and everybody"
 Roosevelt never liked that hundred-day business in the papers but it was obviously some little press thing—Roosevelt. Roosevelt. He never liked . Roosevelt. Never liked that 100 days in the newspapers . Roosevelt did .
 President Barack Obama was elected to the White House in 2008 . Obama's first term was in office in 2009 . Obama won't be in office until 2016 .
 He always liked Allen Dulles and, you know, he thought he was an honorable man, he said . Well, he always had liked Dulles, says the president .
 "I know what it was. Oh, because a while later he went out of his way to have him to dinner," he said .
 Charlie Wrightsman and Jayne Jayne were in Washington, and they were coming to the White House . Charlie Wrightman and his wife, Jayne, are in Washington .
 This was just a couple of weeks after Cuba, or a month—and always Allen Dulles had been their little lion . This was a few weeks after the Cuba crisis .
 Charlie Wrightsman was there, and he said he wasn't going to see Allen Dulles because of the way Dulles bungled the Bay of Pigs .
 Allen Dulles sat down with Jayne and Charlie Wrightsman, just to show Charlie what he thought of Dulles . He made the special effort to come back from his office and sit around with them .
 President Obama has been in Cuba, Cuba and the U.S. since 1964 . President Obama was in Cuba at the start of his presidency . President Bush was in the midst of a war with Cuba .
 General Taylor and Bobby made a kind of inquiry into what happened. Remember General Taylor . Remember . Remember General . Taylor . and Bobby . Made a kind inquiry into . what happened .
 General Taylor always used to be in his gray suit then, Jack would say, when there'd be a meeting of the Joint Chiefs, you know, that you could just feel these waves going out from them wondering about what Taylor would be like .
 "I suppose he'd met him a couple of times because he was always talking about his book," she said . "He'd met them a few times," she added. "He always talked about his new book"
 "Imagine, can you imagine Eisenhower doing that?" asked General Taylor . He'd say, "Whatever all the things were that made General Taylor leave."—-whatever all the . things were . General Taylor left. And you know, and then he would say, then he'd say
 The White House staff felt very badly, quite apart from the general horror of the thing, but we felt that we'd served the President badly, and some had thought—some had been for the project and others had been against it . We in the White House .
 "All of us felt that we hadn't done the job that the White House staff ought to be doing in the way" "We'd been too intimidated by all these great figures and hadn't subjected the project to the kind of critical examination it was our job to do"
 No, he never did—but, I mean, I don't think all of you should feel that way, because look at what you did at the second Cuba . No, I think some of you shouldn't feel the same way . Look at what happened to Cuba. No,
 The thing was you were all cutting your teeth in there and nobody had warned you about this thing . Nobody had been warned of this thing. Nobody had told you about it. Nobody warned you of it. It was a mistake, he says .
 "You hope to God that if the country's been run these past eight years and there'd been crises that those men would know something what they were talking about," says President Obama .
 He used to talk later, never about his staff, but, you know, about who he was left, who he inherited to turn to for advice . So he used to say later that he would turn to his staff for advice, but never about staff, he said .
 I would say after Jack, General Taylor was the man in Washington that Bobby is the closest to, I think—I mean, besides his friends or people in the Justice Department . And I remember—and setting Bobby up with that committee~/ and I think that's where Bobby and
 JFK spoke with return members of the Cuban invasion of Cuba in 1962 . JFK said he was "depressed and under pressure" during the Cuban crisis .
 "That was more nervous, apprehensive, he couldn't stop talking about it," he said . "He was nervous and apprehensive. That's more nervous," he added .
 He wasn't running his own show as he was doing in the Massachusetts fight . The fight was not his own fight, but he was running the show .
 "And then the awful depression when it ended and caring so about those people," she said . "I was so happy to be able to get through the depression," she added .
 "Probably it would be better if you could have, than people see that poor brigade staggering back and remind you all over—the whole country, all over again, of the big failure"
 "I just thought of something else about Bobby's compassion. I have another—I have another--I just have another ... something else," she said .
 It must have—last winter—you can find out when it was—that best spy we had in Russia was caught, it must have been last winter . It was last winter that the best spy was caught in Russia .
 President Obama sat down on a bench in the garden of the White House when he saw his son . Bobby Kennedy was coming out of a meeting in the House, and he came over and sat down in a park, just looking so sad .
 "Just treating that man like a cipher. Bobby was just so wounded by them," he says . "Bobby was just just so ... wounded by [the] people," he adds .
 "People get into a kind of professional sense about all this and they no longer see people as human beings," he says . "I guess he even thought John McCone was rather," he adds. "Well, people get into ... professional sense"
 The attack on the tractor deal was the 'outrageous' attack on President Obama, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 I mean, if there was anything that was something which this nation should have seen as its duty, it was to do everything possible to get those people out, and the attack on it was always a very bad thing to me. I mean . I mean ... if there were anything that
 Roosevelt and Walter Reuther and Milton Eisenhower formed a committee to form a committee . Roosevelt and Reuther formed a panel to discuss the issue of the issue .
 President felt so strongly about Miro Cardona and the members of that committee is that three or four of them had sons . Well, anyway, anyway I think one reason the President felt . well, anyway .
 Oliva*2: "They all showed us pictures of what they looked like before—they had in their wallets. You know, Olivia*2"
 When they pulled pictures out of what they looked like before, they really looked sort of like fat members of Xavier Cugat's band . They really looked like fat X-Cugat members of the band, they said .
 There they were sitting with Jack—nothing bitter, just looking on him as their hero . And how they were with us, there they were sat with Jack, nothing bitter . "They were sitting there with Jack," she says .
 Bob Greene: "They came in February especially up to Jack's grave to lay a wreath, and Bobby brought them—one of them around to see me"
 "Now that Jack was dead, they had no more hope or idealism or anything," she says . "They all said that they were getting out of the army or everything"
 "They'd just all go out and try to get some jobs because it was he was he they were all looking to with hope," she said .
 "All those people there, you know, crying and waving, and all the poor brigade sitting around with their bandages and everything. All those people were there," he said .
 "I think he was carried away and said some things that weren't in the text of his speech," says Obama . Obama's speech was "carried away" from the text, he says .
 Donald Barnes is a wonderful man that you should speak to sometimes is Donald Barnes . You know, you should talk to sometimes, sometimes, Donald Barnes. Donald Barnes has been a great writer and broadcaster .
 Sedgwick was trying to say his sort of flowery eighteenth-century French, which no more sounded like a translation of Jack . Sedgwwick's voice no longer sounded like that of Jack Jack .
 Jack said the two best interpreters he'd ever seen were Barnes and Adenauer's interpreter, who he used in Germany instead of our own . Jack said he'd used the interpreter in Germany .
 I remember asking him this fall—oh, yes, that day that I told you about—it was one day in October, when he woke up from his nap and he looked very worried . He looked worried, and I asked him if he was going to die .
 He said, "This has been one of the worst days of my life. I said something and he said, I said something," he said . This has been the worst day of his life," he added .
 CNN.com's John Sutter recalls a raid on Cuba in the 1960s . He says the raid failed, but it was the first time he'd heard from Cuba .
 He obviously didn't want to sit down with me, talk about Cuba because it was a worry to him, he said . He said he was worried about the situation in Cuba .
 Lincoln's office when Jean Daniel was brought in and being introduced to him first . Lincoln was introduced to Jean Daniel first .
 "I can't remember what it said now, but it didn't sound—didn't ring true," she says . "It didn't seem to ring true" she says. "I didn't think it was true"
 I always felt the President understood—had a certain sympathy with the frustrations— Yes, you know, and he never said anything awful about him. Yes, he said . He said, "I always felt he understood ... but he didn't."
 Miro Cardona was in the middle of a storm when he was in charge of the Spanish soccer team . Cardona has been in the news for more than a decade .
 The President had been interested in Latin America, particularly, because it became such a major interest in the administration . The President's Latin America became such an important part of the administration, he said .
 I never remember him talking especially about Latin America before. But—but he was really quite young then and I don't think— he was very young then . I'm not sure if he was talking Latin America again, but he was quite young .
 President Obama made his Alliance speech when he got into the White House . President Obama has been criticized for his lack of transparency .
 I went to an orphanage and there was a picture in the paper that evening. I went there to see a picture of the orphanage in the newspaper that evening . It was the first time I had been to visit a child's orphanage. I was there to visit an orphan
 The headline was very complimentary, it said, ""We love Mrs. Mrs. Obama," Obama said .
 "That just hurt Jack so for them and he said, you know, "Look at those people. And that just . Just hurt Jack," she said . "That hurts Jack so much"
 "I didn't go to Berlin, you see, because I was having John—Patrick," she says . "Well, I didn't . Well, I'm having John, Patrick," she said . "I'm having Patrick, Patrick. Well, John."
 Vienna“2 was incredible in that it was miles in from the airport and back, and it was a dark, gray day. Well, Vienna"2" was incredible, says the author .
 "Just to see those crowds going on for twenty-five miles mostly weeping and waving handkerchiefs," she says . "And just to see these crowds going through twenty-25 miles mostly weep and waving handkerchief chiefs"
 He had an extraordinary sympathy for Latin America, the problems of Latin America . And he liked the Latins, too, too. He said .
 He was this thoughtful—he almost seemed—not German, but Nordic in his sadness . "He almost seemed not German, not German," he almost seemed .
 "Nothing was ever in the papers about it. When he came here to the hospital and I went to see him, nothing was ever about it," he said . "I went to visit him, and he came back to see me," he added .
 He said yes, he's done all that, working for the Alliance, and he said he'd help again . "He said yes," he said, "and he said yes"
 We should turn to this hemisphere. We should just, if de Gaulle and everyone want to have their own little thing, they should . But really, we should just turn to the hemisphere.
 JFK restored a sense of a common hemisphere, which had gone out of the U.S. entirely since Roosevelt and the Good Neighbor policy . Kennedy's visit to Mexico was one of the greatest things he did was to restore the sense of this being a common .
 "I remembered it before. And it's so shocking," he says . "He noticed it in Mexico, and I noticed it again," he adds .
 When we say America there, meaning our country, but America to them means both continents . America to us means America, meaning both continents, when we say "America"
 "You have to bite your lip a couple of times when you're talking about America. And, you know, you have to bit your lip when you talk about America," he said .
 The Kennedy name means more—it's the best asset we have in Latin America at the moment . And, well, well- well, it's the Kennedy name mean more .
 I wish, you know, I wish the new administration, for example, would ask Bobby to go down to Venezuela— They want—Venezuela asked especially for Bobby, and Lyndon Johnson wouldn't send him, he says . Lyndon Johnson would have sent Bobby to Venezuela, but he
 President Betancourt was the first president of Venezuela who had served out his term . He was the president of the country's first president . He died in 2009 .
 "It will remind them what America—what North America is capable of, which would mean a lot. No. No, but it will . It would remind them of what America . It will remind [the U.S.], what North America can be capable of . No,
 "At the same time that all the Cuban things were going, there was this problem of Laos," he says . "It was a very serious problem for the United States," he adds .
 Laos, Cuba, South Vi—you know, I remember Laos so well—and Berlin, but I can't remember which month was which . Well, it just seems always there was Laos and Cuba, Cuba .
 The crisis was simmering next year, the year after the crisis was sort of simmering, he says . "Yeah, that was next year. Yeah, that's next year."
 "There was always something like that about to blow up, and always Jack living with that and the pressure of being in the White House, and yet trying to live in an ordinary way," she says .
 "You know, hear what he had to say, but not ask too many questions about something painful," he said . "I'm not going to ask too much questions about it," he added .
 The only time I really did, I asked him something and it was at the end of the day. Well, usually, I was so good about not asking questions, but then with all those flames and Diem and everything, the only time .
 "Oh, my God, kid" was a term of endearment that I suppose his family used. And he said, ""Oh My God, Kid""—which was—it sounds funny but I got used to it. It was a sort of a term .
 He could make a conscious effort to turn from worry to relative insouciance . But he could make this conscious effort .
 "TI always thought there was one thing merciful about the White House which made up for the goldfish bowl and the Secret Service" "You were hermetically sealed or there was something protective against the outside world," she says .
 You didn't realize, you didn't hear mean things people were saying about you until a lot later . "You didn't know what people thought about you," she said . "I didn't want to hear things people would say about you"
 Everyone should be trying to help Jack in whatever way they could, she says . "That was the way I could do it the best—you know, by being not a distraction," she adds .
 "I would try to have people who'd divert him. And the people around that he would ... divert him," she says . She says .
 "I mean, there were always people from Washington or something, but who wouldn't be—right on the subject that he'd thrashed about all day, and good food, and the children in good moods," she says .
 "A lot of times if I couldn't think of someone, or something, I'd call up Mrs. Mrs. Smith," she says .
 "A couple of times, you'd arrange a little dinner of six people and it might be a night where he wanted to go to bed," he said . A couple of years later, he said, "I'm not going to be able to get to bed"
 'Last year was just one or two people all the time and then he'd decide when to go with Mrs. Mrs. Robinson'
 Nkrumah bought the biggest yacht in the Mediterranean that belonged to some shifty Greek friend of Stas's—the Radiant . And Stas had just told us before that Nkumah had bought the yacht .
 "He was so delighted to be in the family apartments and I think he saw the children. Terribly agreeable, and he was so happy to be there," she said .
 "Would you send me a picture of yourself because you were our first visitor""—foreign visitor. So, I wrote him in my own hand and to be nice I said, ""Would you sent me a photo of yourself"—foreign visitor."
 The Ghana Ambassador in all his robes came wading in and gave me the picture, but you know, in the beginning, I liked Nkrumah. So about two weeks later, the Ghana ambassador in all . His photo was given to him by the Ghana Ambassador, but he
 The only person I met who you knew was a bandit before he came and turned out to be all you expected was Sukarno. The only . person I . met who . you . knew was the bandit . before he . came, he said. "You knew was
 "I think he sort of had all these little ways of doing something a little bit extra for people," says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "He sort of ... had all the little ways he ... did something special for people"
 "I was always having a drink before lunch or tea, whatever it was, with me," he says . "So one thing was to come up and either have a drink ... with me, whatever I was, up there," he adds . "I'm not going to be a
 Mao Tse-tung had published his art collection, which meant an enormous amount to him . Mao's art collection was published by Mao, who had published an art collection of his own .
 "They got there about twenty minutes before he did, and I hardly had time to flip through them," she says . "They were there about 20 minutes before they got there," she adds .
 "We started to look at the volume together, it was enormous. So I said you know, ""Mr —whatever you call him, President or Prime Minister" --I forget, but I knew—""we have your art collection here"
 Sukarno was in the middle—all three of us on the sofa, and Jack and I on each side . Jack and Jack were in the center of the conversation . "Sukarno" was in a middle of the sofa with Sukarni .
 "You just couldn't believe it, and I caught Jack's eye and we were trying not to laugh at each other," she says . "You couldn't imagine it," she adds .
 Sukarno was terribly happy and he'd say, ""This is my second wife, and this was""—But he was sort of —I don't know, he had sort of a lecherous look," she says .
 I didn't like Adzhubei and Adzhubai, he said, "I didn't like him" He said he didn't know anyone else in the party .
 "It was very good what Jack did with him and Pierre arranged that, and the interview and everything. Oh, all right, it's very good," she said .
 John came in the living room -- at the Cape—came running out of the dining room or something, having escaped from Miss Shaw as usual . Adzhubei said, "Ah, here is your son. Maybe he's very sensitive underneath"
 "In a few years he and my son will be shooting each other in a war,"" or something. Or something," he says of his son . "I'm sure he'll be shooting his son in a War,"" he says .
 "I thought much worse. I mean, he had that same heavy-handed humor Khrushchev had, but I thought much more worse," he says .
 I didn't really like Madame Khrushchev too much, and I hated the daughter she had in Vienna . I hated her daughter in Vienna, and she didn't like her too much . I'm not sure what I really thought of her, but she was a good friend .
 Dobrynin asked Jack to have his wife to lunch alone, and I did, but both of them have this really gamesmanship thing . Dobrynins asked Jack specially if I'd have lunch alone with his wife alone, I did .
 She was very shy, but she seemed sensitive, but seemed sensitive . You know, she'd make little jokes which she would make, she said . She was shy but sensitive .
 Adzhubei was really impressed that a doll Khrushchev had given Caroline was in her bedroom . Bill Walton wrote about Russia when he went there after Jack was dead .
 'It was one of those things she loved to take apart on a little table by her bed, also with the Virgin Mary and things. She loved to play with her dolls and dolls, she said . She said: 'It's a very special piece of art that she took apart
 I mean, I got sick of all that, those little digs all the time, though she was very shy at the palace in Vienna where we had lunch . She was shy at a palace in Austria where she had lunch, but she was shy .
 "For some reason, I outranked her because Jack was President and Khrushchev was just chairman of the whatever it is" "So she wouldn't leave the room before I did," she said . "Jack was President. Jack was president and she was Chairman of the Whatever it
 "I mean, have their little chips. So obviously, they're all shy underneath," she says . "They're all ... shy underneath"
 "It's like sitting next to Abbott and Costello, or something, to get through that dinner," he says of the pair . "It was like ... Abbott and costello," he adds .
 Kekkonen of Finland walks every morning before breakfast . But it's better than sitting next to him and asking him how long he walks every day .
 "They're all dancing. But then, you know, they had this ballet and all these swooping ballerinas in Schénbrunn would come swooping towards Jack and Khrushchev and me and Madame Khrushche, and me . And I said, 'They're
 "No, no, it is your husband they are paying attention to. They're all throwing their flowers""—and he said, ""No, no, it's your husband"—and he added, "They're throwing flowers"
 Jack always said, ""You mustn't talk to these great men'"—I mean, Mrs. Mrs. Smith . And all—and all, all the time, Jack always told her, "Don't speak to these men'"
 The Sabres of Paradise by Lesley Blanch is all about the Ukraine in the nineteenth century, and the wars and things .
 "I think the romantic side is so much," she says of President Obama . "I said, Mr Chairman President, don't bore me with that, I think it's so much"
 "God knows what we were probably talking about— the czar, I don't know. So, God knows what . It was probably something we were talking about," he said .
 I knew all the names of those dogs, Strelka and Belka and Laika . Oh, and then I knew that one of them dogs that had puppies, one of those space dogs .
 "I see where—I see one of your space dogs has just had puppies. So I said, ""I see . I see where —I see a space dog has had puppies," she said . So she said, "I see ... one of the space dogs have just
 President Barack Obama met with the Russian ambassador in the Oval Room . The ambassador was carrying a terrified puppy who'd obviously never been out of a laboratory .
 "There was no—remember what he said at the end of that—their conversation. Oh, well, that time in Vienna there was no ... their conversation," she said .
 Khrushchev thought that perhaps he could do what he wanted with Jack. And he said that in really scared—then you'd seen just naked, brutal, ruthless power and—you know, then . Then he thought that maybe he could— saw that perhaps . Perhaps he could .
 Khrushchev could be jolly, but underneath there was a tough guy . He was very tough there, but he was tough there. He was a very tough person, he said .
 I think he'd gone there expecting to be depressed, but I think it was so much worse than he thought . He'd gone to the hospital expecting he was depressed, he said . He said: "I think he went there expecting he'd be depressed. But he thought it was
 I mean, he hadn't gone there with any lovely illusions they could all work together . But he did have some lovely illusions that they could work together, he said .
 "I used to tell him, for some strange reason, I liked Gromyko's face. But then I told him, he used to say, 'I liked him' But then, he said, he liked him. I liked him," he said .
 "I came out for a walk and there were he and Gromyko sitting in the Rose Garden. Because one day —it was the funniest thing," he said . "I was going to see them all over the country, and they were there, and it was funny,"
 "Before we'd done it over, there was a tiny, little bench that—you know, two lovers could barely squish on to it," she said . "Two lovers could hardly squish"
 And he and Gromyko were sitting there on that little love seat, talking . And he was sitting there, talking. And he said, "I'm not afraid to say goodbye to my friend"
 Jack told me later he wanted to get him out of the office and talk alone, and I walked by, so so Jack called me over . And Jack wanted to talk alone . "Jack called me up to talk," she says .
 "People say he looked like Nixon, but he had a nice smile when he smiled," says Nixon . "He was a good guy, but not a bad guy," he says of Nixon .
 "Then, you know, all the things he said to Jack before the second Cuba. But then, he said, "All the things ... before the first Cuba. Cuba," he said . "But then, then, Jack, Jack," he added .
 I think Gromyko must have come three times. See, I can't remember what year, why they were seeing each other then, but I know—I know . See, he says, "Gromyko has come three or four times."
 "In the early days, you'd have to do so many things, I mean, just like you would for a dinner in your house now if you didn't have any help," he says . Later on, "later on they got much better—but in the early years,
 "I mean, sometimes Bunny Mellon and I would be there before—just before it was time to get dressed for dinner, doing the flowers. You had to see about the table and the flowers," she says .
 "We had to work out a way that it wouldn't come always cold from the kitchen," she says . "And the food, and then we had to figure out how to make sure it wasn't always cold," she adds .
 There's no pantry in the White House, the kitchen is below, and there used to be these endless waits . You know, there's there, there are no pantries in the . White House .
 The only one that really was hard going was the Japanese—Ikeda, who was, you know, a very nice man but neither he nor hardly anyone in his party spoke a word of English . And then the entertainment you'd have to work on and get a stage but—
 "I liked Abboud of the Sudan, I did like Karamanlis," he said . But I liked them, he said. "I did like the Sudanese, especially. But I like them"
 Jack had met him in Key West, Key West and then in London after Vienna . Jack met him again in London, London, after Vienna and Key West .
 President Obama and his wife had corresponded for years, but they'd corresponded ever since he was first in the White House . The president and wife were married at the time .
 "It was such a happy atmosphere and they would stay in and talk. But, yes, then we had lunch, just Sissy and David@ and Macmillan and Jack .
 And, oh, well, if you could see their letters, and—I'll show them to you someday because I can't do them all on the tape . I'll show you some of the letters I've received from the family .
 "How Jack went out of his way to send him some telegram when he resigned and tell David that it could be in all the papers," he says . "And how Jack went ... of all that he'd done for the West," David says .
 Just his face had that sort of suppressed mirth and his funny clothes and things, but, oh no, he was a— He was a sharp old customer— Yeah. Yeah.
 I had the impression the President was particularly impressed by his strong feeling about nuclear . And I think—I had a sense of the President's strong feelings about nuclear—about getting the nuclear thing under control .
 I know he used to write eloquent letters about the horror of nuclear war . He used to use his letters to write about the horrors of the war, but now he's dead .
 Macmillan said he really cared about the Western Alliance . That was one of the things he said, he said .
 Jack would tell me some of the things they said with the men at dinner, even after lunch, that I don't think I should say on a tape, even . Jack would say some things he would say after lunch that he doesn't think he should say .
 People say that the younger generation have lost all hope living with this nuclear something . One thing was, oh, people say that people say they have lost hope . The younger generation are living in a nuclear something something .
 "Just funny things. Look at them, they're perfectly fine," he says . "But, I don't know, just funny things," he adds .
 The one time I was ever together with them was that time at lunch in the White House. So then, we may . We may—then, we might—be together again, the one time we were together, was that lunch at lunch .
 Jack had this high sense of mischief and so did Macmillan, so I've never seen two people enjoy each other so much . Jack had a high sense for mischief, so did so did his wife, she says .
 Adele Astaire Douglass was married to a Cavendish man, who'd been married to Cavendish . Sissy and David were talking about important things alone, but when it ended up with Sissy, David and David and us and him and him .
 "Always this wonderful humor underneath it all. Talk about a lot of family things, I guess, but always a wonderful humor"
 I always thought it was really British history that he patterned himself on more than ours. "I always thought . British history," he said. "always thought it would be British history"
 I mean, that he read, he was always—well, I told you all the speeches —Burke's ""To the Electors of Bristol"" and Warren Hastings and you know, Charles James Fox. He was always very well-read, he said. He said .
 "He picked out what he thought was best in American thought and oratory," he says . "It was mostly through being sick and having read the classics and then the English people," he adds .
 The last time we were in London together, I guess was '58, maybe, maybe—and had a dinner of all his old friends . So he had such an admiration for all, he had to have dinner of old friends, he says .
 David Gore was the only one who ever amounted to anything and he was—Jack always used to say he was one of the brightest men he'd ever met in his life—he and Bundy, he used to have said . David Gore, Jack said, was the brightest man he'd
 "He wasn't like Joe Alsop, who dearly loves the lord and just gets so excited at the mention of anyone English. But you know, the others were, well, kind of defeatist or turned into nothing or—he wasn't . He wasn't just like Joe
 Of all those young men who'd been his friends in '38 and '39—Hugh Fraser, Tony Rosslyn—2 Well, he was in the government, but it's a disappointed life . Of all the young men he'd been friends, he said, "It's
 He'd gone to prison because he wouldn't fire on civilians in a town and that's where he wrote Now Barabbas . He'd liked Kick and he'd written—you know, he'd liked it, he said .
 You played the reluctant prime minister—2 Prime Minister . You played a reluctant PM in the war-torn Britain .
 William has about four children to support and he has to write too quickly . Well, Poor William he has .
 Alec Douglas-Home, a Scotsman, was now prime minister . Well, he'd meant that Alec Douglas Home, a Scottishman, had become PM .
 Former British Prime Minister Tony Blair met David Cameron, who was foreign secretary . He says he didn't dislike him, but he did like him .
 First time I ever saw Alec Home was at Jack's funeral, and I liked him . But, the first time I saw him was at the funeral of Jack, he said he liked him.
 The Agnellis®* had asked us to have dinner with them, and then they took us before dinner to Onassis's yacht to meet Churchill . Churchill was Churchill's guest on the yacht .
 "The poor man was really quite ga-ga then and a lot—you know, we all came on the boat together and he didn't quite know which one Jack was," she says . "Well, the poor man ... didn't know which Jack was. Well, the man
 He started to talk to one of the other men there, thinking he was Jack, and saying, ""I knew your father so well,"" and this and that, and that was cleared up .
 "He really had read practically everything of Churchill's," he says . "But of course, you know, he'd read everything he ... had read everything," he adds .
 I felt so sorry for Jack that evening because he was meeting his hero, only he met him too late . Jack met his hero at the end of the night, but he was too late to meet him .
 "He was so hungry to talk to Churchill at last, or meet him and he just met Churchill when Churchill couldn't really say anything. All—think of all he could have -- he was hungry to meet Churchill at first, or met him and just met him," he said .
 "He'd take one private home because his mother's had an appendix or something and they'd start another weeping round," he said . "They would start another weep round. He'd go to private homes because he'd have to go there because he's got an appendix"
 The only two ambassadors he really disliked were that one, Grewe, and the Pakistan ambassador—Ahmed. The Pakistan ambassador, he said, was Grewe .
 The new one's named Ahmed, so, this was the Ahmed before this one . Well, the new one is named Ahmed .
 The Germans wanted reassurance all the time and it got to be a pain in the neck . Well, the Germans wanted it all, and it was a pain to the neck. Well, it was the Germans .
 I remember everything about it, you know, getting off—and Vanier, the Governor General, is the most marvelous looking old man—and Madame—you know, white mustache, sort of like C Aubrey Smith .
 "I rode in from the airport with her —that must be about fifty miles," she writes . "That must be fifty miles from the . airport to Ottawa"
 "I was still very tired then and so I had to leave the receiving line that night," she said . "Jack was so sweet, rather protective, getting me out of there," she added .
 "I took a week off in the country so that I'd sleep and build up my strength and it was all right. So before we went to Europe, I took a whole week off," he says . "I'm not going to be able to go to Europe and I'm
 Everyone was saying that Ottawa was so cold and never gave receptions to—nice ones to anyone, and I guess, especially to America, or something . But everyone was saying . Ottawa was cold and didn't give receptions to anyone to anyone .
 "Everyone was flabbergasted. And they really were—well, they seemed like terribly enthusiastic crowds," she said .
 Diefenbaker insisted on telling Churchill stories in accent, calling him ""old Winston" or ""the old boy" or something. But he insisted on calling him "old Winston,"" or "old boy" He said it was a mistake .
 Jack was campaigning in the Oregon—out in Oregon and I just met him at a reception at the French embassy . "I guess I talked to him for about ten minutes," he said of Jack .
 I suppose he wasn't—I just told him how much Jack admired him and made up some completely completely— But I thought he was easy to talk to when we were in France . I suppose . I told him about Jack, how much he admired Jack admired Jack, and how much
 Louis XVI's daughter married the Duke of Angouléme, did she have any children, and this or that . "Because I'd ask him things of history—or all the things I wanted to know, he'd say," he says .
 Mr. Jack leaned across the table to Jack at lunch and said in French, ""Mrs. Jack," he said . Then he leaned across at lunch, "Mrs. Mrs. Jack's"
 But then you could ask de Gaulle so many things, again, not talking about the obvious . "I'm not sure what I really want to do," he said .
 "I know he was interested in me and everything and impressed by Jack. I mean, I know he [Jack] impressed me," she said . "I'm not surprised by Jack," she added .
 I said he was the most brilliant young head of Harvard, so he leaned across and said something about Harvard in very halting French . And I said, ""Head of the National Security Council""—I don't know if he knew what that meant—and I said: "Head of
 You know, it was strike one for our side or—yeah—or first run of our side. You know it was striking one for your side or ... or first run for your own side .
 "There was Napoleon's inkwell or something was in front of us and the tablecloth was—it had a lot of gold embroidery on it. You know, he'd had all the gold"
 The two men sit next to each other during visits to foreign states . "You know, in all the foreign state visits, it's different than here," he says .
 Head of state sits next to the other head of state . In other words, this is the case of the two heads of state in the world .
 De Gaulle, Jack, de Gaulle and me. Yeah, so it would go, from right to left, from . right to . left, they would go from right-to-left .
 "Whenever you'd go to their dinners here, it would be done that way most of the time," he says . "They would be doing that way," he adds .
 "Jack knew de Gaulle had this thing about the West, so I guess there wasn't anything then—problem, but I think Jack knew it would come," he says .
 De Gaulle asked de Gaulle about his relations with Churchill and Roosevelt . He asked him about his relationship with Roosevelt and Churchill .
 'With Churchill we were always in disagreement but we always reached an accord,' says de Gaulle . 'I was in disagreement with Churchill, but I was always in agreement,' he says .
 He said it so much better—and again, I didn't write that down . Or that's the gist of it—he said it much better .
 No, I'd always—Nicole Alphand asked me what would I like to do in the French visit and you could see that anything you said, they'd turn the place upside down . No, he'd always said, "I'd always always like to go to France,"
 Four days before we got there, both his sons were killed in an automobile crash . And you see how really protocol and ruthless the French are, he says .
 The two black crows come in at the first reception that first night, at the Elysée, their faces just all white and puffy from crying through the receiving—and all Malraux's tics going at once . The two crows came in at first night .
 "I suppose it's good to have something to do after something like that happens. And I think it gave him, in a way, a way," she says .
 "They couldn't have that much time to see each other, but when Malraux came over here, they really did," he says . "They really did, and then they came out to the country, you know, for lunch," he adds .
 And then Malraux came back for the Mona Lisa and again we had another evening of just us and then the Alphands . The Alphands were the first time they had been together together since the 1930s .
 Jack was with de Gaulle and Malraux at Versailles, but he was behind with the French leader . "It's funny, as we were walking from the dinner at Versasilles to the theater," he says . "But you know, it was funny, it
 "It's like being taken over this incredible obstacle course at ninety miles an hour. Or else else he repeats," he says . "Or else he repeated"
 "But again, he's rather disillusioned because he sort of admires the simplest things," he says . "He sort of likes the simplest thing. But again, it's rather disappointing."
 President Obama's most impressive moment was when they took the color flags down from the White House, the Honor Guard, downstairs .
 Irwin Shaw told me his greatest moment in life was when he was head of a brigade or something, in the Maquis . Shaw said: 'Oh, Irwin Shaw's greatest moment was when ... he was ... head of ... a brigade'
 "He worships de Gaulle like, I don't know, some cocker spaniel adores its master," he says . And he worships the Frenchman, he adds .
 "I mean, he seems to have this incredible intellect and then certain sort of blind spots," he says .
 No, I didn't see them together very much, but you know, he was de Gaulle's lieutenant all through those years . No, he said, "I didn't ... see them very much"
 De Gaulle was rather grand with him, especially as I wanted to talk to him—he was always sort of leading you away .
 In public he "treats him like some servant, like Nehru treats the man who sleeps outside his door," he says .
 The President wanted to do something for Jim, who certainly is a fine man. "I know I know I'm going to be a great man. I know it's a great thing to do," says Obama .
 "He thought they'd like him because of the war, but then I know he was rather disappointed when Gavin's cables would come back. Yeah, he thought they would like him."
 This is the same sort of thing that he did about Allen Dulles and the Wrightsmans, he said . This is a repeat of what he did when he attacked Dulles, the Wrightmans and Dulles .
 Jack put Dick Goodwin on the list because he wanted to show how much he thought of him . She could only have a hundred and two and I think she was up to ninety-nine or something—Jack wanted to honor him .
 Gavin was the most pro-de Gaulle ambassador they ever had, he said . He said: "But there was Gavin, who was ... pro-De Gaulle"
 "I'm amused and sort of irritated the way, you know, Hervé has that phobia about protocol," she says .
 "Hervé moaning all around Washington. And every time we'd see David Gore or Caroline would go to play with Alice Ormsby-Gore, or something, you'd hear Hervé moan all around D.C. Gore .
 That he was a Gemini and Jack—it was just after Jack's birthday—and Jack was ... and Jack was . Jack was born a Gemini . That he and Jack were a Gemini.
 "The whole Berlin business, of course, involved constant relations with the Germans," says President Obama . "It's a good thing for the world," says Obama .
 "As I said before, he tried so hard not to bring problems that irritated him all day home. As I said . He tried to not bring problems into his home all day . As he said, "He tried to be the most polite person in the world"
 "For himself really more than me, but that was one thing that just irritated him so and he'd say, ""What do you have to do to show the Germans that you care?" -- that we would defend Berlin. For himself, he said .
 Adenauer would start flaming up all over again, and saying that we were going to pull out, and then the ambassador here, Grewe, would come running in. And then it would always seem the least tiny thing could happen, some colonel drop his hat on the Autobahn
 Cuba showed we only were interested in the things nearer our shores and not over there. That because we jumped in to take care of Cuba, it showed we were interested only in things closer to our shores . That because of that, it shows we were not interested in what happened over there
 It wasn't until after after his visit to Berlin in June '63 that he finally did convince them . Well, when you think of it, it was until after he visited Berlin in '63 .
 The Germans were always doing that, leaking to the press both in Germany and Washington, he says . "Little things of lack of confidence," he adds, "leakering to the media"
 It was constant really from the middle of—summer of 1962 until the Cuban crisis . But I can remember the Berlin crisis, just sort of coming all through that—I guess was it the— Berlin crisis .
 It began the summer of Vienna and it went from there until the Cuban crisis, really, in November '62 . The Cuban crisis began in November 1962 . It began in Vienna and went from then to Havana, Cuba, in '62.
 He made the speech calling for an enlargement of the military, of the defense budget .
 You could see after that Khrushchev meeting, I mean, he was really in a gloom, which he wouldn't talk about, but you could just tell by a sort of quietness and lowness . But after that meeting, he would just tell you by a certain quiet
 President Barack Obama was scheduled to speak of Berlin on Thursday night . Obama was expected to make a speech at the end of the week . The White House has been under pressure from the White House, Obama says .
 "I can remember again him march—and scribbling on the pages and, you know, for a few days before," she says . "And I can remember ... him march"
 "People would start taking pictures, or something. But then I thought, "No, that might make him more nervous,"" or "people would start photographing him," he said .
 "That was one of the grimmest speeches I've ever seen him make. And, well, that was well, I'm not sure what I was doing."
 "You just couldn't believe that you were sitting there thinking that, well, you really might have to go to war," he says . "And you just couldn’t believe that ... you might be going to war"
 Grimmest speech except, of course, for the Cuban Missile speech . Grimmest of all speeches except for Cuban Missile .
 Berlin was sort of the first one, so it almost frightened me more because by the time of the missile crisis, you were scared all through it, but, you know, Berlin was first one and then it did turn out all right . "You know that Berlin was the first .
 Berlin was the big thing in the summer and fall of '61, and then as a result of our reaction, you remember, Khrushchev then extended the deadline and so— That's right. That's exactly what happened, and that's right .
 No, it's "You don't have friends or allies, you have colleagues," he says . "You can look up. You can look it up," he adds .
 "His relationships always changed and he never made it hard for anyone to come back and be forgiven or, you know, go on in a new relationship with him," she says .
 And somehow, that was the quality which we should all be grateful for . The quality of life in the world should be the most grateful for, it is said .
 "Yes, it was a marvelous thing this," says President Obama . "To leave a way for your opponent to retreat and preserve his dignity," he says .
 If you wanted lots of popularity in the newspapers or something, you'd go around shouting things about "No one's going to tell him to say this to America,"" and then you'd just be, everybody'd be shooting before you knew it . And if you wanted to be popular
 "It was always so easy when you were married. So, it's that side of him which—it was always easy," she said . "So, it was so easy"
 "I might say something that would sort of hurt his feelings and there'd be a certain quietness that day," he says . "I mean, a little tiny thing might come up that would cloud," he adds .
 "That just ran all through his personality. He never would hold, or make you really," he said . He never held or made you really, and that just ran through him . He said, "I would never hold you really"
 Bobby McFadden: "Bobby's getting it -- and it was a side of Bobby that's lacking a bit" McFadden says he's developing a side he admired in him .
 "It was really easier for Jack to be that way when he had Bobby doing a lot of the things," he says . "Jack was really easy to be the way he was," he adds .
 As the Berlin thing was dying down in November, Nehru came and made his visit Yes, and—that was a rather nerve-wracking visit .
 And Galbraith kept saying Nehru wanted no fuss, and everything private . Nehru kept saying he wanted to keep his life private .
 Jack sort of was wondering whether Galbraith's advice was quite right because he thought Nehru would like a lot more pomp. So Jack was wondering if he was right .
 "Hyannis just seemed a little too depressing, so we went to Newport and we met him at—whatever that air force base is there," he said .
 Jack had had a most unsatisfactory time with Nehru when he'd been a congressman in India . He had had an unhappy time with the Indian leader .
 Nehru started to look up at the ceiling when he was in the air . Jack said he'd been there about ten minutes when Nehru looked up . Nehru died of a heart attack at the end of the war .
 It was decided the men would eat in the dining room. So, anyway, they came and it was decided to eat in a dining room .
 Gandhiand I would have a little ladies' lunch in the living room—and Lem Billings was with us . Gandhi and Billings were with us at the time . Gandhiand Billings would have lunch in their living room .
 Jack brought Nehru back on the Honey Fitz and Caroline and Caroline were waiting for him at the front door, which she'd picked a little flower for him and made a curtsey . Caroline picked up a flower and a little bouquet for him .
 Nehru says Nehru never said one word before lunch . Nehru had a drink before lunch and Nehru didn't say anything, he says .
 Hindu Hindus don't look on social gatherings as a time to speak, says author . "Just that real Hindu thing—you learn it in India," she says .
 I don't know if they're contemplating—but I also say it's just damned spoiled brattishness . "You should make an effort when other people are trying," she says .
 "I don't know what they talked about. So anyway, they had their lunch," he says . "They had lunch, and I don't ... know what we talked about," he adds .
 Nehru sat in Nehru's best seat in the best seat, Caroline on Jack's lap next to him . The helicopter took them back to Washington .
 It was the first dinner of that fall in the White House. And I think it was when . It was when—anyway, it was . The first dinner was when the . first dinner .
 "The smoke was just so thick and everyone's eyes were pouring. And of course, somebody hadn't opened the flue of the fireplace, so when we came back in that room the smoke was so thick," she says .
 It was meant to be, as you remember, a rather small dinner, but yet it wasn't quite small enough or big enough because we were in the State Dining Room, and just enough of us so that it was rather like sitting in a church with not enough people there .
 My sister was there and I so badly wanted her to sit next to Nehru, who should have sat next to Lady Bird . Lady Bird was Lady Bird. Nehru should have been Lady Bird, she said .
 Jack always had a good sense of respect for his vice president . The vice president's wife is the president of the nation .
 Nehru does sort of like pretty women in the most unlecherous way . Nehru is known for his love of pretty women .
 "It's just the only— he sort of talked between Lee and I, and you could get him to say something about something and make a little joke," he says .
 "We got sort of, to be a little bit friends in Newport, and then the helicopter and the plane," he says . "Well, we got kind of ... to be ... friends," he adds .
 'They'd obviously cared about the trip and had this chip on their shoulder, I don't know. So they must have been really good,' he says .
 The next night there was a big dinner at the Indian embassy and again I sat next to Nehru . And then the next night, there were a big dinners at the embassy in India .
 "I found him very easy and charming, you know, and he seemed to so like to have someone make a—you know, I always felt that he liked me," she says .
 I think the meetings got absolutely nowhere and there was an awful lot of tapping the fingers and looking up at the ceiling . I think there was a lot of tap the fingers, looking up the ceiling and tapping the . ceiling .
 Abbie Rowe: "I think the generational thing played its part here. Well, it was just someone so different than—someone so different," she says . Abbie: "It was just a generational thing here. I think the generation thing played their part here"
 Jack Kennedy was not pleased that a man like Jack was President of the United States, but on the other hand, a young, brilliant man half his age was bound to make him feel uncomfortable . "I think he must—I'm sure he must .— infinitely—was infinitely pleased
 Gandhi's daughter is one of those women who when marriage and love and all those things don't turn out right, it's as if something— It all goes back inside you and the poison works inside like an ulcer, so she's a truly bitter woman . Gandhi, his daughter
 You can name so many violently liberal women in politics who were always suspicious of Jack. Jack. Hillary Clinton, Hillary Clinton and Hillary Clinton .
 "I thought one reason— this is just my own sort of psychology -- but that Jack so obviously demanded from a woman," she says . "A relationship between a man and a woman where a man would be the leader and a . woman would be his wife and look up to him
 With Adlai you could have another relationship where he'd sort of be sweet and you could talk, but you wouldn't ever—wouldn't ever come down to a definite thing . "You could have a relationship where—you know, he'd be sweet ... but you could
 I always thought women who were scared of sex loved Adlai— because there would never be the challenge . The challenge wasn't there at all. The challenge was there, she says. "There would never ever be the— The challenge .
 Not that there'd be the challenge with Jack but it was a different kind of man . Jack was not the same man as Jack, but he was a very special man .
 "All these sort of twisted, poor little women whose lives hadn't worked out could find a balm in Adlai," she says . "So, you know, all of the sort of ... poor little little women ... could find the balm"
 He was very upset when you came out for him, then a day or so later for Adlai Stevenson . "He couldn't understand why because he'd just been down to lunch the day before, or a week before, and had a very nice time," she says .
 President Barack Obama "loved her and saw that she didn't really dislike him," she said . "Then later on when we were all in the White House together, then he—loved [Obama] and saw her," she added .
 "I could never conceive of not voting for whoever my husband was for," she says . "And I could never imagine not voting" she says of her husband .
 I mean, it was really a rather terribly Victorian or Asiatic relationship which we had, which I had— Yeah, a Japanese wife . So that was just so strange because that was—I mean, I had a rather terrible Victorian or Asian relationship .
 Hutheesing: "I guess she's the rather right-wing one who lives in Bombay, but she's great fun"
 "Nothing profound was talked about or even that we were going to Pakistan next, but, you know, it was a relaxation for him," she says . "It was the kind of thing I'd try to bring into Jack's life in our evenings at home"
 He wouldn't have this kind of vacant, passive, passive— Well, never lively, but sort of gentle and he would talk . He would talk and he has those great brown eyes. Well, but never lively .
 "I'd read all his autobiography and I'd ask him about some of those, you know, times—and he talked," he says . "He talked. He talked. And he talked. I'd read it and I would ask him for answers," he said .
 "I asked him about the times in prison, and everything—his life. Well, I asked him . About his own past and— Well, he said, "Everything in prison and everything"
 He always was so—lI've written all down somewhere, everything we talked about, so maybe I can find it. I've written it down somewhere . I'm so proud of his legacy that he was so good at school .
 "That was a terrible time for him. I can remember him being so worried at the time about our resuming, and how long you should ... you could possibly put it off," she says .
 There was nothing that worried him more through—would it be '61 and '62?—than all this testing . "There was nothing more worried he more through," he says of the testing .
 David Gore was doing something at the UN on disarmament and he and Jack were talking . David Gore came to Hyannis the fall we were married, and Jack was talking .
 It was the first time I'd ever heard—it seemed so extraordinary—you never saw it in newspapers here. And you know, it was first time it was ever heard, it seemed extraordinary, you never saw in newspapers .
 Jack started to say in his speeches that it was a disgrace that there were less than a hundred people working on disarmament in Washington—or less than ten, maybe, maybe . And I remember then—from then— from then on, Jack started saying, "I remember then ...
 Sen. Ted Cruz says he's been in the spotlight since his Senate campaign . He says he wants to keep his seat in the Senate . Cruz: "I think he said it all through my Senate campaign. But he said that in all"
 David Gore came back to the Cape in '58 or '57 . David Gore and Sissy came to Cape Cod in '57 or '58 . He and his wife came back again .
 President Obama said he was concerned about nuclear disarmament, but that he cared about that for so long . He said he didn't want to use nuclear weapons, but he cared so much about it .
 I remember poor Macmillan then. So that's what I tried—and then he sent him this touching telegram . So that was what he tried . He sent him a touching message .
 Jack would have been his forty-seventh birthday on January 1, 2013 . He was the subject of a special tribute to the late actor .
 President and Prime Minister have been deeply committed to test ban treaty . President and prime minister forced the issue constantly on their advisers . I have the impression that we would not have had the treaty treaty if we had not had it .
 David Gore was "indispensable, yes. Indispensable" to the White House, he says . "Having David Gore here at the time made it happen," he adds .
 "So many things happened. Sometimes—well, we can go into that relationship at another time," she said . "Sometimes ... sometimes, sometimes things happened," she added .
 He would come for dinner, and something awful would be going wrong in British Guiana or somewhere, and he would call and call and everything would be kept smooth . "All the time of Skybolt he was with us—and he would be with us," he says .
 Jack and Macmillan really made this test ban thing possible, of just how outrageous of de Gaulle . But what I just wanted to say about—I was thinking when I thought of Jack ... of how outrageous it was, I said. But what he was thinking was Jack and
 "That egomaniac not to be associated with that when that's going to be the one thing that matters in this whole century," he said . "Of the one . thing that really matters and that eomaniac . not to ... associate with that."
 Graham Sutherland, who's a painter, said he wanted to do a picture of Jack . "He said something to me so interesting. And then Graham Sutherland," he said .
 He said, "Power made him a better man" and he said it made so many people worse men . He said the extraordinary thing about President Kennedy was that power made him better .
 Adenauer said Winston, you know, became less nice—and of course, it made Adenauer meaner . He said Winston became nicer, but Adenauer became meaner, and that made him meaner.
 Well, it made—Jack a chance to work for good and I really think Harold Macmillan too. Well- it made ... Jack a chance for good . Harold MacMillan too .
 "This again was one of those prolonged things that kept dragging on for a long time," says CNN.com's John Sutter . "It's a long way to go," says Sutter. "I'm not going to let it go"
 I remember I used to feel sorry for him—just sitting in Geneva all his life— because I'd been in that depressing city . I remember feeling sorry for his life in Geneva . I've been in a depressing city. I remember .
 I don't remember hearing him say he was disappointed with anyone or—I remember him saying wonderful things about Harriman— Yes. Yes. But he doesn't remember saying anything about anyone else .
 The Russians feel that when Harriman is sent to negotiate that the U.S. means business, and that that was absolutely necessary to—*2*2 And it was very touching, Jack's relationship with Harrimans .
 Averell Harriman had done all these extraordinary things in foreign policy, but that domestically everything he'd done was disastrous, says Teddy White . White: "There'd been something in Teddy White's book, a little footnote, about a disastrous foreign policy"
 "I remember Jack feeling sort of sorry for him when he read that part of the book and feeling so happy that this crowning thing came at the end for Averell Harriman"
 In— I gave him a copy of the test ban treaty which the Archives° did especially for me—you can't tell it from the original—when we left his house after he lent it to us after November . In—I gave him an old version of the treaty, which
 It was in that winter that—in that fall and winter—that Hickory Hill began, he says . The President mentioned it to me later, but I wasn't there .
 "Jack always wanted to go to them but he just wanted to hear you. Yes, those seminars that Bobby did," he says .
 Would he be judged as great—because he would have had this almost insoluble problem of the Reconstruction, he says . Either way you did it would have dissatisfied so many people. Either way, either way, you did .
 President Obama said it was "better for Lincoln that he died when he did" The president said he agreed with him that Lincoln's death would be better for him .
 "It will never top this. I mean, it's so strange, these things that come back, because he saw then that he would be -- you know, he said, it will never be top this."
 The first year I was married, I took a course in American history at the Georgetown School of Foreign Service from Professor Jules Davids, who was this brilliant man. Professor Davids was a brilliant man, he says .
 I'd never taken American history and I used to come home full of these things and I was so excited—Thaddeus Stevens and the radical Republicans, I can remember. And I'd come back with these things, and I'm so excited . I can still remember Thaddeus
 "I told him how great Davids was, and he had him do some research on it. And then when he told him about Profiles in Courage, he asked him to do it," he said . "He had to do a lot of research on Davids"
 At that time, we would talk about Lincoln and the Reconstruction, and, you know, if he lived and that—and that was back when we were mairied was '53, '54, and then his book was '54—'55—so we talked about it
 There was another Hickory Hill meeting at the White House—Isaiah Berlin . The meeting took place at the same time as a meeting with President Obama .
 Jack loved that and he loved just listening to Isaiah Berlin . "Jack loved that. Yeah, well, Jack loved ... Berlin," she said .
 Melbourne was his favorite book and says what he really was most like were these great Whig houses and Whig liberal families who, you know, had everything and lived a stimulating life, yet cared . I mean, that was the side of Jack .
 He used to tell me about going to Emerald Cunard's*2 when he was a boy in London with his father to listen to the music .
 When we were in London together, we'd go to the old Duchess of Devonshire's for lunch and she'd have a couple of people around . When she was in London, she'd go for lunch with the Duchess . She'd have people around at her old home, including
 I have the impression he talked with greater—more intimately with David than with any member of the—of his own cabinet.— Yeah. I have a sense of him talking with greater . than with anyone member of his own . cabinet. He says .
 If I could think of anyone now who could save the Western world, it would be David Gore . Gore would be the only person to save the world if he could save it, writes Simon Tisdall .
 Jack and Sissy started as friends obviously in London, and Kathleen was Jack's favorite sister . Kathleen was Sissy's best friend, Jack's sister, and Jack's friend .
 "So many of them ended up with rather sad lives, or this or that," she said . "I mean, so many of the ... people ended up ... with this, or that. I mean, they ended up . I mean ... I'm not sure what happened to them
 Hugh Fraser was sort of a friend, but not very bright, and you'd always wonder if Hugh would get a job in some government and he never did, or it was a pathetic one . Hugh Fraser never did get a government job, but he was a friend .
 Jack used to say that David Gore was the brightest man he'd ever met . But whenever David was here, we'd see him, he'd say he'd never met him . David Gore died in 2008 at the age of 92 .
 Bundy's intelligence is almost so highly tuned that he couldn't often see the larger thing around him, says David . Bundy is more intelligent than David, he says, because he's so tuned to his intelligence .
 David has more wisdom, I think, than Mac, he says . David has also the conciliatory sort of side that Jack did, he adds . Mac is a brilliantly intelligent man but David's judgment is more, he writes .
 Bundy "can get mad and then sort of arrogant and then make conciliation impossible," Bundy says . Bundy: "You know, Bundy can get mad, then sort-arrogant and then ... make conciliiliations impossible"
 Bundy in the missile crisis: "When you think of that great mind, in the beginning he wanted to go in and bomb Cuba" Bundy wanted to bomb Cuba, Bundy says . Bundy: "Bundy's mind is a great mind"
 "They would stay with us, usually on vacations, or they'd come for a weekend to Camp David, or the country, or Camp David," she says . They would stay on vacation, or a weekend at Camp David or the Cape, she says.
 I thought I just can't do that to them. We used to do it rather spontaneously, and of course they'd be involved in something official and then they'd get out of it, so I decided to do that . It's not the first time they've been involved in official
 David would tell you sometimes of the extraordinary places he'd been when he was ferreting out to talk to Jack . Jack would tell David of his extraordinary places in his life .
 "2 David came back to Florida with us and, of course, the next day the whole thing blew up. And then this Skybolt thing—after Nassau,“2 David” came back with us, he said. “The next day, the entire thing
 David went into another room and called Harold Macmillan, says David McNamara . And they called Gilpatric, and McNamara was away, McNamara said .
 "Everything could have blown apart between England and America then. But you know, that closeness kept—well, I mean, everything could have blew apart," he said .
 "Jack's lacking. So many of the others I can't bear to see because I miss—Jack's missing," she says .
 "David is one of the ... intellectually and emotionally he's a rich person, and a generous one, and— And he's not—ambitious. Anyway— Well, David is . He's not ambitious, he says, but he's rich and generous, and generous .
 I always kept hoping he'd give up his title and be prime minister one day, but I think he'll be foreign secretary . I always wanted him to give up title and become prime minister . But he'll probably be a foreign secretary.
 "I've been after him too to try to get him to give up his title, but it's clear that he's probably not—not going to do it," he said .
 He thinks if he does this it will signal the fact that he wants to be prime minister, which he thinks is an absurd thing for him to want to be . He thinks that if he did this it would signal that he is trying to be PM, he will be the prime minister
 He felt that Roger Blough had double-crossed him. I mean, he was really . He was really—what Roger . Blough did to him. He felt he was being treated like a child. He was very angry .
 Bobby said to me later that if we'd known the people like André Meyer or something, or had more friends in that community, perhaps it could have all been arranged with less bitterness . Bobby said: "Perhaps it could've been arranged by less bitterness"
 Clark Clifford was the one person they found who they thought the others would trust . Clifford's office and the White House called everyone and got him up to negotiate . Clifford: "It was back and forth between his office and White House and calling everyone and getting"
 Or whichever company first broke, and he was at the Library dinner for Jack. Jack. Or Jack . Or Jack. or Jack .
 Bob Greene: "Remember how it said in the press that the FBI got sent into everybody's home at night or something—the reporters— Woke up reporters at two in the morning. Oh, and then I remember Bobby saying to me later, November, that . Remember how it
 Bobby was talking about how awful J Edgar Hoover's been since Jack died and how he curries favor with Lyndon Johnson by sending him all these awful reports about everyone . Hoover was talking to Bobby about the way he curried favor with LBJ .
 Bobby said he'd always, you know, tried to deal so nicely with Hoover and whenever anything—anything—anything the FBI ever did well, it was fine with him if Hoover took credit for it . Bobby would take credit for anything that Hoover did badly, he said. Bobby would
 Sort of sounds like— I mean, I can't remember who they wrote up, or what reporter they would be waking up right now . I mean ... I can’t remember who’s writing up .
 Arthur Goldberg played an active role in this steel thing and Ted Sorensen, I imagine . Arthur Goldberg was an active part of the steel project . Ted Sorennsen was also an active member of the project .
 It seems to be mostly Jack on the phone and Clark Clifford . But the President was really— But the president was really, he said, "really, really"
 "I think just after Roger Blough came in his office and told him that—you know, a flare flare," he says . "I'm not sure what happened to me," he adds .
 The second closest thing I've seen to it is sometimes after the Germans have done one more damn irritating but relatively minor thing. And as I say, I'm not sure what it is, but it's sometimes after they have done something that's irritating .
 "I mean, all the time he was acting in the crisis, he wasn't acting out of madness and temper," he says . And then it changed from madness to madness, he says. And then he says, "then it changed"
 "Then he was working it like a chess board. Then it was just trying to see how you could," he said . "Then it was trying to ... work it like chess board," he added .
 Was he mad then or was he more— I suppose he was less— he felt betrayed by Blough? "He felt betrayed," he said. "I suppose he felt less, less"
 He had no reason, I guess, to expect Barnett to act differently from the way he did . Barnett was a good guy, but he was a bad guy, he says .
 You wouldn't realize what it had been like and I guess when, you know, the tear gas started to run out and the troops that were meant to get there in an hour were still four hours away . The tear gas was running out and troops that had been meant to arrive in
 Did he ever mention— Well, I don't think—I don't know what he thought of him later? Well, he said, "I do know what I think of him"
 He acknowledged that having made that call during the campaign got them . Then he told me of a tape that the FBI had of Martin Luther King when he was here for the freedom march . He said what an incredible speaker he was during that freedom march thing .
 "He said this with no bitterness or anything, how he was calling up all these girls and arranging for a party of men and women, I mean, sort of an orgy in the hotel, and everything," he said .
 "Oh, but Jack, that's so terrible. At first he said, oh, well, you know—and I said, ""Oh, Jack," she said . At first, she said, "I said, Oh, Jack, it was so terrible."
 "This was when it was just one girl, they had the conversation. No, this wasn't ... this was when ... they had a conversation," she said . "This wasn't when it wasn't— this was in the middle of the conversation"
 Jack said, ""Oh, well, you know—he never really said anything against Martin Luther King. And Jack said: "Oh well, he would never judge anyone in any sort of way"
 Since then, Bobby's told me of the tapes of these orgies they have and how Martin Luther King made fun of Jack's funeral . Since then Bobby's . Bobby's said of the . tapes of the orgies he has . Jack's .
 Martin Luther King is really a tricky person. And things about they almost dropped the coffin and—well, I mean Martin Luther . And things . about the coffin almost dropped, he said. "Martin Luther King was really a tough person. He is a really tricky person."
 "He never said anything against Martin Luther King to me, so I don't know. But I wouldn't know," he says . "I wouldn't say what happened to me," he adds .
 Bobby would be the one to find out what he ever really thought of him in that way . "Bobby would be one of the ones who would want to know what he thought of Bobby," he said .
 I just can't see a picture of Martin Luther King without thinking, you know, that man's terrible. That man's horrible. I can't think of him without thinking of him as a terrible man .
 Lyndon was trying to make the—I don't know who —like him. That he'd done something down there and made some speech which had just caused infinitely more trouble, and then got all the South mad or something .
 I can't remember if people knew about missiles when Jack went away on that speaking trip . I'm not sure how much of the world knew about the missiles when he was away .
 The news arrived on a Tuesday and then the small—very small group knew . He went over the news over the weekend, he said .
 He went away on the Thursday or Friday — on the Friday—and then came back on the Saturday, and then gave his speech on the Monday following . And he went away, remember, remember .
 "I was lying in the sun and it was so nice to be there, and this call came through from Jack and he said, "I'm coming back to Washington this afternoon"
 "There was just something funny in his voice and he never asked me to do," she says . "He knew that those weekends—and away from the tension of the White House—were so good for me," she adds .
 It was just so unlike him, having known you'd just gotten down there with two rather whiny children, who you'd have to wake up from their naps and get back . "It's just so unusual him," she said .
 "I could tell from his voice something was wrong, so I didn't even ask," she said . "I didn't know what it was, but I could tell something from him," she says . "He was very upset, but he was so upset that he didn't ask
 "We got back there, I suppose, around six or something. So you woke them up from their naps," he says . "We were back there around six," he adds .
 "I just knew, whenever he asks, or I thought whenever you're married to someone and they ask something—yeah, that's the whole point of being married—you just must sense trouble in their voice and mustn't ask why"
 "It seemed there was no waking or sleeping, and I just don't know which day was which. But from then on, it seemed there were no waking," she said .
 "Some people had said for their wives to go away and Mrs. Mrs. Jack told me right away," she said . "But I know that Jack—oh, he'd said something," she recalled .
 Phyllis Dillon told me later that Douglas had taken her for a walk and told her what was happening, and suggested she go to Hobe Sound or somewhere . She said she was told by Douglas that she should go to a place where she would be safe .
 "I knew if anything happened, we'd all be evacuated to Camp David or something," he said . And I remember saying, "Well, I knew if any of us were going to be evacuated," he added .
 I don't think he—but I said, ""Please don't send me away to Camp David," she says . "I said, "I and the children. I and my children"
 "Even if there's not room in the bomb shelter in the White House," President Obama said . "I'd seen. And, you know—and I said, even if there was not room"
 It was so much going on and then the thing—and then as the time went on, it turned out—well, you know—it turned out . "Oh, the awful fluke of a couple of days," he said. "I was so busy, it was so
 McCone had just gotten married again and had gone off on a honeymoon . And then McCone, when ... McCone was just getting married again, had gone to honeymoon. McCone: "McCone's wife had gone on honeymoon"
 There was something rather tricky there that, him being out of town on his honeymoon, didn't order another flight or didn't something, so you would have known a couple of days sooner . Then he'd stopped—all—there was something that, he said, "there was
 There's something there where McCone could have postponed his honeymoon a bit, or whether it was just a hapless accident, but that was responsible for a delay .
 "There was no day or night because I can remember one night, Jack was lying on his bed in his room, and it was really late, and I came in in my nightgown"
 "I'd already run over to his bed, and it was because Bundy was in the room," she says . "Suddenly, I saw him waving me away —Get out, get out!" Bundy was waving her away, she says. "And suddenly, he waved me away,"
 "I waited for Jack in my room, and whether he came to bed at two, three, four, I don't know. Well, then I got out of the room and waited for him," she said .
 "I remember Bundy at the foot of both of our beds, you know, waking Jack up for something," she says . "And then another night, I remember Bundy . He was at the bottom of both our beds," she adds . "He was always at the feet of both
 "Jack would go into his own room and then talk on the phone maybe until, say, from five to six to seven" "Jack" would go to his room, then talk to the phone, maybe until he had to go to bed .
 He might come back and sleep for two hours and go to his office, or—as I say, there was no day or night. He might go back and go back to sleep, or go to work, or not . He might have gone back and forth, or there was
 "That's the time I've been the closest to him, and I never left the house or saw the children," she says . When he came home, if it was for sleep or for a nap, she would sleep with him, she says. And, well, that's
 "I'd walk by his office all the time, and sometimes he would take me out—it was funny—for a walk around the lawn, a couple of times," he says .
 The White House had a secret meeting in the Oval Room when it was held in a car so that the press wouldn't get suspicious . The president's son says he's proud of his father's legacy and the president's legacy .
 Former President Bush was in the Treaty Room at the time, but he could hear them talking through the door . He says he was just fiddling through some mail or something, but the door was open .
 No—McNamara summing up something and then Gilpatric giving some summary and then a lot of queses—and then I thought, well, I mustn't listen, and I went away . No, he said, "I mustn’t listen
 I mean, you mentioned Mac Bundy's— Well, that I all knew later and that was never told to me until much, much later . Well, he said, "That I all . knew later," he said . "Well, that . that I just knew later"
 "At the time, you know, at the time he—well, it was just so so—he really wasn't sort of asking me. And the thing was—no, at . the time," he said .
 Khrushchev told me about the telegram he received from the Soviet Union . But then he did tell me about this crazy telegram that came through one night, he said .
 I guess he'd sent the nice one first where he looked like he would, but then this crazy one came through in the middle of the night . The nice one was first sent to a nice one, then the crazy one, he said .
 Jack was really upset about that and told me and then decided that they would just answer the first, and being in on that. Well, I remember Jack being really upset that and telling me . Well, it was then that they decided to just answer it first and be in on it
 "He really wanted to put Gromyko on the line of just lying to him and never giving anything away," he said . "How he'd seen him and he talked to him," he wrote .
 The Russians might have thought we were sending it in, and that could have just been awful. Oh, my God, you know, then the Russians might think we sent it in .
 I remember hearing how Anderson at the Pentagon was mad at McNamara, wouldn't let—I don't know if that was afterwards or before—but all that thing. And then I remember when the blockade— oh, and then I . remember hearing . how . the blockade . Anderson
 "It was like an election night waiting, but much worse. The only thing I can think of what it was like was like, it was election night . It was like Election Night waiting waiting, and much worse," she said .
 One ship was coming and some big fat freighter had turned back, but it didn't have anything but oil on it anyway . All these ships were cruising forward. But one ship was turning back, and one was coming .
 "If it had just gone on maybe two more days, everybody really would have cracked," Bundy says . Bundy: "All those men had been awake night and day. And I can't remember ... the day finally when it was over and saying to me"
 "I wrote a letter to McNamara afterwards, which I showed to Jack. And you just thought ... You just thought—and then I wrote ... McNamara after I showed him a letter, McNamara."
 "You didn't worry about him and fatigue because you'd seen him driving himself so much all his life," she says . "So you knew he always would have some hidden reserve to draw on," she adds .
 "I always think that if you're told how much longer you have to go on, you can always make it," he says . "You always think ... you always think—you always think," he adds. "You can always be told how long you've got to go ...
 "When it was over, I mean, I don't know how many days or weeks later it was, but he thought of giving that calendar to everyone. And finally, when it was . over, he thought . of giving it to everyone."
 President Kennedy presented his wife with a calendar on her desk at the White House . He then surprised her with a surprise, and she was surprised to find out .
 I didn't—I was so surprised when I got one because he told me he wanted to do it, so he said, you know, ""Ask Tish or Tiffany,"" or something. I was just so surprised . He said, "Ask Tsh or Tiffany" or
 When they came, I was so surprised that I had one and I burst out crying . So I told her and then when they came she told her, she burst out .
 I just remember when the article by Charlie Bartlett or something came out later. It was later published in the book, "Charlie Bartlett" It's not clear what happened to the original article, but I remember when it was published .
 I think he came either to the end or the one at the beginning or the end of the beginning of the career . "He came either one of the ones he came to, or the ones at the end," he says .
 "He didn't want to get involved with everything that was going on, or what I think is more like it, he came at the one at the end," she says . "I think that he came to the end and didn't give any opinion," she adds .
 "He could have come to all those meetings too, and he didn't come to one," he said . "And he could have ... come to a meeting," he added. "But he could've come to every meeting"
 Chester wasn't in India but he wasn't involved in this. And Bobby said—I remember the first one, Bobby said to him— No, Chester wasn’t in India . Chester was in India, but not in India. He wasn't going to India, he said
 "Everyone who leaves this room agrees,"" or something, Bobby said . "Everyone in the room agrees" or "everyone in this room disagrees," he said . Bobby was going to say that he didn't disagree, but that he disagreed .
 Everybody had taken a whole series of positions on this and various people at various times had taken various positions and various things had been suggested that, as you mention the case of Mac, who was both— you know, one time he was a hawk and another time a dove .
 Two viewpoints existed, but I think, at one time or another, nearly everyone around that table had—took one or another of the viewpoints . And the thing was, there—there—two viewpoints existed .
 "Jack was just upset over the flak of the article," he said . "It much oversimplified the— Well, anyway, I mean, Jack was just ... upset," he added .
 Clayton® had told me that it would be so nice if we would ask Adlai to some of our private parties, that that could really make things up . And Clayton® told me he would like to have some of his private parties with the actor .
 "It really made an awful difference to Adlai when I went to lunch at the UN and I gave him a little watercolor that I'd done," she says . "Well, anyway, that really made a difference"
 I'd done it—Jack and I were just sitting there one night— of a Sphinx I have, and I just had it in my briefcase . I'd do it, Jack and I was just sitting . Jack had it, and it was in his briefcase.
 "I mean, you had to do things to sort of soothe his feelings because he—but that did smooth over very nicely, finally," she said . "That did smooth . over nicely," she added .
 There's a terrible crisis going on in Laos but nobody really knows it, except in the papers . The difference between Jack and Lyndon Johnson, and where it's really going to make a difference in this country, is now there's a huge crisis in Laos .
 He's running all around Texas, getting high school and college degrees . He says he's running around Texas to get high school, college degrees.
 Dave Powers” says he can't bear to go to Camp David or anyplace he's alone . Now he has beach chairs around the pool, and on weekends, he likes to sit in the pool and they have drinks there —and all his cronies .
 "He can't bear ever to be alone and face something awful, or discuss with these people," he says . But he says he's never been alone and faces something awful alone .
 "There wasn't a problem for seven months, which Jack had made possible. And that man came in," he said . "Jack had made it possible," he added .
 President Barack Obama has "a sense of security" in the wake of a mass shooting in November, CNN's John Sutter says . He says the president has been able to "make this air of good feeling and lull so many people into this sense of . security"
 A president has to be on top of his post-Vietnam crisis, says President Obama . "The terrible things are going to happen, because every little group is off," he says .
 "People will think I'm bitter, but I'm not so bitter now. It was just in front of—this is off the track, talking about Lyndon," he says . "I'm not bitter now," he adds .
 "I just wanted it to be put in context the kind of president Jack was and the kind Lyndon is. But I just wanted to put it in context," she says .
 Harold Stassen2 said last weekend that Johnson would be like Harding, and it would be another era of good feeling, and business liked Harding and the senators liked Harding . Harding didn't keep too much sort of tabs on the people who worked under him, so they could sort of
 Lyndon can ride on some of the great things Jack did, and a lot of them will go forward because they can't be stopped . Civil rights, the tax bill, the gold drain stuff, he says . "A lot of the things will go ahead," he adds .
 "When something really crisis happens, that's when they're going to miss Jack. And maybe you'll do something more about the Alliance and everything," she says . "Maybe you'll ... but when something really . crisis happens" "Jack" will be remembered for his role in the
 Jack, thinking of being vice president and how awful it would be, gave Lyndon so many things to do . It was so funny because Jack thought of being VP and gave Lyndon a list of things he wanted to do.
 He could have made his council on human rights4 or whatever it was into some— you know, gone ahead with it—equal opportunity . I mean, he could have . made it into some of his councils .
 "He just never wanted to make any decision or do anything that would put him in any position," he said . He said he was never in a position to make a decision .
 Jack would say you could never get an opinion out of Lyndon Johnson at any cabinet or national security meeting . And he never liked—Jack would say . Jack said he never got an opinion from Lyndon at any Cabinet meeting .
 He'd just say, you know, that he agreed with them—with everyone, or just keep quiet . He'd say, "I agree with them" or "he agreed with everyone" or just quiet .
 He'd ask to go to Finland or something, and that would be fine. Or then then he'd ask for Finland . Or then he would ask for something else . He'd like to go back to Finland .
 He'd bring back a lot of little glass birds with ""Lyndon" written all over that he'd give out . And he would bring back some of the glass birds . He'd give them back to him and give them away .
 President's state trip to Luxembourg and Belgium is pathetic, says CNN's John Sutter . "It's so pathetic when all you can find to do with a President who's dying to give you a lot to do, is take a state trip"
 President Barack Obama's visit to Greece was "phenomenal," CNN's John Sutter says . "You just wouldn't believe the confusion and the frenzy and what was demanded of people," he says .
 Godfrey McHugh had tried in the beginning to make Jack order four new Air Force Ones,707s . "We needed the one that could be the fastest. We needed to be the best," he said .
 Jack wasn't going to spend that much money for four new planes, he says . Lyndon kept pushing him to do that . Jack was going to do it, but Lyndon was pushing him .
 Lyndon kept pushing for a bigger plane, says President Jack Reagan . "You know, Lyndon wanted a big plane," he says .
 All the kind of things like that he wanted, the panoply that goes with power, but none of the responsibility . And—or more—or for more—all of the things he wanted .
 Jack and Lyndon were in Florida in the middle of his rest and vacation, and if Lyndon would've come to report, it would have to be in the night, which wasn't great for Jack, and he thought it would be awful for Lyndon . Jack thought it was terrible for Lyndon
 "Find out if he'd like to or not,"" Lyndon would always like to. But he'd say, ""Find out . If he'd want to, find out . Find out . He'd always want to. Find out what he wants to do .
 He'd always be flown down in a special jet and the press would all be alerted . So he'd always fly down in special jet to meet the press .
 President Obama's vice president would come over and there'd be absolutely nothing to talk about, but it would look as if, you know— So that's the kind of vice president he was, he says .
 Jack used to say, "I wouldn't do anything with Congress. No," he said. Then once he wasn't majority leader anymore, he'd either think—either Jack thought this or Lyndon thought this—but he wouldn't . No, Jack said, but he would do anything
 Jack used to say more times, "My God, Mansfield gets more accomplished" Ben Bradlee used to tell Jack O'Brien that Mansfield got more accomplished . "Larry" and "Mansfield" were Larry and Mansfield, says Jack .
 "He said, ""He's done more,"" and he said—The thing is, Lyndon snowed everyone so much. And he said, Lyonnie snowed everyone so much," he said .
 Ben was needling him, saying, "But you're not going to get the tax bill by and the civil rights bill by this year," he said .
 The civil rights he predicted exactly—everything that would happen as the date . He predicted exactly everything he would happen on the date of that date .
 Mansfield, he just thought, was extraordinary and that nobody recognized it because the man played quietly . Mansfield was extraordinary, he said, but nobody recognized him .
 The story has been printed to the effect that there was some consideration of dropping Johnson in '64 . The story was printed in the story that there were some consideration .
 "I don't see how you could drop him in '64. I mean, stories would come out about '64, but I don't think you could do that." "I'm not sure how you would drop him," he says .
 Lyndon Johnson thought he would be too old then to run for president, but he is now too old to run .
 President Nixon "didn't like that idea that Lyndon would go on and be president because he was wotried for the country," Nixon says .
 Of course, it was so dominated by the—overshadowed by the Cuban crisis . The Cuban crisis was over-the-top of the story .
 At the beginning, he planned a rather short campaign and then made a longer one . At the end of the campaign he planned to be a very short campaign, he said .
 "Sometimes, I'd wander out of my room in my dressing gown and all those men would come out in clouds of smoke," she says . "And sometimes, sometimes, I would wander out in my . dressing gown," she adds .
 "Sometimes they'd be in the Family Dining Room. Sometimes they would be, and then later on they were in the family dining room . Sometimes they were there, sometimes they were on the floor, sometimes in the kitchen .
 The first one, all the antique chairs that Harry du Pont had had, broke one by one. "Harry du Pont's antique chairs," he says . "The first one," he said, "broke by one, and the second one broke by one"
 He loved Mansfield and Dirksen was always very nice with him, he said . What did he say about Mansfield? "Well, he loves Mansfield," he said.
 I don't know, I guess he was really sad, was very sad when Sam Rayburn died . I'm not sure why he was sad when he died, but was sad .
 Larry O'Brien told me one of the great mysteries around the White House was the legislative breakfasts . The White House breakfast was "a great mystery," says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "I know one thing about the legislative breakfast"
 Larry couldn't stand Ted Sorensen, so one night he was telling me . Larry would have prepared an agenda for the breakfasts and just before they were about to start Ted would ask to see it and take it, he said . Larry said so many times .
 He'd just change one or two sentences and then initial it ""TCS"" and pass it all around that way . He'd then change it to "TCS"
 I told you about the Profiles in Courage thing, and well, I mean, he was doing it to Larry O'Brien, everyone. He was doing that to everyone. I told him about it, he said .
 Someone said he loved himself and finally he loved one other person, which was Jack . Jack. To— Someone said, "Jack. Jack. Jack"
 "I can remember when he first started to try to speak like him or dare to call him Jack, and he'd sort of blush," she says . "He would blush when he tried to talk like him," she adds .
 The sort of civilized side of Jack, Jack, or be easy at dinners or if girls like you, and men, is Jack . Jack is the kind of civilized man who is easy at dinner .
 "Because he knew he wasn't quite that way in the beginning, it almost went into a sort of a resentment," he says . "Because of the resentment. Because of the fact that he didn't have a lot of the things he had to do, he said .
 "I never saw him very much in the White House. I mean, it was very mixed-up in his own inferiority complex," she says . "He had a big inferiority Complex," she adds .
 "That would be the last person you would invite at night. But that wouldn't have been—I mean, as he and Ted had the problems all day," she says . "That wouldn't be—that wouldn't ... have been," she adds .
 George Smathers survived in the West Wing . The West Wing star survived his injuries in a way that mystified people .
 His friendship with Smathers was before the Senate, really, and before he was married, he says . He says he's a friend of the late Sen. John McCain .
 Stockdale was a friend of Smathers. He says he and Stockdale would see each other off and on in the summer or in the winter . Stockdale's wife says he was a good friend of Stockdale, who died in 1999 .
 "I always thought, sort of a crude side. And it was really a friend of one side of Jack," she says .
 "Jack had the crude side, but you could laugh or hear a story," he says . "He didn't want to stick it to someone who'd once been a friend," he adds .
 Kenny hated Smathers, and he knew when he was hurting him . And he knew that when he hurt him, he knew he was going to hurt him . Kenny hated him, and knew when his friend was hurt .
 "He was hurt by him and he wouldn't—he wouldn't ever say, ""O.K.—you're out—now we're enemies,"" "because he was just too kind," she said .
 Joe Kraft said that someone who had been at that house got so frightened and was so, you know, rocked by seeing Johnson in his cups at four in the morning . Kraft said he doubted if he had the equipment to be a president .
 "He didn't have that funny, sort of droopy look he used to have. And the—he didn't, he said, "I'm not going to be able to do that again."
 He "looked very sort of spruce and chipper" when I saw him, says CNN's John Sutter . "He looked very spruce, chipper," he says of the late actor .
 He intervened in a by-election at Devizes and gave a speech and the Tories held that—astonishing—and he felt, I think, very cheerful about that, as if, politically, politically— You know, in the Cuban crisis, I was so surprised that all these
 It seems to me that your reaction is sort of the reaction you'd have to have. Was there a—it seems to be a—there was there a . Was there there a ... reaction? "Yes, yes," she said .
 We ended up last time talking about the Cuban crisis, and the next event of great interest was the problem with the British over Skybolt .
 David Ormsby-Gore came back and Randolph Churchill came back, but not Macmillan . No, I don't think MacMillan did . David ormsby, Gore came back .
 President Kennedy and Prime Minister Macmillan met at Nassau in 1962 . The meeting took place in Nassau, New Zealand .
 First, they met in Nassau because Jack told David to tell Macmillan he wouldn't meet in Bermuda again because there was no hot water for the bath . In the governor general's house there was . no . hot water .
 McNamara said he didn't know, and McNamara was away . Then he got on the phone and tracked everyone down and tracked them down . Gilpatric said he was away from the scene .
 He was crushed because Nassau had gone so beautifully and Macmillan had—Macmillan was really in trouble at home, I guess, and whatever they'd worked out was Polaris . Together they'd both done the best they could to get something that would be all right for them
 CNN.com: "It's always some third person down the line somewhere whose fault it is. And as he said, it's always somebody's fault it's not their own."
 Jack always did think was stupid, doing some little thing and someone not being there when someone called, I don't know. It turns out on that thing, which he just explained to me briefly, it's Thorneycroft, who Jack always thought was stupid . Jack always does think
 Yes, and concern, because it did weaken Macmillan's political position . Yes, but concern, as well as concern, for the future of Britain .
 President and Mac Bundy and David on the plane down to Nassau. And I think the actual solution was worked out by the President, Mac Bundy, David and David .
 "Jack was really mad, either talking to me on the phone from Nassau or telling me before. And I remember Jack being really mad," she said .
 Diefenbaker had made some snotty condition that he had to come down there and have lunch with him one day, or something . He hated him, but he said he was going to meet him, and he would meet him .
 "They had a good time, always, he and Macmillan," he says . "I mean, sort of it was rather wry laughter. But, you know, they had a fun time," he adds .
 You know, they always managed to have their jokes, even though they were tinged with despair a bit . You know that they always had their jokes .
 Labour didn't want Skybolt either, so they weren't in a position to exploit it for themselves . Skybolt is the only MP to win a seat in the Labour-controlled Commons . But Labour are unlikely to take the chance of a Labour majority in the Commons .
 Randolph Churchill, when Jack went to Washington, came over . And then Randolph Churchill came over. And then I remember Randolph Churchill . Randolph Churchill went over to Washington .
 He was proud of the fact that he'd written the one pro-Nassau piece to appear in the British press . Yes, he came to Washington thereafter, and was very proud of it .
 " Churchill was always interested in him, but really it was more Churchill. Well, of course, he was always . He was always always interested, he said . He said: "He was always fascinated with Churchill. He was very interested in Churchill."
 "He'd explain of how he'd never forgotten the slights of the last world war, or practically, that we didn't come earlier into the first world war. You know, that that man was just consumed really with grudges, and he'd explain . You know that
 "Everybody that he was dealing with then is dead, and everything, and he just—he just —just—he was nice about it," he said . "He just— he just — just—and he just said it. When everybody that he . was . dead, he
 He just seemed to have such distaste for someone who was so spiteful, he said . But he said he didn't want to be a person who had such a distaste .
 Churchill asked Roosevelt if he got along with Churchill or Roosevelt best, he said in Paris . "I remember he asked him, in Paris and he was very interested, who he got Along with best—Churchill or Roosevelt," he said .
 And de Gaulle said, "With Churchill I was always in disagreement but we always reached an accord" de Gaulles said .
 "With Roosevelt I was always in agreement but we never had an accord," says Gaulle . "I wouldn't be surprised if Jack almost expected it," he says .
 Jack said he purposely wasn't going to talk to him about all this—you know, France and England and everything, the kind of thing that Hervé was always so frantic about, he said . He came for dinner one night alone, afterwards, and said he was going to
 "It was about coming back from Morocco, when I'd said I wouldn't land in Paris, or something. But—and later on that spring I had to answer a letter," he says . "Or else it was about . coming back . from Morocco"
 "They think I'm a so-and-so but they think you're nice because you like France," she says . "Don't you see you're the one avenue that's open," she asks .
 "You must always leave an avenue open and you mustn't—"" Again that thing of conciliation always. And you must always always leave a avenue open," he said .
 Jack gave so much and that spiteful man gave so little. But he was just so un-Christian of de Gaulle, he said . "Jack gave . so much," he said. "It was just . so unChristian"
 De Gaulle saw that in the long run, de Gaulle would do all of this work for ""/a Gloire"" and everything, and he'd really be remembered as —well, the man who, with Castro and Red China, didn't sign the test ban treaty .
 Nehru's image really did change a lot in his last years because Nehru got to be awfully sanctimonious, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: Nehru had to change a bit in his final years . He says Nehru was a "sansanimonious
 "He had that sort of feeling about him. You asked me about him and Nehru the other day," he said . He said Nehru had a feeling about Nehru .
 He thought that that was de Gaulle's horrible failure, and I don't think he did think much of him. So he thought that . That was a horrible failure . So he didn't think of him, he thought he was a terrible failure .
 "I loathe the French. But no, you know, basically he didn't like the French, and I loathe them," he said .
 There's not one French person I can think of except—maybe two very simple people. There are two simple French people. The French are simple people .
 "Malraux would talk brilliantly and so would Jack, and Bundy would always be there," says Bundy . Bundy would "always be there" says Malraux . Bundy was always there, says Bundy's widow .
 "Malraux sort of off in a marvelous fog or— It was very interesting and they never, you know, really got into policy or all that," she says . "It was a wonderful exchange, but Malraux was sort of sort of ... off in the marvelous fog
 There was no point giving really Malraux any messages, but— but— he wasn't astonished by de Gaulle then . But he was astonished by De Gaulle, he says, then .
 He rather expected that de Gaulle would have a headstrong headstrong, he says . Well, maybe he was a little astonished in the beginning because he really tried hard and went over backwards .
 "It just wasn't going to get any better. But, well, maybe he was a little astonished, but then he got to see that it was this classic pattern," he says .
 He was really irritated, I told you before, at what de Gaulle said after Cuba2 . And that was another time that I think there was some sincere irritation that that proved we'd never defend Europe. And that . That proved that that that . proved we . would never defend
 Yes, or it was going to be January, even, and it was likely to be at Hyannis Bay .
 Hervé always said, if only they could talk and meet the way Macmillan and Jack met, they would meet again . "Macmillan, Jack met," he said, "anywhere, you know, halfway, this and that, but do it a lot"
 The President had some expectations a meeting with de Gaulle might ease things, he says . But he says he would want it to be some momentous meeting, and that meeting would have had terrific results in a way .
 "De Gaulle respected Jack and the whole way his opinion changed of him in Paris," says de Gaulle . De Gaulle's opinion changed the way he viewed Jack in Paris, he says .
 "You could just see that he was," she says of her late husband . "He told me about him after his funeral, upstairs. And, you know, the way he'd speak to me of him," she writes .
 Abbie Rowe: "He just was one of these—you know, so impressive. Well, I mean, that he just was ... so impressive" The burial of President Kennedy is held in Boston .
 De Gaulle really looked up to him, says de Gaulle . And maybe he didn't like it sometimes, but he really looked at him, he says .
 "Bohlen4" tried to say that Johnson would be all right, he was the one Kennedy had chosen as vice president . "Bobby told me this later," he said, according to a friend .
 Jack never would have recognized Red China, I'm sure, if Jack had been alive . So he wouldn't have dared to . Jack would have been alive if he'd been alive, he says .
 Jean Monnet was one of the first for the Medal of Freedom, and you know, so he thought he was a most wonderful man . Well, in the very beginning, he always thought of him as a wonderful man, and that all that he worked and believed in, and everything
 President Obama was "very much for it but he was much less interested than a lot of the people in the State Department about the questions of structure and all this kind of thing. He was very much for [the] State Department," said Obama .
 He knew if it came, it would come in its own way and you could get obsessed with the sort of tactical questions about it . And I think quite rightly so, because he knew it would be a big success . He knew it was going to come, and I think rightly so
 "I think he saw it as a historic inevitability. Yeah, he never seemed to be pressing it, or anything, but— I think he thought it was an inevitability," he said .
 Oh, if he'd only written these things down because I'd forgotten them. Oh, I've forgotten them . I've never forgotten these things, but I'm glad they're here .
 Macmillan had been out at Rambouillet about two weeks before . But de Gaulle vetoed the Common Market and what he had been told him . De Gaulle vetoed Common Market .
 "Everything seemed to be fine and then there was some little thing here or there, some typically French thing of ... Hervé always being mad when he's not given precedence"
 "Well, something that some country or person did that irritated him and bang-o, he turned around and did the other," he said . "He did it because he was angry at something that he thought was something that annoyed him"
 Macmillan told him at Nassau about Rambouillet, he says . Yeah, that he—that he . that he . was told by MacMillan, he said . Yeah. That he . told him . That he— that he told him about . Ramb
 Macmillan at Rambouillet had not said anything to de Gaulle about the Nassau agreement . De Gaulle believed he didn't understand the plan was drawn up on the plane down to Nassau .
 Macmillan came to Rambouillet and held out on de Gaulle and, therefore, De Gaulle regarded that as a personal betrayal . Because of that sort of thing from the French here, I heard some of that kind of thing .
 At Rambouillet it had all looked wonderful. And that's why he suddenly did the Common Market, though he suddenly decided to do it .
 "I think that, in any case, he might have done it but not in that kind of contemptuous way that he —that he . did it," he said . "I don't think he would have been contemptuous," he added .
 Fanfani first met the President at the Chicago convention in 1956 . He met him at the convention in Chicago .
 "I mean, he wasn't just, you know, inspired beyond belief by him. You know, that was sort of the opening to the left and everything, I suppose"
 "Tito had a violent temperature when he saw him, so that was difficult. I wasn't," he said . "I wasn't going to be able to see him," he added .
 "I was still so terribly tired after John and I didn't really want to go on that trip," she says . "We were so tired that I was so tired," she adds .
 "Once it was delayed, you just weren't up to it, or something was happening," he says . "I forget what. So I forget what," he said . "So, once it was . delayed, it just wasn't up for it," he adds. "I
 Ken would keep saying that the children at Mysore were weaving garlands, and this and that. And you wrote back and forth, and you tried to change it and he—and Ken would say that . And you tried, and he would say, "This and that"
 CNN.com will feature a map of Rajasthan and around India . This week, we cut it down to a very small version of the map .
 Jack got through to Ken Galbraith, and Ken was really protesting on the phone, and he spent the whole last day of his little holiday there, shouting to Ken on a bad connection .
 "It was wonderful to go to India, and he didn't really care if I went or not, but I guess he thought it would be nice," she says .
 JFK was very pleased with it and very proud of the success and I think he thought that—well, as you mentioned yourself in connection with France, that quite apart from it's nice for you to get a holiday and get out of Washington, I think it helped the country .
 India was really just getting to know Nehru, who did like Lee and I—Lee and me. You know, it was so funny, the difference between India and Pakistan, because of the difference . India was just getting a little better at Nehru .
 "I basically like the Paks more than the Indians. And when we got to Pakistan—of course, I basically like them," he says .
 Ayub never stopped talking politics or how he hated Nehru or couldn't stand him . They're sort of more manly, and Ayub always talked politics . Ayub: "I'm not sure what I'm going on to say, but I'm sure I'm not going
 State Department made sure it looked like McConaughy was an old friend of Jack's . State Department had a message from the State Department from Ken to make sure that it was true, he says .
 The first thing I did when McConaughy and Ayub got there was the day before, as the ambassador . So the first thing he did was to greet Ayub: "I did it the day I did—the day before"
 "I tried to sort of say—set it up that they'd known each other from when and everything," she says . "So, I tried to kind of say...set up that [the pair] knew each other," she said . "I'm not sure what happened to
 Ayub said, "That's right in front of Ayub—""That's not true at all, Mrs. McConaughy," she said . Ayub: "Oh, no" She said, "That's what she said, and Ayub replied, "
 The first time I ever met the President was two weeks ago when I gave —"" And the only time I wrote Jack a letter, which I wrote coming down from the Khyber Pass and gave him when I got home, was what a hopeless ambassador McConaughy was for
 McConaughy said to Ayub Khan, "Mr President, I was so interested to hear all that French at the airport today"
 "We were having nosebleeds every day and night. And our trip was so exhausting that all through Pakistan, Lee and I were having nosesbleeds . Lee and Lee had nosebleeding every day .
 Ed Gullion was the only person in the State Department who would sort of talk to Jack, who would really say how awful Indochina was and the way it was going, he says . Jack and Ed were married in 1971 .
 He got shifted out of that area and given other things. And I guess he got fired because of that, or else he got—or else, got—no, he got put in some— He got placed in some areas, he says .
 We always used to see him all the time and, well then, I think Jack named him to the Congo, just showed what he thought of him . It was the first time we'd see him in the Congo and he was very happy to be there .
 In 1963, one of the big things on the President's mind was, of course, Vietnam and Diem and Madame Nhu, and all that . The President was in Vietnam in 1963 .
 Yes, well, you know, obviously it was trouble for so long and you didn't ask Jack about it when he came home, and everything. Yes, yes, well . You know, Jack .
 "I forget how long Lodge was out there before things really got bad. But I know once—I forget . I forget how many times I've been there, Lodge was there, but I know that he was there at the time .
 He was out about, I guess, about three months before Diem was thrown out of the country . "He was out," he says .
 "He started acting rather strangely, and he said he wouldn't answer their cables and you couldn't get through," she says . "Well, I know that he started acting ... rather strangely," she adds .
 Lodge had started something and they'd stopped. Lodge had done something to try and stop, he says . "I know he'd done something he'd tried to try to stop," he adds .
 All of this you can learn from other people because a lot of it I learned later. All of the things you learn from others are things you can't learn from . "A lot of the stuff you learn later is how important it's important to learn from people like me," says
 When Diem was murdered, Jack had that awful look that he had at the time of the Bay of Pigs . But anyway, when Diem died, Jack was still looking like he was looking at Diem .
 He said he said Diem fought Communism for twenty years and everything, and it shouldn't have ended like this . And he said: "And he said he fought Communism ... and everything" Diem died in Vietnam in 1968 .
 Madame Nhu tearing all around, saying things about him, was more of an irritant . She was a bit of irritant, he said . He said, "I suppose she was more than a irritant."
 She was everything Jack found unattractive—that he found unattractable in a woman . "She was everything that Jack found . unattractive," she said. "That she was everything I found ... unattractive"
 Clare Luce had come to lunch with Jack once in the White House when Tish was still there . Tish had lunch with her husband Jack at the time .
 "Oh, she so badly wanted to come to see him as a man would. And I remember—oh, she . She so badly . Wanted to come see him, and I remember . She wanted to go to him, but he didn't want to see her .
 Tish told me she was so nervous before, she'd had about three martinis . Anyway, a sort of a male lunch was arranged, and Tish said she was nervous before .
 "I was so mad at her that I stood outside our dining room, standing there, pretending to shuffle through my desk," she says . "I just really cut her dead, so that when Jack introduced us and I just stood with my hands at my side and finally walked over,"
 "If you're going to cut someone dead, dear" he said, "you know, he was sort of touched at my loyalty because it could only make Mrs. Mrs. Barbara." He said to her later, "You know," he was touched at her loyalty .
 "He really wasn't very pleased at my doing that. Luce hurt me more,” he said . Luce said, “I'm not sure what happened to me, but I'm sure that Luce was hurt more .
 "Luce, who I guess was a bit loaded, just went on and lit into him and told him all these things," she said . "I guess he was a little bit loaded," she later said .
 He was always, you know, so courteous to women, he said, "Well, I'm sorry, Mrs. Mrs." He said, ""Well,  I'm sorry. Well, I was always so polite to women."
 The sad thing about that is they'd been friends and she'd been a friend of Mr Kennedy's and he'd helped her so. And the sad thing is that she'd helped him so. She'd helped so. He'd helped [Kennedy] so. It was the sad
 "For her to turn on him like that, well again, this resentment of men," she said . "I'm not a man. I'm a woman. She's a woman," she added .
 "It never got bitter that way. Well, I know Jack saw him a couple of times and, you know, it was all right," she says .
 Mr Kennedy had gotten Arthur Krock to do it, because Jack had gotten him to do so . Jack Kennedy was the president of the United States .
 Mr Kennedy thought that it might look as if Arthur Krock had written the book or something, because he'd been an old friend of the family . Mr Kennedy then decided that it would be better if Henry Luce did it . And then Mr Kennedy decided that Mr Luce should write
 Arthur Krock never forgave Jack for changing the show midstream . "It was sort of changed midstream, and that's one thing Arthur Kock never forgives Jack for," he says . "That's one of the things he never forgets Jack for"
 "Krock had known as a young boy and known me and he'd sort of been his mentor," she says . "And you know, so that's where this queer enmity that Krock had for him, who, after all, knew me"
 "Krock became absolutely hopeless. I can remember in the first winter, the dinner at the White House, when the Krocks were there," he says . "There was still a slight relationship then, but then Krock became hopeless," he adds .
 The Times-Herald editor and poet used to write poems to each other, for both of us . He was a friend of my grandfather's, and I've been friends with him for years .
 You try, over and over, to do something about the relationship, and each time you just get slapped in the face with a wet fish, and finally you gave up . And you tried, over . over again, but each time . each time, you just got slapped in .
 "He was too bitter, and he couldn't bear to see someone young coming on," he said . He was too angry to see a young person coming on, he added .
 "We went out of our way to be nice, and we even went to their house for dinner," President Obama says . Obama: "We even went out for dinner -- as President. And we went ... as President."
 On Vietnam, it was rather interesting that the President should send Cabot Lodge, whom he defeated in the Senate in 1952 and who ran on the opposite ticket in 1960 . Lodge had defeated Lodge in 1952 in 1952, and ran on opposite ticket .
 No, the only time I can remember, we asked Lodge to the dinner for Abboud of the Sudan, he says . The only time he can remember it was for the Sudanese, Lodge says .
 I mean, I think Jack had always thought of him as rather arrogant and everything. I think he had always always thought he was rather arrogant, everything .
 "Once he was President, he did these extraordinary sort of thoughtful things, to go out of his way," says President Obama . "I'm not going to let it slide down," he says .
 Lodge had served as liaison officer with the French army in the Second World War and spoke excellent French . Rusk suggested it, and I think the President was attracted to it partly for that reason .
 Latin America was something the President cared about a great deal, obviously. I think Latin America is something he cared about, obviously, obviously . President Obama's Latin American policy was a priority for President Obama .
 President Obama has admiration for Betancourt and Lleras Camargo . He said he was impressed by Betancour and Camargo's work in the field .
 Quadros has been a big name in the sport, but it's not the first time he's been in contention for the title . He says he hopes to win the title in the U.S. on Sunday night .
 Jack was horrified, but that just wasn't in his way of doing things . Jack was not horrified, because that's too strong a word .
 President Obama was "prepared to lose this election," CNN's John Sutter says . He says he would be talking about civil rights on civil rights issues .
 "It was something that had to be done. Sometimes when things were bad, and he'd say, maybe" "Well, maybe," he said, "but you know it had to do," she said .
 "You could never really be a great president unless you were prepared to be hated or to lose on something that counted," says President Obama . Obama: "I'm not a perfect president. You could never be a good president if you're prepared to lose"
 President Bush thought Goulart was a "shifty character" who was "really messing everything up" in the economy and Communists, he says .
 I thought he thought he was a faker and a robber and a— but I don't know what he exactly thought. I thought—I think he thought ... he thought that he was faker, a robber, and a fraud, he said .
 When he was overthrown, it reminds me so now of everyone saying that the U.S. recognized the junta in Brazil too quickly, because we held off recognition or something . But anyway, when he was . overthrown . It reminds me now of people saying that . the
 Rosita Prado, who Pat24 went to school with, wrote a letter saying, ""You saved my father's life" because they were going to execute Prado and, I guess, his wife . And later on, Rosita wrote Pat's, saying, "You saved
 "Because of what we did and everything, they let him get out and get to Paris and all that. And because of what they did, they allowed him to get out of Paris," he says .
 Instead of just saying, "Hooray, hooray" they've overthrown, they've been overthrown," he says . "No, you're absolutely right. Finally, it made it better in the long run," he adds .
 What we did was we suspended and said, we will resume if you agree to do certain things like give parties political freedom, restore freedom of the press, agree to hold elections . What we said was we suspend and said . We said we would resume if we agreed to do some things
 "They finally agreed to do these things, and then we resumed relations, and it made a great difference," he said . "It made a very difference. They finally agreed that these things would make a difference."
 The minute the junta took over this time, everyone just had cheers . And in Brazil, the minute the moment the military took over was cheered . "In Brazil, people just had joy," says one of the country's leaders .
 "Everyone has their civil liberties taken away from them. He said all—half of Congress, or Parliament, whatever it is, all the great writers," he said .
 Kennedy and Johnson were both presidents of the White House . Kennedy was the president of the United States in the early 1960s and early '60s . Johnson was the first president to take office in Latin America . He was the second president of Latin America in the 1960s .
 Charlie Bartlett played a role in working out the conditions with the new government in Peru . Bartlett worked out a deal with Peru's new government to allow him to return to the country .
 Bosch's problems were going to be insurmountable, he said . Well, he just said that Bosch is going to have problems, he added .
 "You know, he had such high hopes for Rusk in the beginning, when you read his dossier of what the man was," he said . "He had such a high hopes," he added. "When you read the dossier, you know what he was."
 Dean Rusk saw him get to sort of be the tool, really, and he saw that that man was so—well, could never dare to make a decision or any —he never would make a . decision, he said .
 CNN's John Sutter says he was asked for a message to be drafted to Russia by the government . Sutter: "I remember once they'd asked for something like wishing Khrushchev happy birthday" He says it was a very unimportant one, but it went by six or
 Former President George H.W. Bush was in Morocco when he visited the country . He says he told him of a brilliant, young, very low man in the embassy there, who'd been there two years .
 Jack Rusk was angry that he had to move everyone every two years . "I wrote Rusk a memo about that six months ago, that you shouldn't have this policy"
 "That it's so much better to let them build up some knowledge,"" or "something. That it's better than letting them build some knowledge" or something. "Or something,"" he said .
 He was toying with the idea of putting McNamara in there, but it really wasn't firmed up because I don't know if he thought exactly McNamara would be right for foreign policy . And I think he was sort of toying .
 He wanted someone like McNamara or Bobby, who could just flush out all those . And it was so funny, one day three ambassadors came in to say goodbye to him, and he said they all had on striped shirts with white collar and cuffs .
 One was going to Africa, one going to the Near East, one to the Middle East . One was in Africa, and one was in Lebanon or Turkey or somewhere. And one went to Africa .
 "It was the wrong idea of the kind of people he wanted to be sent out there anyway. And these sort of precious flits came in his office," she says .
 He wasn't in on either part of the missile crisis or something terribly important because he'd have to go to a dinner for the foreign ambassadors in Washington, D.C.
 Jack said one terrific thing about Angie Duke, who he was so proud of in a way, because Angie does have the most beautiful manners in the world and did so much helping .
 Angie wanted to get out of being chief of protocol, and Jack was so surprised where she wanted to go . Jack and Angie were shocked to find out where Angie was going .
 "I sort of wanted to be Bill Blair, going to eternal parties. Yeah, that he was ... sort of ... Bill Blair," he says .
 He never called anyone by their first names until he really knew them well . He called them first names only when he knew people very well .
 Dean Rusk was the one member of his cabinet—probably because he was older and he hadn't known him before—who he called "Mr Rusk" right up until the last year .
 He never liked it if anyone called you ""Jack," or me ""Jackie,"" or -- except in the campaign, when they yell it . "Jackie" is "Jack" or "Jacky,"" when they call him "Jack," he says .
 He always called his mother and stepfather "Mr and Mrs. And he never would call anyone," he said . He called his stepfather and stepmother "Mr. and Mrs."
 He called my mother ""Mummy,"" because he thought it was such a funny name— as sort of a joke . He called her "Mummy" as a joke, she says . He calls her 'Mummy' as a child .
 Chester Bowles would give endless talk in a meeting about we should enslave, take mud huts out of enslavement and raise the standard of the, blah—you know, go on with these rolling phrases for hours . Jack would say, ""Yes, Chester, but I'm
 Walt Rostow*2: "It was funny, one night I was at a seminar at the Dillons. I was in the middle of a seminar" Rostow: "The Dillons are a great place to be in the world, and I love them"
 He really thought Walt Rostow went on and on, and was hard to listen to, he said . He said he thought Rostow was hard-to- listen to . Rostow is a great writer, he added .
 Every time the door would be open, Wiesner's head would peek in and out, and it would finally drive him so crazy he'd say, ""All right, come in or else go away,"" and it was usually something unimportant . The door would eventually drive him
 The State Department always wanted to appoint a Foreign Service officer . The White House wanted to send some non-Foreign Service officer, like Bill Attwood, to the White House .
 Foreign Service ambassadors were usually so awful. Well, just as I said, that the Foreign Service ambassador was usually so terrible.
 "He really prepared that talk. Then he went over there to give a talk to them once and to tell them," he said . "Then he went ... and gave them a talk," he added .
 "They get sort of trained not to take a position one way or the other, but by the time they get way up, they just can't give you any answer but the answer that's no answer, he says . Younger people should get up quicker .
 President Obama said he was prepared to take an answer one way or the other in a speech to the House of Representatives . He said the speech was part of the whole point of the speech that he gave to them was that you must be prepared to go to Congress or go to the other
 Just that their training was wrong, and they were brainwashed by the time they got there, and, mostly too effete to do any good, which was sort of the standard the people at the State Department admired .
 "Jack never said to me but I saw this later, this winter when he came to see me—it's Chip Bohlen. And just to say something rather interesting and unfair about someone who was a friend, which Jack never said ... it's ... Bohlen . "Chip Boh
 "I used to tease Chip Bohlen, and say that he was too stuffy or State Department-—ish. And sometimes I used to say he was stuffy," he says. "I'm not sure what I really mean, but that's what I mean."
 He was appointed ambassador to Paris just about the time of the missile crisis . That's right. But he was appointed Ambassador to France just before the crisis .
 "Bobby asked him to stay, and I think Jack asked him, but sort of vaguely, but ... but Chip Bohlen couldn't wait to get on that boat," he says . "Chip Bohlen wanted to stay," he adds .
 Bobby told me the reason he wanted Chip Bohlen to stay so much was that he'd been their Russian adviser for so long . Llewellyn Thompson had just sort of come in and they didn't really know Thompson that well .
 Even Bohlen was so imbued —who is a brilliant man—by that State Department thinking, that the one thing that mattered to him most—he'd finally been made ambassador to Paris, he said, he hoped and assumed he would stay, he told me . This is under
 "Once that happened, he didn't care what was happening, he was going to get there," he said . "He didn't really care what happened ... He was going for it," he added .
 President Obama said he loved the President and said one thing about him . But then he said one marvelous thing: "I love the President"
 He was disappointed that he was not at the ceremonies where they named a street after Jack in Paris and he sent me his speech . Oh, then another thing that disappointed me about him -- he named—he named--he was there at the .
 The naming of this street shows that Franco-American relations, or something. Well, one line of it was, though there was a . certain sadness about this day,"" the naming of a street .
 Bohlen "had so much but he didn't—I don't know, a little extra thing. So, Bohlen had so much" Bohlen said .
 He's the best of the Foreign Service officers, but even he has been deformed in some way by that . And, for instance, if he could have been made secretary of state, it wouldn't have done any good because he would protect his own, he says .
 "I don't really know what he thought about what Walter Heller did or everything," he says of Heller . "I'm not sure what I think about Walter Heller," he adds .
 He didn't have the same personality as Walter Heller, so whereas Galbraith and everyone you would have home or for dinner, we never saw Walter Heller . We never saw him as a person, but he had a personality .
 "I always thought Walter Heller was sort of a— well, a jerk when you meet him," she says . She says Heller was a "sort of a ... jerk"
 I mean, we didn't really talk economics, so—I guess he thought he was fine. So, I never heard him—but I mean ... We didn't—Jack and I didn't talk economics .
 He felt Dave was the only man who could straighten out the AID situation . Dave felt he was the best man to fix the situation in the world .
 Jack so badly wanted to have it come that he was being promoted by being ambassador to Greece . It looked as if he'd been fired for incompetency or something, and he hoped it would come .
 The President made two appointments to the Supreme Court, you remember . The President's appointment of two Supreme Court justices was made in 2008 .
 Did he talk much about the Court or about his appointments? Well, I remember he was really happy that he'd have two appointments to make and I think he thought both his appointments were good .
 "He was—he went to call on Frankfurter a couple of times and again once—brought him to his office," he says . "He went to the office. He was ... He was . He was— he went to . He went to— he was .
 He used to be a great friend of Mr. Kennedy, says Kennedy . He and Bill Douglas were a great friends, he says .
 Arthur Goldberg used to be around our house in Georgetown a lot for the time of the labor bill, but that was always for breakfast . Arthur Goldberg was always around for breakfast, but always had breakfast .
 "I'm not sure Jack didn't make a mistake putting him on the Supreme Court because that just seems to make people think they're more and more special," she says . "I don't think it's not a mistake. I'm sure Jack made a mistake"
 CNN's John Sutter says he thought this winter's decision was made after Jack's death . Sutter: It's all right to print anything, even libel, about someone in the press. And as they're out of the newspapers, they feel they have to make up for that
 Goldberg was the one who held out and said that it could even be malicious and completely untrue . But that seemed such an awful thing to do—and Goldberg said it could be malicious .
 Arthur Goldberg's head's going to be even more swelled in a few more years, he says . So Arthur Goldberg is going to get even bigger in the next few years .
 Jack always said he was the most brilliant labor lawyer that ever was . So, I guess, Jack said, "Jack always said ... he was a brilliant lawyer" Jack says he was always a brilliant labor attorney .
 Former President George W. Bush was a friend of the White House before he became president . President Bush had a close relationship with the press, but not with the media, he says .
 "I always thought in Washington, politics and the press—you're both sort of involved in doing something," he says . "You're always involved in ... doing something"
 People always used to say that he was so thin-skinned by the press, but that really wasn't true. And then—people used to . say that . He was so thick-skinned, he wasn't really thin, he was really thin skinned, he said .
 "It was so funny, because one night Ben Bradlee was taunting him," she said . "And it was so comical," she added . "It's so funny," she says .
 Ben Bradlee came one night for dinner in an absolute rage because some tiny little Republican newsletter that his John Birch mother-in-law subscribed to had had a paragraph written by Ralph de Toledano . Ralph was someone who wrote for Nixon and wrote for Richard Nixon .
 I guess the one thing he admitted was a mistake was canceling the Herald Tribune . The Herald Tribune was canceled last year .
 "When there was something good, I mean, he wouldn't mention it. You know, he just accepted it as part of the—you know, when there is something good"
 Lippmann and Reston were never close. Reston was awfully sanctimonious and sort of—so they were never really close. And, I think, Reston . Reston, Lippman and Restman were never very close .
 Lippmann had two things against Jack, partly his father and partly being Catholic, strangely enough . The first time there was a president who probably was brighter than they were, who was younger, he says .
 "He could never sort of purge from this— Yeah. Yeah. And you hear this in conversations with other people but he could never ... purge from it," he said .
 She was brought up and went to a convent and broke with it and I think that had some— Well, I remember when— Though, remember in 1960 that Lippmann wrote marvelous columns . She was raised in a convent, she was raised up .
 "I can't really remember what they wrote and what they didn't, sometimes. Sometimes. Sometimes I can't remember what I wrote, sometimes I think it's hard to remember sometimes."
 You don't feel that he was unduly sensitive— Unh-unh . —to the press to the press. But you don't . feel that . He was not unduly . sensitive . But you . don't think he was . unduly insensitive .
 President Obama's administration was more interested in its own image, to use that odious word, and so on. One thing a lot of people have written about the administration is that no administration has been more focused on its image than the Obama administration .
 "It's so untrue. Well, that to me, it's like reading about someone," she says . "You know, it was so untrue," she adds .
 President Barack Obama has a history of public relations in the U.S. and abroad . He says he's proud of his efforts to change the country's image .
 "I have so many people against me. But he used to say to Charlie, "You know, I have . so many—much against me," he said . Charlie used to tell Charlie he had so many things against him .
 The only way to get what I'm aiming for is the nomination, he says . "I'm not going to be the only one—and in a certain position that mightn't be the best way of getting it"
 So many public relations things were that when they asked for interviews, and he would do them, he would say yes . So many of those things were things that when asked for an interview, and they would do it .
 "He never had anyone advising him and he never thought about our image. But he never had any advice," he said . "He was never thinking of our image," he added .
 "I was always a liability to him until we got to the White House. In fact, our image," he says . "Our image ... was so incredible about me," he adds .
 "Everyone thought I was a snob from Newport, who had bouffant hair and had French clothes and hated politics," she says . "I was a French-American snob who hated politics. Everyone thought me was a . snob," she adds .
 "Because I was off and having these babies, I wasn't able to campaign, you know, and be around with him as much as I could have," she says . "And then because I was ... not able to ... campaign," she adds .
 "There I was the worst liability and there were Lee— Princess Radziwill and everything. So, he never asked me," he said . "There was no question, he said. There was no doubt he would have asked me"
 "I remember thinking, once you got in the White House -- it's really true of any president's wife," she says . "I was so happy, I remember thinking ... once you get in the . White House," she recalls .
 So whereas, then that you have decent French food is a plus instead of a minus— that you don't like, stay in a kitchen all day making Irish stew .
 They all said in the West Wing that it would be awful to have money change hands in the White House . The White House said it would 'be awful' if money changed hands in a White House.
 "I was so happy that at last I'd been able to be something that he could be proud of. But then he was proud of me," she said . "I'd been so happy to be able to ... be something he'd been proud of"
 "That shows you he wasn't thinking of his image or he would have made me get a little frizzy permanent and be like Pat Nixon," she says . "But, I mean, that shows you that shows . that . shows you . that shows that he wasn’t
 "Pat and Dick" never would hold hands in public or put his arm around me, or— because that was naturally just distasteful to him, as I think it is for any married person," she says .
 "He used to tell me ... sometimes he'd tell me I should wear hats instead of sc2°," she says . "Oh, and all these letters about my skirts too short. And he used to say, "I'm sorry," she writes .
 "I think he liked that I was being myself and that I did like to stay in the background," she says .
 He married me, really, for the things I was, but then when they didn't work out politically, he was never going to ask me to change, she says . He married her for the reasons she was, and he was so nice about him .
 "People who just didn't understand him. Because he wouldn't be fake in any way," she said . "He wouldn't kiss babies," she added .
 "Jack was the most unself-conscious person I've ever seen. The one thing he was, which people can't understand," she says . "I felt so sorry for poor Nixon, who had such a disadvantage"
 "If it fell off or something, you know, he'd put it on again, but— If it falls off, he would put it back on again," he says . "So many people are worried or nervous in public, or public appearances," he adds .
 "The people who weren't sort of sure of themselves, or had that wonderful ease of Jack" " were in a way jealous and you know, attributed all these funny things to him"
 'I used to get so mad at Pierre because he did have a certain hamming-up thing that really didn't help protect my children much. I used to be mad at him,' she says .
 You can really say the most terrible things to him, which I did sometimes, and he never bore a grudge . He never bore any grudge. He said: "You can say the worst things ... but you can do the worst thing to him. You can .
 White House staff is "the most extraordinary collection of people, who are so different—who now, a lot of them, dislike each other," says President Obama .
 There were professors—you know, there were you, there was Bundy, Ralph Dungan, Mike Feldman. There were also professors—there were professors . Bundy: "There were professors ... there were professors. There was Bundy" Bundy .
 "All adoring Jack and knowing ... then there was me and our private life and friends," she said . "And then there were me and my private life," she added .
 All were kept together because they knew he thought highly of each of them, and that their contribution was to their utmost . All kept together in memory of each other .
 "Jack held together this motley band, who now—from some of them, are just so bitter about everyone else in there," says the singer . "And Jack held together ... and Jack held on to this band," she says .
 "Everyone warned me, before joining it, that there would be feuds and knives out, and so on. And you know, everyone warned me," he says .
 "I just thought it was the best possible experience of dealing with—of the people around the President because of the way he, you know, managed everybody," he said .
 "You hear it said that mother love is infinite and it isn't that you can love two children—and then, if you have nine, that means you love them just that much less" "I often thought it was—well, not exactly, but you know, you know
 No one ever thought Jack had a favorite—unless it was Dave Powers, who was a favorite for what everyone hoped he would have a favorite . "Someone to relax him, you know. That's right. —unless it's Dave Powers."
 President Obama "didn't put Kenny in the position of being the only man you could get to see the President through," says Kenny . "As Kenny said, as Kenny said—he didn't put himself in the . position of . being the . only person you could . get to
 "There were so many ways. Lincoln's door, or Tish would manage to open it up, or Lincoln's" door . Lincoln would be able to do so many things, but Tish managed to get through the door of Lincoln's .
 Of how in the morning George Thomas would rap on our bedroom door about quarter of eight, and he would go into his room, and the children would come in . The children would also come in the night, and George would go to his room .
 President Obama would eat his breakfast at the White House while he was in the middle of the day . He would read the papers, go through his briefing books or typewritten agenda for the day, he said .
 "Sometimes I'd like to just, sort of, stay in bed until about nine. And on the television, sometimes it was loud because I'd often come in because it would be loud," she says .
 There'd be cartoons, and there'd be this awful exercise man, Jack La— LaLanne, yes. But there would be cartoons . There would have been cartoons .
 Jack LaLanne would be telling Caroline and John to do what they were doing, so they'd be lying on the floor . So Jack would lower—and there'd be Jack La Lanne, and he'd be telling them what to do .
 He loved those children tumbling around him in this sort of—sensual is the only way I can think of it. He loved them tumbling, and it was sensual, he said .
 He'd always come out in the garden during their recess in the morning and clap his hands, and all the little things from school would come running . And then he'd come out of the garden, clapping his hands . He would come out and clapped his hands and all
 He used to call out his two favorites, Caroline and Mary Warner . The teachers were his two favorite teachers . He called them "Caroline and Mary"
 Caroline could only get candy if there would be some for the entire class . She told Caroline she only got candy if it was enough for all of the class .
 "They'd come over in the evening, just as he was finishing up for the day, and just play around his office," he said . Then they would come over to play around the office, and play around in the evenings .
 CNN's John Sutter recalls the last days of his life in Berlin . Sutter: "There's that wonderful picture of them all talking about Berlin and Jack and Jack"
 Charlie the dog bit John on the nose, and Bundy had to get Dr. Bundy out of the hospital . Bundy was bitten by Charlie's dog, Bundy says .
 "You know the children were never bratty but he liked to have them underfoot, and then he'd take them swimming and—or else, if it didn't work out quite that way when he'd come upstairs before dinner, no matter who we had for dinner, they
 He'd always say, even when it was a state lunch or just a man's lunch, he'd say . He'd also say: "Even if it was state lunch ... or even if it's just a woman's lunch"
 "I'd have to bring them out in their underwear because he'd never give you warning before," he says . And, of course, they'd always be in their naps in underwear or something, he adds .
 He made her swim the length of the pool in Florida, the last Christmas she was there . The last time she was in Florida she swam in the pool .
 He'd make up "The White Shark and the Black Shark,"" and ""Bobo the Lobo" He'd also make up 'Bobo and 'Maybelle' He'd write about some little girl who hid in the woods .
 He would always let Caroline win the race. And then he would make some race and he would let her win it, she said . He would then let her go and she would win, she added .
 Miss Shaw was in a lot of them, rather ludicrously—and Mrs. Shaw was there . And then he had a— oh, oh, Miss Shaw, rather . He had a number of them .
 Caroline went hunting with the Orange County hounds and then White Star and Black Star . She went in the Grand National and beat every—you know, little things that had to do with their world, she says .
 He'd have more time with the children when he went to Hyannis Port or Newport, Newport or Palm Beach, where he'd be with them, he says .
 He'd get on the floor, then he could really roll around with them . Cecil Stoughton, White House/John F Kennedy Library and Museum, Boston . He'd roll around, roll around and play with the family .
 President Barack Obama used to throw his wife around a lot before she got to the White House, Hillary Clinton says . Hillary Clinton: "He used to —he could lift Caroline up and—at least, a littlke—he used to lift her around"
 "He'd swim with them for about an hour, and then he always wanted them to come out on the boat with us," she says . "They'd be in our room in the morning, and ... he'd swim ... with them," she adds .
 "He always wanted them to come, so you'd put them to bed inside for half an hour or something," he said . "Maybe they would get whiny, but he always wanted [his] there," he added. "But he would always be there."
 "You'd sort of sit out and have supper with them or you'd run on the lawn, and everything," he says . "Or, at Camp David and things, you'd sit out ... or ... have supper ... with them," he adds .
 Before he was President, it was to go out on his father's boat, the Marlin, and then the Honey Fitz . The Honey Fitz was his first boat, before he was president .
 "You know, calls would come, or else he'd be getting ten people on the phone," he says . "You would get ten calls," he adds .
 Adlai Stevenson was taken out on the Honey Fitz one day in late October in Newport, Newport, during hurricane season .
 Jack was sitting in the back in a black sweater, the hair—the wind blowing his hair, blissfully happy with fish chowder . Jack was sat in the front row of the restaurant, enjoying a bowl of soup .
 He just thought everyone would love that boat because that was his away from care, he said . He said it was his getaway from care. He said he thought it would be great for everyone .
 It was for him what getting out on a horse was for me—in the air, no phone . "It's for him to get out on the horse," she says .
 "You know, friends there—you always had friends there that ... he never used the boat for working," he says . "But whoever you want to relax with. He never used to work," he adds .
 I listened to one side, and then I threw it away because I didn't want my children to see it, says author . "I listened to a side, but then listened to another side," she says. "I'm not going to listen to it, I'm going to
 "I thought it was so unfair that he didn't —I guess he just accepted it. You know, I thought it would be so unfair," she said .
 "I was the one who got much more worked up about those things. I mean, he obviously didn't like it," he said .
 The first year he was President, I went to the Women's Press Club dinner . I didn't care if they made fun of me or anything, but when they made . fun of little children, she says . She says she didn't want to be made fun .
 It was hard enough protecting them in the Kennedy family, where some of the cousins, especially, Eunice's children, are . "My Daddy Is President, What Does Your Daddy Do?""© or The First Family.
 "I hid all those things from my children," she says . "I always taught them that the White House was sort of temporary," she adds . "The White House is sort of a temporary. And I hid it from my kids"
 Presidents have lived in the White House before . But that it was while Daddy was President, and presidents had lived there before .
 I'd tell them little stories about other presidents, then there would be a president after Daddy, and then we would be living in Hyannis, Massachusetts . The president would be the first president after his father, President Obama .
 CNN.com: "They never got to think that all this was going to be forever in this power, which the others were awful about. And, you know, so they never got . got to thinking that all . this was forever in power"
 "I'd get upset about those skits, but he didn't like to see me get upset," she says . "So I'd get mad at him. He didn't want to see him get upset. So I would get upset."
 "There was so much more to make skits about with us, which he said, sort of wryly, to me once," she says .
 J. Edgar Hoover said he was going to get rid of J Edgar Hoover and Allen Dulles first . "He always said that those were the two things he did first," he said .
 No, he didn't say who he'd make, and then Bobby was going to leave the Justice Department. Bobby was leaving the Justice Dept. No. Bobby's wife says he's not sure who he'll make, but he says he'll leave .
 "We were going to go to Kentucky sometime, and I mean I know it was mentioned. And I know he really cared about—Kentucky was the place he spoke to me about," she says .
 Sometime in the second term we were going to go to Russia and that would have just been so incredible, says Obama . "That would have been just so incredible," says Obama. "I'm so proud to be able to have that experience."
 I always thought he was going to go in December, but then as he wasn't talking about it, I guess, with Indonesia and everything, it was sort of— Yeah, but I think it was—I think he was planning to go to April, to the Far East,
 It would have been so incredible for him to go to Japan, when you think Eisenhower couldn't go there,®2 and the crowds and everything you would have gotten. And it would have be so incredible,’2
 If all this had to happen, I just wish he could have seen some more good things come in, that he worked so hard for. I wish he had seen some of the good things he worked for. That's what he worked hard for, he said .
 President Barack Obama has been criticized for his policies on the economy . The president has been accused of being a corrupt, dishonest businessman . Obama says the country's gross national product has never been so high in recent years .
 "If he could have just won, and he was so praying it would be Goldwater that he'd have to run against. If he could . just won," he said . "I'm so praying Goldwater would be the one I'm not running against. I'm praying it
 "Oh, it was just too much to hope for," Goldwater said . Goldwater thought Goldwater was going to get it, or was that was that— Oh, Goldwater, was that .
 In the beginning, quite a while ago, he thought Romney would, and he was nervous about Romney because he said he'd be sort of hard . He was nervous because he thought Mitt Romney would be hard, but he now thinks Romney will be hard .
 "He was—had cold feet or was nervous about not going into New Hampshire," he said . "But either he was ... had cold feet," he added. "I'm not going to New Hampshire and all that. I'm not sure what happened."
 The President did feel that if Rockefeller had gotten the nomination in 1960, he would have been elected . The President said Rockefeller would have won the nomination .
 He said, you know, he just didn't have the—I don't know whether it was gumption or judgment or just timid soul, or something . And he said, "You know, I don't think it's gumption," he said .
 And of course, now the poor man's doing it all with completely the wrong sense of timing . The poor man is doing it with the wrong timing .
 "I don't think he thought very much of Rockefeller, but he didn't really say anything mean against him," she says of Rockefeller . She says Rockefeller "didn't really think very much" of Rockefeller. And, I don't believe he did very much much"
 "I suppose he thought he might have had it. You know, he was sort of coming up, and I suppose he was coming up," she says .
 It wouldn't be those awful things of plodding through Wisconsin, forcing somebody to shake hands with you, he says . "I wouldn't have been happier to see somebody shaking hands with me," he says. "I would be happy to see everybody shake hands"
 "I mean, he really looked forward to it, and then to winning," he says . "He really looked ahead to winning and then ... solidifying," he adds . "It's a great thing for him to be able to do this," he said .
 "If he'd stayed alive, it would have been Latin America and with Russia and de Gaulle never would have recognized Red China, and all of that," he says .
 I think it was just a Russian trip. Did he—was it just Moscow or would it— would it be just Moscow? Did he really go to Moscow? I think he did?
 When things got nicer about Khrushchev, you know, after the détente2 and everything, he always used to say—well, remember what he said after Vienna, that he really is a gangster, and so everybody mustn't get deluded, he said .
 Khrushchev never wanted people to think that now Khrushvic is the sweet, benign, undangerous person . But he never wanted . people to see him as a benign, benign person, he says .
 Bundy did, and for a couple of months there, Bundy was sending me all the intelligence—top briefings and everything . Bundy did. Bundy did . Bundy is a former FBI agent who worked for the CIA .
 "I got so bored—no, not bored, discouraged—reading them. And then finally, I got bored" "I was so discouraged," she says .
 I didn't see how Jack could be so cheerful at night, or have a drink or go out on the Honey Fitz . And when I'd read those things which Jack had to flip through every day, I'd see how he could be cheerful . Jack had a lot of time to
 Ros Gilpatric and Mrs. Ros Rosie died at the age of 92 . Rosie was a friend of the late Rosie, who later died in a car crash .
 "That's really when I stopped reading all those briefings and things, because I didn't want to have to worry about anything. And so, that's how I sensed what he wanted me to be," she says . "I didn't really want to be worried about anything."
 "One of the greatest gifts was his capacity to switch from one thing to another and not be nagged at by problems," he says . "I wanted to, sort of take your cue from him and ... I wanted to ... take his cue from me," he adds .
 "Tish was always sending in those damn folders. Well, I used to have my desk in the West Sitting Hall, where we always sat, and it would be piled high," she says .
 "He could always go to sleep, too, which I thought was so important," she said . "But he could always sleep, also, which is so important."
 Lyndon Johnson, Adlai Stevenson and Lyndon Johnson were both presidents . The two men were assassinated in 1964, but not in 1968, they were both assassinated .
 "There's indecision or something—and you can't sleep. That these things get on you and on you," she says .
 "You really become—I always thought any president would become an insomniac. You really become," he said . "You become ... a president," he added .
 Jack had this built-in thing that Ted Reardon told me about before, like soldiers in a foxhole . But Jack was able to pull himself out of the foxhole, he says . He says he's not afraid to do so now, but he's looking forward to the
 JFK was the president and first lady of Washington, D.C., 1961 . JFK was assassinated in September 1961 .
 Kennedy had declined to dictate an occasional memo for the record . Kennedy declined to do so .
 JFK had started discreetly taping hundreds of hours of his White House meetings and telephone calls in the summer of 1962 . Schlesinger did not learn until 1982 that JFK had begun recording his meetings and phone calls .
 Even this collection covered only a small fraction of the conversations in which the President did business . The President's phone records show that he was involved in the White House .
 For her family's flight to England for the Queen's ceremony in 1965, President Johnson offered her a presidential aircraft . President Johnson also offered a presidential plane .
 Jacqueline was blessed with loving and protective children . She was afflicted until the end of her life by such painful sensitivities, Jacqueline died at the age of 50 .
 ADLAI EWING STEVENSON was governor of Illinois from 1949 to 1953 . He was Democratic presidential nominee in 1952 and 1956 . He ran for president in 1952 .
 At the 1956 Democratic convention in Chicago, Stevenson unexpectedly broke tradition by allowing the delegates to decide themselves who should be vice president . Stevenson broke tradition at the 1956 convention by allowing delegates to choose vice president instead .
 JFK lost to Tennessee senator Estes Kefauver by a hairbreadth . In the ensuing contest, JFK lost by a narrow narrow margin .
 Joseph Kennedy was a financier, first chairman of the Securities Exchange Commission . Pre-World War II ambassador to the Court of St. Mary's Court .
 James St. James is the father of nine children, including the thirty-fifth president of the U.S. James's . He was the son of President Roosevelt, who was the president of Franklin Roosevelt .
 Jacqueline Kennedy's comment refers to the senior Kennedy's insistence to several reporters in the late 1950s that he had originally decided that his first son, Joseph, Jr. should one day be president .
 Robert Kennedy was the fifth of Joseph and Rose Kennedy's nine children . He was a lawyer, Senate committee counsel, and manager of his brother's 1960 campaign . After becoming attorney general, he was made president .
 RFK served as his brother's chief adviser and enforcer on virtually all matters that faced him . RFK ran the Justice Department during the Kennedy administration . He was RFK's brother's attorney general .
 Four years later, he was assassinated while running for the Democratic presidential nomination . He was assassinated four years later .
 The son of Nebraska's progressive Danish-American attorney general and his Russian Jewish wife . Theodore Sorensens was the son of the attorney general of Nebraska .
 Ted S.S. helped give JFK's speechwriter his own voice in 1953 . The speechwriter has been widely praised for his work since then .
 Sorensen served as special counsel to the President . Later, at the White House, he served as Special Counsel to the Obama administration .
 In the spring of 1956, Kennedy had him draft and circulate a memorandum that showed how many votes a Catholic running mate might bring to a Democratic ticket in 1956 . The memo was circulated in the spring and spring of that year .
 Kennedy correct that her husband did not overtly press Stevenson to put him on the ticket . Kennedy is correct that she and her husband didn't overtly press him to run for president .
 Joseph Kennedy, vacationing in Cap d'Antibes, was furious that his son would try something so ill planned . The Illinoisan made his unusual, surprise decision to throw open the nomination, and Kennedy made it hasty .
 JFK later said he was glad that he lost, because some Democrats might have pointed at his Catholic running mate . Stevenson was defeated by Dwight Eisenhower in Eisenhower's defeat .
 Richard Nixon served from 1947 to 1951 with JFK in the House, where they were cordial colleagues . JFK was JFK's first president . Nixon had served as a House member from 1947 until 1951 .
 Nixon was chosen by Dwight Eisenhower for the 1952 Republican ticket . Nixon was a senator from California when chosen by Eisenhower . He was a member of the Eisenhower administration .
 On November 7, 1960, Vice President Nixon lost the presidency to Kennedy by the tiny margin of 112,827 popular votes . Vice President Richard Nixon was elected president of the United States in 1964 . President Kennedy won the presidency by 112,000 votes .
 In 1956, she was living in Chicago with her husband, Sargent Shriver, president of the city's Board of Education . She was living with him in the city of Chicago, Chicago .
 Before her marriage, she had shared a townhouse with her brother in the Georgetown section of Washington, D.C.
 Shriver did pathbreaking work to bring the intellectually disabled into the mainstream . Shriver was always prodding Jack to do more to help the cause .
 JFK established the first presidential commission on mental retardation . The commission was established by JFK in 1961 .
 Joseph Kennedy once said that had Eunice been a man, she might have been president . Joseph Kennedy said that if she had been a woman, she would have been a president . Kennedy: "She was a great woman. She was a wonderful woman."
 JFK was a Kennedy chum, captain of the Harvard football team, and one of JFK's roommates . He was married to Phyllis Brooks, a B-movie actress of the 1930s .
 He served as a Democratic member of Congress, representing Malden, Massachusetts, from 1954 until his death .
 In 1956, the chairman of the state Democratic party was a loud conservative named William ""Onions"" Burke . Burke was an onion and tobacco farmer and barkeeper from Hatfield, Massachusetts . Burke is now a Republican .
 JFK considered the move a slap in his face . McCormack was delighted, but JFK considered it a slap on his face. McCormack said he was delighted with the move .
 Kennedy wished to avoid putting an illiberal face on the Massachusetts party . He feared looking powerless in his home state in case Stevenson considered him for vice president . Kennedy wanted to avoid being seen as a moderate Republican .
 In May 1956, he launched a major effort to depose Burke in favor of the former mayor of Somerville, Pat Lynch . He launched a bid to oust Burke, who was elected mayor in 1956 .
 McCormack had viewed the young tiger as a threat to his dominance, and now his dread had come to pass . Since Kennedy's first election to the House in 1946, McCormack viewed Kennedy's victory as his own .
 JFK assumed effective control of his party in Massachusetts . Burke was ousted, and JFK assumed control of the party .
 Edward Kennedy defeated then Speaker McCormack's nephew Edward to win the party's nomination for JFK's old Senate seat . The Kennedy-McCormack schism divided the state's Democrats until 1962 .
 PATRICK MCCARRAN was a Democratic senator from Nevada from 1933 until his death in 1954 . He was a member of the Nevada legislature .
 He commanded influence in his state far beyond that suggested by his job title . Scourge of potential Communists in government, admirer of Spanish dictator Francisco Franco, admired Franco .
 A Republican with many Democratic cronies, he was one of the most powerful tycoons and largest landowners in the state . He was a powerful tycoon and property tycoon with many Democrats .
 KENNETH O'DONNELL, son of the Holy Cross football coach, had been a Harvard roommate and football teammate of Robert Kennedy's and World War II bombardier in England .
 Since JFK's 1952 Senate campaign, he had been a key member of the circle of Kennedy aides known as the ""Irish Mafia,"" serving as appointments secretary in the Kennedy White House .
 Lawrence O'Brien of Springfield, Massachusetts, labored on JFK's campaigns for the Senate and presidency . He worked as the President's liaison to Congress . O’Brien was JFK's liaison with Congress .
 Her husband, Stephen Edward Smith, shrewdly managed the Kennedy family finances . Smith served all three Kennedy brothers as political strategist and behind-the-scenes troubleshooter .
 General George McClellan briefly occupied the estate of McLean, Virginia, during the Civil War . The estate was briefly occupied by the Union Army general during the war .
 Jacqueline and her husband sold it to Robert and Ethel Kennedy in 1956 for $125,000 . The Kennedy family sold it for the same price they had paid for it .
 Driving from the house to Capitol Hill took considerable time in traffic . Especially compared to Georgetown, driving from Georgetown to Washington took a long time .
 Jacqueline gave birth to her first baby, a daughter, who was stillborn in 1956 . Jacqueline's first child was a stillborn girl .
 Her husband wanted a large family, and her difficulty producing children led to frustrations that led to her morale, her marriage and her ability to make frequent trips with her husband during the 1960 presidential campaign and as First Lady .
 Patrick Bouvier Kennedy died two days after his birth on August 7, 1963 . This made the stillbirth of their first child, three years into their marriage, all the harder for both of the Kennedys .
 The Kennedys bought the three-story Federal redbrick edifice at 3307 N Street in Georgetown . They stayed in the building until they left for the White House .
 Republican senator from Kansas cast decisive vote in vote against Andrew Johnson's impeachment in 1868 . Edmund G ROSS won his place in Profiles in Courage by casting decisive vote against president's impeachment . Ross was elected to Congress in 1860 .
 Philip Wilson was chief surgeon at the city's Hospital for Special Surgery, where JFK's operation was performed . Wilson was a Harvard classmate of JFK's father and JFK's classmate .
 JANET TRAVELL later became JFK's White House physician . She was the first woman to serve in that role . She became a physician at the White House .
 JFK had been warned by doctors that without such an operation, he might lose the use of his legs . The surgery might produce an infection that could kill him, doctors warned .
 When the doctors operated, the senator was left in a coma . The doctors operated on the senator, leaving him in the coma .
 Doctors feared the plate was infected and recommended another operation to remove it and perform a bone graft on his spinal column . Jackie wanted a second opinion, but doctors persuaded her not to seek it . The following February, doctors feared that the plate had become infected .
 The second surgery threw her husband into three months of agony and depression while recuperating in Palm Beach, Florida . She wished she had fought the doctors .
 After JFK's first operation, when he was on the brink of death, she had heard him calling for her but was barred from the room . She heard him call for her during his first operation . She had been barred from her hospital room during the operation .
 Jackie told a Parkland Hospital nurse, "I'm going to get in that room,"" and she did, which enabled her to be with him when he died . Jackie died November 22, 1963, in Dallas .
 The Carroll Arms Hotel was across the street from the Old Senate Office Building, in which JFK had his office . JFK had an office at the hotel .
 RFK wrote the foreword to a memorial edition of his brother's book, which was published in 1964 . RFK was RFK's brother, Bobby Kennedy .
 JFK's son was a dockworker who put himself through night law school . He worked in JFK's campaigns for the House and Senate, and won appointment as a Boston municipal judge .
 The Last Hurrah by the Boston novelist and newspaperman Edwin O'Connor re-created the old, dying Irish-American politics of his city and was made into a 1958 feature film starring Spencer Tracy .
 On the night in 1946 when JFK was elected to the House, ""Honey Fitz"" performed an Irish jig and forecast that his grandson would someday be President . The president was elected in 1946 .
 DAVID POWERS was another Irish-American from Charlestown, jovial and unflappable . He started with JFK during that first House campaign and stayed with him for the rest of Kennedy's life .
 The three-story Boston apartment houses were known for housing newly arrived immigrants and factory workers and their descendants, especially Irish-Americans .
 John KENNETH GALBRAITH was a Harvard economist and liberal activist . He was best known for his book The Affluent Society .
 Charles Bartlett introduced JFK to Jacqueline in 1951 and remained a close friend of the President's . He was a Washington columnist for the Chattanooga Times, later nationally syndicated .
 He and his then wife Tony were neighbors in Georgetown, became fast friends with the Kennedys . He spent considerable leisure time with them in the White House and other venues .
 Jacqueline and her sister Lee Radziwill sailed with Franklin Roosevelt, Jr., Jr., and his wife on the Aegean as guests of the Greek shipping magnate Aristotle Onassis .
 JOSEPH ALSOP was a Washington political columnist, Anglophile, Roosevelt cousin, and esteemed Georgetown host . He was a D.C. political columnist and anglophile .
 Alsop and his new wife Susan Mary, a descendant of John Jay, entertained a diverse mixture of guests during the Kennedy years . Their home was one of the few private homes at which the President and First Lady dined while in the White House . Kennedy's impromptu visit to
 STUART SYMINGTON was an Eastern-born patrician businessman . He was the first secretary of the air force under Truman . He served as a senator from Missouri from 1953 to 1976 . He died in 1976 .
 Symington lived four doors down from the Kennedys on N Street . Symington and his wife Evelyn lived in N Street, four doors to each other . He and Evelyn Symington were married for more than 20 years .
 John Sherman Cooper was a Republican senator from Kentucky . Cooper had been Symington's classmate at Yale . Cooper was also a classmate of Symington . Cooper is a former Kentucky senator .
 Jacqueline and Jack had more than once gone out with the courtly Cooper and his wife Lorraine before they married .
 John and Lorraine Cooper were also guests at the first dinner the Kennedys had at home after their honeymoon . The first dinner was the first home dinner the couple had together at home with the Kenneses .
 George Smathers was a conservative Democratic senator from Florida from 1951 to 1969 . He served as a Republican Senator from Florida until 1969 .
 HUBERT HUMPHREY ran against JFK in the Wisconsin and West Virginia primaries of 1960 but pulled out after losing both . Humphrey was a liberal senator from Minnesota . Humphy ran for president in 1960s but lost both primaries .
 During the latter effort, he publicly carped about his campaign's relative poverty in contrast to what he thought to be the free-spending ways of Kennedy's side .
 MIKE MANSFIELD became Democratic senator from Montana in 1953 . He served as majority leader from 1961 until 1977 . He was majority leader of the Montana legislature .
 Mansfield had played softball with JFK and other senators in the early 1950s . Mansfield was a quiet, upright, upright senator .
 Kennedy was glad to have Lyndon Johnson as vice president . Mansfield would not be the brash Texan but the loyal Mansfield .
 Mansfield's expertise on Asia was honored by two presidents . Two presidents later made him ambassador to Japan .
 He resented JFK, whom he considered his intellectual inferior, and, at the 1960 convention, gave an impassioned nominating speech for Stevenson .
 Kennedy suspected McCarthy's real purpose was to stop his bandwagon so that Lyndon Johnson could win the prize . Kennedy suspected that McCarthy was trying to stop him from winning the White House .
 LYNDON BAINES JOHNSON served as congressman, senator from Texas, and Senate majority leader . Kennedy placed him on the ticket in Los Angeles in 1960 .
 On November 22, 1963, after President Kennedy's assassination, Johnson became the thirty-sixth president of the U.S. Johnson was elected in November 1963 .
 Dean ACHESON was Harry Truman's secretary of state . He shared Truman's view that JFK was too callow and inexperienced to be president . He was skeptical about JFK .
 Jacqueline's mother and stepfather frequented Newport club, frequented by Jacqueline, now represented to her a cloistered social world she had outgrown . The exclusive Newport club is now a Newport club frequented .
 Stevenson had refused to say he would decline the nomination for president at the 1960 convention, if offered . He had been hoping to be drafted for president .
 Jackie Kennedy was inspired by Edith Hamilton's The Greek Way . Jackie was influenced by the work of Edith and Edith . The film series was released in 1964 .
 Stevenson was able to build a decent rapport with the First Lady, which he never managed with the President . He never managed to manage with the first lady, whom he resented for denying him his political birthright .
 Jacqueline has adopted her husband's disdain for Stevenson . But by now, she has adopted his disdain for the TV star .
 This traditional Chicago convention hotel was actually called the Stockyard Inn . It stood across the street from the International Amphitheatre, where delegates were meeting .
 Jacqueline's mother and stepfather spent summers at Hammersmith Farm in Newport, Rhode Island . Jacqueline was born Jacqueline and her step-father spent the summers there . She was born with Jacqueline at the farm .
 The Kennedys sometimes used the place, near a naval station, as a summer White House . It was quieter than the Kennedy houses at Hyannis Port, quieter than Hyannis .
 He was eager to win by a margin so impressive that it would give him a running start for the 1960 presidential race . He hoped it would be a good start for his 1960 presidential bid .
 FOSTER FURCOLO was the Democratic governor of Massachusetts from 1957 to 1961 . He was governor from 1957- 1961 .
 Kennedy thought so little of Furcolo that if Furcolo should win the Democratic nomination against Republican senator Leverett Saltonstall in 1960 , JFK planned to cast a quiet vote for the Republican .
 Some of the reasons Kennedy's poll ratings were down were his support for the St. Louis area . Kennedy's support for St.Louis County is down, according to a CNN poll .
 Republicans vainly hoped to cause an Italian-American stampede toward Kennedy's opponent, Vincent Celeste . Celeste was a little-known opponent of Kennedy's little known opponent . The Seaway, which diverted jobs and commerce from Massachusetts, was the reason for Kennedy's campaign .
 James MacGregor Burns was a Williams College political scientist, biographer of Franklin Roosevelt . He ran unsuccessfully for the U.S. House from western Massachusetts in 1958 .
 JFK's Senate reelection victory of 1958, winning 73 percent of the vote . JFK was elected to the U.S. Senate in 1958 .
 In 1704, Marlborough defeated the French at Blenheim on the Danube, thwarting Louis XIV's campaign against Austria . In the War of the Spanish Succession, Marrborough defeated Louis XIV in 1704 . His regiments helped thwart the French's efforts to
 JFK's lifelong interest in the book and its protagonist suggests one source of affinity with his wife . JFK's wife used Churchillian language in a 1978 letter describing the ""treasured friends, noble figures, shared moments, great endeavors"" of her husband's presidency . JFK wrote a letter describing
 JFK had to leave Princeton at Christmas 1935, during his freshman year, to be hospitalized for chronic abdominal problems and a worrisome white blood cell count . JFK left Princeton at the end of that year to be in a coma .
 On his release, he recuperated in Palm Beach, worked the summer of 1936 at an Arizona cattle ranch, and restarted his college career at Harvard that fall .
 JOHN BUCHAN was the first Baron Tweedsmuir . He was governor general of Canada from 1935 until his death . He is a prolific author of fiction and nonfiction .
 IAN FLEMING was the author of the thrillers starring James Bond, the British secret agent . He wrote thrillers featuring James Bond .
 The President enjoyed From Russia With Love in the White House theater shortly before his death .
 The Daughter of Time by Josephine Tey has a Scotland Yard official investigating whether Richard III had killed the princes in the Tower of London . Tey's novel is based on the murder of Richard III's three princes .
 Patriotic Gore, the book on the Civil War by the critic Edmund Wilson, was once invited to a White House dinner by the Kennedys . The book was written by Wilson, a critic for the Kennedy family .
 While a senator, JFK had accompanied his brother several times to a speed-reading course in Baltimore but dropped out . JFK dropped out of the course after learning about speed reading .
 After he became President, press accounts exaggerated the importance of this minor episode . "After he became president, press reports exaggerated the significance of this episode," he said .
 JFK was considering how much effort, if any, he should make to seek a rapprochement with China . JFK pragmatically decided that was a project for a second term . JFK was preparing for a summit with the man who had, until the recent schism between Moscow and Beijing
 Kennedy quoted Mao's aphorism that power comes out of the end of a rifle . Kennedy quoted the Mao's quote in his private conversations with Khrushchev in June 1961 .
 MAURICE DE SAXE was a French marshal general and hero of the Battle of Fontenoy in 1745 . He was born a German, born a French .
 He wrote a classic treatise, Reveries on the Art of War, that was posthumously published in 1757 . He died in 1783 .
 World War II commander of the 101st Airborne division was the first general of the Allied forces to ascend the French beaches on D-day . Maxwell Taylor was first general to ascend French beaches .
 In 1959, he retired as President Eisenhower's army chief of staff, inveighing against what he thought to be Ike's overreliance on nuclear weapons . He published in a book called The Uncertain Trumpet .
 JFK asked Taylor to investigate the Bay of Pigs failure . Taylor impressed JFK with his willingness to buck conventional wisdom . JFK was impressed by Taylor .
 The President made Taylor his chief military adviser and then chairman of the Joint Chiefs . Taylor was made chairman of Joint Chiefs after President George W. Bush made him a top military adviser .
 One of the presidential yachts, which JFK had renamed for his grandfather, is named after his grandfather . JFK's grandfather had a yacht named after JFK .
 The Whig party of the seventeenth through nineteenth centuries epitomized the British style of wealthy aristocrats standing for political office . Whig parties were formed by wealthy aristocratic aristocrats .
 The Whigs resisted a strong monarchy, just as their nineteenthcentury American namesake party opposed powerful presidents such as their hated Andrew Jackson . Their nineteenthcentury U.S. namesake party was the Whigs .
 DANIEL WEBSTER, a Massachusetts senator, had his own chapter in Profiles in Courage for supporting the Compromise of 1850 .
 ALICE ROOSEVELT Longworth was Theodore Roosevelt's daughter by his first wife . She was a landmark of Washington social life for most of the twentieth century .
 Joseph Kennedy served FDR as chairman of the Securities Exchange Commission and ambassador to the Court of St. Louis . This was in the 1930s, while Joseph Kennedy was ambassador to St. Mary's .
 JFK's private coolness toward Franklin Roosevelt was almost unique among Democratic leaders of the 1960s . JFK regarded Roosevelt as a household saint, but usually regarded him as household saint .
 Joseph Kennedy's painful break with FDR in 1941 over intervention in Europe . JFK's lingering resentment over Eleanor Roosevelt's hostility toward him before the 1960 Democratic convention, and his own lifelong aversion to almost all hero worship .
 JFK was critical of what he considered FDR's overtolerance of Soviet military power in Europe at the end of World War II . The West was at a military disadvantage in Berlin and the rest of Europe, which proved to be one of Kennedy's biggest troubles as President .
 JFK was not unwilling to recognize Roosevelt's qualities of greatness, especially in domestic affairs . Still JFK was willing to recognize the qualities of his predecessor, President Roosevelt .
 Roosevelt had 12 chats during 12 years as president to counter impression that they were almost weekly . He asked Schlesinger to find out exactly how many such chats he had during that time .
 President Kennedy had a press conference roughly every two weeks . By contrast, President Kennedy did not have many such press conferences .
 At this point, she had an affectionate but somewhat distant relationship with her mother-in-law, especially in comparison to the instant connection she had felt on first meeting Joseph Kennedy .
 A Political Profile of JFK was written with JFK's cooperation, written with his cooperation, which questioned his emotional commitment to political goals . JFK was a Republican Senator from New York City .
 Anyone sees he has the intelligence—magnetism and drive it takes to succeed in politics, says Obama . Anyone sees him has intelligence, drive and intelligence to succeed, he says .
 French president from 1959 to 1969 . Free French leader of World War II . Charles-and-E.MARIE de GAULLE .
 As an ardent Francophile in art, architecture, literature, history, and couture, she was vexed by de Gaulle's willingness to poison relations with JFK and the U.S. by upholding his extreme standard of French pride and independence .
 Peter Thorneycroft resigned in 1958 as chancellor of the Exchequer, along with two lesser officials, to protest increased public spending . The more recent example she is thinking of was probably probably Peter Thorneycroft .
 Prime Minister Harold Macmillan quickly replaced them all . Dismissed the resignations as ""little local difficulties,"" Prime Minister later replaced them with new ministers .
 JFK hoped that his victory in heavily Protestant West Virginia would quash the Catholic issue for good, but it remained virulent enough that in September 1960, he felt compelled to appear before a group of Protestant ministers in Houston and reaffirm his strong support for separation of church from state .
 Truman asked JFK, the front-runner for the Democratic nomination, to step aside on July 2, 1960 . Truman said JFK was too young and inexperienced, and that the convention had been ""rigged"" in advance .
 After making a statement, he flew to Los Angeles for his party's convention . After making this statement, the president flew to LA for the convention .
 To Johnson, a reliable friend was someone ""you would go to the well with"" in order to draw water, referring to the days when American Indians threatened settlers of European origin . Johnson: "A reliable friend is someone you would go with" to get water .
 Jacqueline LEE BOUVIER CANFIELD RADZIWILL was Jacqueline's younger sister . CAROLINE LEEBOUVIer CANFIELD CANFIELD RATZILL was her sister .
 Harry Truman was counsel and close adviser to President Harry Truman . Harry was a St. Louis lawyer who was a close friend to Truman . He earned a reputation as one of Washington's "wise men"
 In 1957, Pearson charged on ABC that Profiles in Courage had actually been written by Sorensen . Pearson: Profiles In Courage was actually a book written by the same author .
 During the 1960 campaign, Kennedy asked Clifford to start preparing for a potential transition to the White House . Clifford was asked by Kennedy to prepare for a possible White House transition .
 Clifford continued to advise both the Kennedys on various matters private and public . Clifford continued advising both JFK and JFK . Clifford died in 1963 .
 At the time of these oral history interviews, both men were rushing to complete rival books on President Kennedy, which for a time frayed their relations . Both men were working on rival books about President Kennedy .
 Sorensen writes that in 1953, he and JFK agreed that on any outside published work on which they collaborated, he would receive at least half of the fees or royalties .
 Profiles became a major bestseller, generating royalties ""far in excess of anything either of us had ever contemplated" JFK ""unexpectedly and generously" gave him a sum to be spread over several years, that I regarded as more than fair" JFK says .
 RFK had served as assistant counsel of Senator Joseph McCarthy's Subcommittee on Permanent Investigations before resigning in protest over McCarthy's excesses . RFK served as aide counsel to McCarthy's subcommittee .
 From 1957 to 1959, he served as chief counsel for Senator John McClellan's committee on labor racketeering . He relentlessly pursued Teamsters president James Hoffa from 1957-1959 .
 In 1962, Ted won his brother's old Senate seat and occupied it until his death . Ted won the Senate seat in 1962 and held it until he died in 1994 .
 JFK appointed him as labor secretary and Supreme Court justice in September 1962 . He was general counsel to AFL-CIO and United Steelworkers before JFK . JFK was son of Jewish immigrants from Poland and Ukraine .
 The Landrum-Griffin labor reform act of 1959 sought to regulate union practices . The act sought to avoid the excesses that the Kennedy brothers had uncovered in their hearings .
 JFK wished that it did not also restrict honest union activity . JFK wished to ensure that it didn't also restrict honesty union activity. JFK wished it did . JFK wanted to ensure it did also restrict dishonest union activity, he said .
 JFK gave a controversial speech denouncing French dominion over Algeria . JFK took the then-bold view that it was in the American interest to side with anticolonial movements .
 In 1954, the French withdrew from Vietnam after an embarrassing defeat at Dien Bien Phu . The United States was under pressure to replace them and pick up the struggle to keep the North Vietnamese leader, Ho Chi Minh, from seizing the country .
 Jacqueline translated books for him on the history and politics of French colonies in North Africa, the Middle East, and Southeast Asia and other subjects . With her excellent command of French, Jacqueline was able to translate books .
 Georges d'Argenlieu was French colonial administrator in Indochina from 1945 to 1947 . He was French administrator in the region between 1945 and 1947 .
 By voting for construction of the seaway, Kennedy outraged many of his constituents, who complained that he was more concerned about the rest of the country than his own state . Many of those people complained that Kennedy was more worried about the United States than his home state .
 Kennedy's meeting with Eisenhower was actually in April 1961, after the unsuccessful Bay of Pigs invasion . Kennedy and Eisenhower met in 1961 after the failed invasion of the Cuban Islands .
 This refers to the effort to build a National Cultural Center in Washington (later renamed the John F Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts), finally opened in 1971 .
 Norton was a perennial loser for mayor of Boston . Norton had been superintendent of Commonwealth Pier and campaigned from his own sound truck .
 JFK gave a speech assuring free West Berliners that he would support them against Soviet threats to drive them from the city . In June 1963, during a trip to Europe, JFK viewed the Berlin Wall and then gave a rousing speech .
 Robert Kennedy was shocked in 1964 when LBJ told him that of all the things in life, he liked campaigning the best . By contrast, LBJ was shocked when he told Kennedy that campaigning was the thing he liked best .
 When JFK entered the Senate in 1953, his Republican colleague Joseph McCarthy was using the Senate's Subcommittee on Permanent Investigations to pursue supposed hidden Communists in the U.S. government, damaging innocent lives in the process .
 Kennedy was criticized by some for failing to publicly denounce the Wisconsin demagogue . Kennedy was caught between the many Massachusetts voters who loved McCarthy and the liberal Democrats who abhorred him . He was criticized for not denouncing McCarthy .
 JFK was the only Democratic member not to participate in the censure vote . JFK was recovering from his near fatal back operation when the vote was held .
 Fox made the paper shrill and McCarthyite, and deployed it in strong support of ""Onions"" Burke in the spring of 1956 . Fox's use of the paper was a strong support for Burke .
 In January 1953, Robert Kennedy started work for McCarthy's committee as an assistant counsel under Roy Cohn . Kennedy worked under McCarthy's abrasive and unscrupulous counsel, Roy Cohn, in 1953 .
 The animosity between the two men over matters great and small at one point almost led to a fistfight . The animosity towards each other almost ended up being physical .
 By the summer, Robert had moved to the Democratic side of the committee staff, then quit altogether . Robert had been working for the Republican-led committee .
 JFK seriously considered for vice president in 1960 . Sen. HENRY ""SCOOP"" JACKSON was a Democratic senator from Washington .
 MILES MCMILLIN was a reporter and later publisher of the Capital Times of Madison, Wisconsin . He was a member of the Madison-area newspaper's staff .
 His wife Elsie Rockefeller McMillin had been married to the state's new senator, William Proxmire . His wife was married to a woman who was also married to another .
 Kennedy still thought of liberals as people who gave her husband trouble . She said they were people who she thought of as liberals . Kennedy: "I'm sorry for what I've done, but I'm not surprised"
 Members of the group that JFK called ""professional liberals"" had mistrusted him since he first ran for the House in 1946 because of his conservative father . JFK's conservative father was a conservative Republican and his father was conservative .
 Once he was President, they charged that he was too intimidated by conservative southern Democratic congressional committee chairmen to vigorously pursue the liberal agenda on civil rights and education .
 Kennedy especially valued his endorsement in 1960 because it offset the pre-convention opposition of his mother, Eleanor, who much preferred her close friend Stevenson . Kennedy's mother preferred Stevenson's endorsement .
 Wilson asked McNamara to appoint him secretary or assistant secretary of the navy, as his father had been under Wilson, but the new Pentagon chief refused . The President made him undersecretary of commerce in 1963 after failing to find a suitable position .
 The Minnesotan had tried to enter the wartime military but was rejected because of a hernia . In fact, he had already been rejected from entering the military .
 Leslie Stevens's Private Property was so low budget that it was filmed in Stevens's Hollywood Hills home, starring his wife, Kate Manx . This melodrama was Private Property, by director Leslie Stevens, which starred his wife .
 It portrays a housewife taking up with hoodlums, with scenes of rape and murder . The film also features scenes of murder and rape .
 Bradlee speculated that Private Property was on the Catholic Church's index of prohibited films . He joked that it would have helped him with some of West Virginia's Catholic-hating voters .
 TOM Mboya convinced JFK to support his Airlift Africa effort to place Kenyan students in American universities . JFK was chairman of Senate subcommittee on Africa, chairman of the Senate subcommittee .
 One young Kenyan studying in America was Barack Obama, Sr., a friend of Mboya friend and supporter . Barack Obama Sr. had arrived in 1959 and was a friend and a supporter of the Kenyan politician . Obama Sr.'s son, Barack, was born in Kenya and died in
 Stas was exiled Polish prince and London real estate investor . He was the second husband of Jacqueline's sister Lee . Stas' sister Lee was married to Lee's sister .
 He campaigned among Polish voters for JFK in 1960 and was John's godfather . He campaigned for Kennedy in 1960 . John was his godfather and godfather to John's son .
 She had been asked by doctors to stay as quiet as possible until the birth in December .
 Referring to the Illinoisan's encouragement of a Stevenson draft movement in Los Angeles . The Illinoisan encouraged the draft movement .
 Before the convention in Los Angeles, operatives for Lyndon Johnson had cast grim forebodododging about Senator Kennedy's health .
 LBJ castigated Joseph Kennedy for his pessimism before World War II about Britain's chances against Nazi Germany . LBJ had previously been quite amicable with Joseph Kennedy, who had quietly urged him to run for president in 1956 .
 Johnson replied that she had been sending notes to all those people who had been so kind to her husband in Los Angeles . Johnson said she was sending them notes to those who had helped her husband .
 Kennedy had told Symington's close Missouri friend Clark Clifford that he intended to make Symington his running mate . Clark Clifford had run his own presidential campaign hoping to be chosen after convention deadlock .
 Jacqueline felt she was ""nicer"" to Johnson than anyone else in the Kennedy entourage . This passage suggests some disenchantment with the new president .
 Two days before Christmas 1963, LBJ demonstrated his tendency to overreach . LBJ was a president of the U.S. Supreme Court .
 Robert Kennedy, who detested Johnson, had regaled her with tales of LBJ's reversal of Kennedy appointments, policies, and intentions . LBJ asked JFK's personal secretary to vacate her West Wing office the morning after the assassination .
 Mrs. Johnson was unsettled by Johnson's periodic gaucheries and his negation of a number of JFK policies . But, although unsettled, she was able to live with her family .
 Kennedy liked LBJ and had great fondness and admiration for Lady Bird . Lady Bird had often filled in for her as First Lady . Kennedy had a fondness for LBJ .
 Jacqueline was also grateful to her successor for pledging to complete her White House restoration designs . Jacqueline's successor pledged to preserve the White House Historical Association and other improvements .
 PHILIP GRAHAM was publisher of the Washington Post and a close Johnson ally . He liked to be involved in politics behind the scenes .
 In his posthumously published memorandum on his role in LBJ's selection, he in no way suggests that he was anything close to a kingmaker .
 Graham: JFK and LBJ ran together, but Graham's role was limited to urging both men to run together . Graham says JFK went down to Johnson's Biltmore Hotel suite and made the deal with him . Graham: He encouraged LBJ not to bolt the ticket when angry liberals
 RFK, who even in 1960 disliked the Texan, much later insisted that his brother's offer of the vice presidency had been merely pro forma . RFK insisted that Johnson had ""grabbed"" it .
 Graham, Alsop, and others insisted JFK planned in advance of his nomination to make a serious offer to Johnson in order to carry important southern states and thus win the presidency .
 There is unlikely to ever be a definitive verdict on how much Kennedy really wanted Johnson on his ticket . There is still no way of knowing how much he really wanted to run for president .
 Referring to the director, who made pictures such as The Informer, about an Irish rebel who betrays a comrade . Referring . to the . Irish rebel . about a comrade who betrayed a comrade.
 Connally demanded a medical evaluation of whether Kennedy was healthy enough to serve as president in 1960 . Connally had demanded a full evaluation of Kennedy's health before the election .
 Connally and his wife Nellie rode with the Kennedys through four Texas cities on November 21 and 22, 1963 . Connally was elected governor of his state in 1962 .
 Connally told the President of a soon-to-be-published poll that showed him running ahead of JFK in Texas in 1964 . Connally, a conservative Democrat, was a conservative . Democrat .
 One of the purposes of the Texas trip of November 1963 was to resolve an intra-party feud in that state which pitted Johnson and Connally against their political nemesis, Texas senator Ralph Yarborough . Yarborough was the Texas senator who was the subject of the trip .
 Connally refused to ride in the presidential motorcades with Yarborough . Yarborough was the president of Texas in the 1960s and '60s . Connally was a staunch Texan .
 The other politician with the same name was liberal Don Yarborough . Yarborough almost defeated Connally for the Democratic nomination for governor of Texas in 1962 . The other Democrat with the name Yarborough is a liberal .
 WILLARD WIRTZ was Kennedy's undersecretary of labor before moving to the top spot in 1962 . He became Kennedy's secretary of labor .
 Woodrow Wilson's dream of American membership in the League of Nations was born in 1918 . He was a Republican senator from Massachusetts and namesake of the Brahmin .
 Appearing alongside the well-respected Lodge gave JFK a boost similar to that of appearing with the vice president of the U.S. in debate . Appearing with Lodge was similar to being in debate with vice president .
 After losing to Kennedy, Lodge served as Eisenhower's ambassador to the United Nations . Lodge joined Richard Nixon's losing ticket in 1960 .
 WILLIAM GREEN was a congressman from Philadelphia and the city's Democratic chairman . He served as mayor of Philadelphia and Democratic chairman of Philadelphia .
 Jacqueline Kennedy's description of Joseph Kennedy's efforts for his son's campaign is minimalist . Jacqueline's description here is minimalist. Jacqueline described her son's father's efforts as a father .
 John BAILEY was chief of Connecticut Democrats and early Kennedy supporter . He was appointed as Democratic national chairman of the party .
 The modest apartment some distance beyond the gold-domed Boston State House that JFK had taken in 1946 to establish residency for his first campaign for Congress . The apartment served as his and Jackie's voting address by 1960 .
 The Convair plane was bought by the Kennedy family for JFK to use in the 1960 campaign . The plane was purchased by the family in 1960s .
 June 6, 1944, a 1959 bestseller made into a feature film by Darryl F Zanuck at Twentieth Century Fox . The book was a bestseller and bestseller .
 Blaise Pascal argued that even though God's existence could not be proven by reason, one should behave as if He did exist . Pascal said there was nothing to lose by living in a God-fearing manner . Pascal: There is potentially everything to gain from living in God-
 PHILIP HANNAN was auxiliary bishop of Washington . He was World War II Army chaplain who parachuted into the Ardennes and helped liberate a concentration camp . JFK had maintained an unpublicized, quiet running conversation with JFK .
 John Cavanaugh was a priest who was president of Notre Dame from 1946 to 1952 . Cavanaugh served as president from 1946 until 1952 .
 Richard Nixon strongly supported Richard Nixon in 1960, disdaining JFK's opposition to federal money for parochial schools . Although he had officiated at the weddings of Robert and Edward Kennedy, he strongly supported Nixon .
 In 1945, Spellman launched the Alfred E Smith Memorial Foundation Dinner, a fund-raiser for Catholic charities . In presidential election years, the dinner features jocular speeches by both candidates .
 RICHARD CUSHING was archbishop of Boston from 1944 until the year of his death . Cushings died in 1966 .
 Cushing presided over JFK's wedding to Jackie, prayed at JFK's inauguration and funeral, and strongly supported the widow when she was remarried in 1968 to Aristotle Onassis . Son of an Irish immigrant blacksmith, he had originally wished to be a politician .
 In October 1960, three Catholic bishops in Puerto Rico declared it a sin for Catholics to vote for any candidate opposed by the Church . The move gave ammunition to those charging that no Catholic should be elected president .
 Cardinal Spellman publicly endorsed the bishops' edict . Delighted to do damage to JFK just before the balloting, Spellman said .
 Spellman found himself on the losing side of the debate over the progressive reforms initiated by Pope John XXIII at the Second Vatican Council in 1962 . Spellman was a member of the Catholic Church in the 1950s and 1960s .
 She refers to the Catholic custom of prayer and Holy Communion on the first Friday of nine successive months .
 Jacqueline and her family were looking for a weekend escape to escape the city . Jacqueline wanted to go riding and fox hunting . The family was looking to escape from the city and Jacqueline to go horseback riding . They were looking to find a new home for their family .
 Robert McNamara was a Harvard Business School professor with a devout faith in the value of statistical analysis . He was born in San Francisco, son of a shoe store manager .
 Ford Motor Company president in 1960, two days after JFK's election . After World War II, he analyzed effectiveness of U.S. bombing forays in Asia .
 Kennedy met Kennedy at his Georgetown home and offered Treasury or Defense . Eager for at least one big business Republican in his cabinet, Kennedy met him at his home .
 McNamara accepted the latter, provided that he could appoint his own people . McNamara said he would accept the offer, provided he could choose his own staff .
 Later McNamara was the architect of President Johnson's escalation in Vietnam, until his resignation in 1968 . McNamara resigned from his post as Secretary of State of State in Vietnam in 1966 .
 DEAN RUSK was Truman's assistant secretary of state for the Far East . He was president of the Rockefeller Foundation .
 When other possibilities for the State Department did not pan out, Kennedy turned to the mild but tenacious Rusk . Rusk had not known, consoling himself with the notion that he planned to be his own secretary of state anyway .
 J. WILLIAM FULBRIGHT was a Rhodes Scholar who was a Democratic senator from Arkansas from 1945 to 1975 . He served as a Democratic Senator from Arkansas until 1975 .
 JFK admired Fulbright's allergy to conventional wisdom, but knew that as secretary of state, he would have been doomed by his opposition to civil rights and his outspoken support for Arab states . Fulbright chaired the Foreign Relations Committee, which JFK had admired .
 JFK and Khrushchev had only met once, briefly at the Capitol in September 1959 . JFK was a senator when he was a junior in the Senate and was visiting the U.S. at the time .
 Now that Kennedy was in power, each wanted to take the other's measure . Now that he had control of the White House, both wanted to see how much of Kennedy's legacy was taken .
 Kennedy hoped behind closed doors, without the need to posture for the public, he and Khrushchev could reach some kind of worldly modus vivendi about Berlin, Cuba, Southeast Asia, and other Cold War powder kegs . Kennedy hoped that behind closed . doors, he hoped
 Khrushchev interpreted Kennedy's willingness to deal as political weakness as weakness . Kennedy had risen to power under Stalin, who had risen under Stalin .
 His underestimation of the President in Vienna in Vienna was one factor in his decision to challenge Kennedy in 1962 by slipping offensive missiles into Cuba . His underestimating of Kennedy in Vienna may have contributed to his 1962 decision .
 Fluent in French, he collaborated at age twenty-six on the memoirs of his father's friend Henry Stimson, FDR's wartime secretary of war . He became the youngest dean of the faculty ever appointed by Harvard .
 JFK appointed him as national security adviser, which until that time had been something of a clerk's position . JFK appoints him as president of the United States in 1963 .
 After the Bay of Pigs, Bundy convinced Kennedy that the President would have a full-time in-house counselor to protect him against future bad cabinet advice . Bundy's new role has prevailed ever since . Bundy: "It's a redefinition of the job that has prevailed"
 He felt such an affinity with the President that he changed his registration to Democratic . He also felt such a strong affinity with President Obama that he also changed his party registration .
 J EDGAR HOOVER was the first director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, which he helped to create, and its predecessor agency, from 1924 until his death .
 Hoover's detractors noted his metastasizing hatreds (for example, Martin Luther King and the few journalists and politicians who dared to criticize him) Hoover's eccentricities (after an automobile mishap while making a left turn, he ordered his driver to abjure all future left turns
 Hoover spent his FBI years amassing unprecedented and largely unaccountable power, with his files of potentially damaging information on those who might stop him . All agreed that Hoover spent most of his time amassing enormous power .
 JFK felt that he had little choice but to immediately reappoint Hoover . Hoover was re-appointed in 1960 after JFK's narrow margin in the Senate . Hoover died in 1968 .
 Robert Kennedy required the old man to deal with the President through the attorney general . But unlike his predecessors, he needed the Attorney General, whom Hoover detested . Kennedy hoped that resounding reelection to a second term would allow him to fire the FBI director and replace him .
 President Lyndon Johnson made Hoover virtually director-for-life . By contrast, President Hoover was made virtually director for life .
 President Truman's final secretary of defense was a Wall Street investment banker . He was Truman's last Secretary of Defense . He died in 1953 .
 JFK was eager to show continuity with the previous Democratic government by appointing a wellrespected figure . Lovett declined any appointment for reasons of health .
 Kennedy told reporters that he had asked Stevenson to go to the UN . Stevenson declared that he would have to think about it . Kennedy said he would 'have to think' about it after the meeting .
 Stevenson's diffidence was understandable, but at a time when others were happily accepting presidential appointments, Kennedy was annoyed to be so publicly rebuffed . Stevenson was annoyed at being turned down by Stevenson .
 Stevenson's friends persuaded him that if he turned down the UN, Americans would forget about him . Stevenson was convinced that Americans would remember him if he did . Stevenson: "If you turn down UN, you will be remembered"
 JFK approved a revised version of a secret plan left by Eisenhower to launch CIA-backed Cuban exiles in an invasion of Cuba to overthrow the government of Fidel Castro . JFK approved the plan in April 1961 .
 Kennedy publicly took responsibility for the failure of the Bay of Pigs landing in Cuba . The landing was a mammoth embarrassment less than three months into his term . Kennedy took responsibility when the landing failed .
 DOUGLAS DILLON was Eisenhower's ambassador to France and undersecretary of state before JFK appointed him as treasury secretary . C DILLon was a Republican investment banking heir who served in the Eisenhower administration .
 Joseph Kennedy's daughter Eunice was married to Robert S. S. Shriver in 1953 . He met his boss's daughter at the family-owned Merchandise Mart .
 During the interregnum, he served as the President-elect's highly effective chief talent scout . During the interim period, he was the President's chief talent scouted talent .
 Shriver commanded President Johnson's War on Poverty . Later Shriver served as United States ambassador to France . Shriver ran as Democratic nominee for vice president in 1972 .
 JFK gave FDR Jr. substantial credit for helping him win the pivotal West Virginia primary . FDR, Jr., Jr. reassured many voters who worried about his Catholicism but who venerated President Roosevelt for saving their homes and jobs during the Great Depression .
 STEWART UDALL was a Democratic congressman from Arizona when JFK made him secretary of the interior . He was a Democrat from Arizona and a Republican .
 Orville Freeman was governor of Minnesota before he became Kennedy's secretary of agriculture . Freeman: Kennedy's agriculture secretary was Kennedy's first agriculture secretary . He says the secretary's job was to protect the environment .
 LUTHER HODGES was a one-term North Carolina governor who had swung his state to JFK for vice president in 1956 . Hodges was a former governor of North Carolina .
 The President-elect needed at least one southerner in his cabinet, made him secretary of commerce . He is a Southern Democrat .
 JEDWARD DAY had been Illinois insurance commissioner under Governor Adlai Stevenson . He had been insurance commissioner in Illinois before serving as an insurance executive in California .
 Roswell Gilpatric was a Wall Street lawyer who served under McNamara . He served as undersecretary of defense .
 This ruling granted new license for publication of vicious comments about presidents and other public figures . This ruling was a ruling that gave new license to publish vicious remarks about presidents .
 Goldberg felt it would never be possible to firmly establish a defendant's motive, so he preferred a wider berth for the press . Goldberg said he preferred to give the press a wide berth in the case .
 Sargent Shriver, who was performing reconnaissance on potential appointees, visited the U.S. Rep. Joe Biden .
 JFK asked FDR, Jr. to reassure his wife about the prospect of losing the election . FDR Jr. reassured his wife that he was not going to lose the presidency . JFK's wife was depressed by the prospect, and FDR asked FDR to reassure her .
 In June 1962, Jacqueline wrote her friend William Walton, "My life here which I dreaded & which at first overwhelmed me—is now under control and the happiest time I have ever known" "Not for the position —but for the closeness of one's family," she wrote
 In 1962, the U.S. abruptly cancelled its program to build Skybolt missiles, including some promised to British prime minister Harold Macmillan . The missiles were intended to be an incentive to shut down his own surface-to-air missile program .
 Washington's seemingly cavalier treatment of its British ally nicked Macmillan's prestige in his own country . Washington's treatment of Britain's ally in the U.S. was a major blow to the British Empire .
 David Finley was the first director of the National Gallery of Art . He was chairman of the White House Historical Association, founded by Mrs. White House .
 From 1950 to 1963, she was chair of the United States Commission of Fine Arts, which oversaw the design of federal buildings and monuments in the capital . She was a member of the White House Fine Arts Committee .
 John Walker IIT IIT was director of the National Gallery from 1956 to 1969 . He was director from 1956 until 1969 . John Walker is the son of former National Gallery director John Walker .
 After the inauguration, she was still recovering from John's traumatic birth . John was born in January 2013 .
 LETITIA BALDRIGE was a family friend of the Auchinclosses . She was tall, energetic, and intense .
 JFK told Baldrige she was the most emotional woman he had ever met . JFK told her she was an "emotional" woman . JFK said she was 'emotional' when she left her job .
 She was later informed that Mamie Eisenhower had told her staff to keep her wheelchair behind an ornamental screen . The wheelchair was kept behind a screen but only brought out if Mrs. Eisenhower wanted to use it .
 Jacqueline spent the next fortnight in bed after flying to Palm Beach, Florida .
 J BERNARD WEST served as chief usher from 1957 to 1969, directing the household staff of the White House . He had a close and productive relationship with Mrs. West .
 He welcomed and provided crucial aid to her efforts to restore the White House . President Barack Obama has been critical of the Obama administration .
 President Truman denounced in 1947 for his apostasy in adding a second-floor balcony to the mansion's south front . Truman had added the balcony to his south front of the mansion in 1947 .
 Finley's notice that he would leave the Fine Arts Commission that year, Mrs. Finley replied . Finley said Finley would be leaving the commission that year .
 Republican heir to a famous fortune reshaped Winterthur, his family's old 900acre Delaware estate . Winterthur opened to the public in 1951, with period rooms and gardens .
 Kennedy's bipartisan Fine Arts Committee of prominent Americans advising her on the White House restoration . Kennedy was on the panel advising her about the restoration of the House .
 As an Americanist, du Pont was sometimes distressed by the French-inspired improvisations of Stéphane Boudin . Du Pont was often distressed by Boudins' French-style improvisations .
 On some of his visits, du Pont would rearrange White House furniture, after which Jacqueline would discreetly have it moved back . du Pont's visit to the White House was the first time he had been there .
 Jacqueline Kennedy launched books on presidents, first ladies, and White House gardens . An Historic Guide, and books on first ladies and first ladies .
 The guidebook was purchased by a half million readers during its first six months, swelling the coffers of the new association . A half million people purchased the guidebook in six months .
 Resolute became famous in JFK's Oval Office and has been used by every president but one since Gerald Ford . Resolute that became famous was used by Gerald Ford in Ford's Ford administration in Ford era .
 In February 1962, Jacqueline's hour-long tour of the White House restoration was seen by 56 million television viewers . Jacqueline won an honorary Emmy for her role in the restoration effort .
 From the time of their grand trip to Paris of May 1961 and especially, especially, her vastly popular televised tour of the White House, she was not only no longer a political liability but would have been a major asset to the President when he ran for reelection .
 JFK used strong persuasion to have her agree to accompany him on planned trips to Texas and California that were to be the forerunner of that campaign . JFK's campaign was the precursor to his presidential bid .
 President asked Dave Powers to compare the crowd that had greeted them that day to the one when he had come to Houston alone the previous year . In her presence at the Rice Hotel in Houston on their final evening together, the President asked him to compare it to the crowd he had been greeted
 Stéphane Boudin was president of Paris design firm Maison Jansen . He advised on restoration at Versailles, Malmaison, Leeds Castle and other historical monuments .
 To avoid public controversy about employing a non-American, her staff took pains, with Boudin's consent, to keep him quiet .
 Jacqueline was captivated by the sensibilities of Presidents Jefferson and Monroe, both former ambassadors to Paris, who adorned the mansion with French and French-inspired artifacts . But privately Jacqueline thought it completely appropriate that she consult a Frenchman .
 She feared a public outcry against the room's new design, which was no longer dominated by blue . She feared public outcry over the new design .
 SYLVIA WHITEHOUSE BLAKE had been Jacqueline's Vassar classmate and one of her bridesmaids . SYLVia Whitehousehouse Blake was one of Jacqueline’s classmates .
 In the ground-floor corner bedroom of his parents’ house in Palm Beach, Florida, he lives in a corner bedroom . He was born in the same room as his mother .
 SAMUEL RAYBURN was speaker of the house until 1961 . He was a mentor to the young congressman Lyndon Johnson . He served as speaker until 1961 and mentor to Johnson .
 PIERRE SALINGER of San Francisco, bon vivant, former journalist and aide to Robert Kennedy, served as press secretary .
 Frank Sinatra organized a pre-inaugural gala featuring Hollywood performers such as Nat King Cole and comedian Alan King . The gala was held in honor of JFK .
 Republican New Hampshire senator was one of those responsible for inaugural arrangements . He was a member of the inaugural committee .
 Eisenhower could have made sitting beside the wife of the man who was now the nation's most prominent Irish-American . Eisenhower's wife is now the country's most famous Irish American .
 EARL WARREN was the governor of California whom Eisenhower had appointed as chief justice in 1953 . Eisenhower appointed him chief justice of California .
 Although a Republican, Warren had been glad to swear in Kennedy, rather than Nixon, who was a political enemy . Warren was glad in Kennedy's swearing that Nixon was not a political foe .
 EDWARD FOLEY was a well-known Washington lawyer, former undersecretary of the treasury under Truman under Truman . He was chairman of JFK's inaugural committee .
 George Thomas was JFK's longtime valet and lived on the third floor of the White House . He was African-American from Berryville, Virginia .
 Krock had once been a close friend of Joseph Kennedy's and adviser to Jack while writing Why England Slept, but had broken with them in 1960 over JFK's growing liberalism while seeking the presidency . Krock broke with the Kennedy family in 1960 .
 Jacqueline's grandfather, John V Bouvier, Jr., Jr. and her stepfather, Hugh Auchincloss, were old friends of Jacqueline . Krock had helped Jacqueline get her job on the Washington Times-Herald .
 Referring to the exuberant tours of the White House given by Lyndon Johnson since becoming president . President Johnson gave tours of White House .
 HANS KRAUS was an Austrian-born mountain climber who extolled exercise as a remedy for back injuries .
 When JFK's back problems grew worse in 1961, he consulted Kraus, who agreed to take on the case as long as Dr. Kraus . Kraus agreed to work on JFK's case until JFK died in 1961 .
 Travell was removed from the President's case and that Kraus would be able to reach Kennedy at any time by direct telephone . Travell has been removed from Kennedy's case . Kraus was able to call the President by phone by any time .
 Dr. Travell had simply cured the President's pain with Novocain and let his chest, abdominal, and back muscles atrophy . Travell was shocked to discover that he had used the drug to atrophy his back and chest .
 Kraus warned him that he would soon need a wheelchair unless he began a strict regimen . Kraus told him he would need to use a wheelchair if he didn't comply with Kraus' strict regimen. Kraus said he will soon need to be in a wheelchair .
 JFK was telling friends by 1963 that he had never felt better and felt hearty enough to resume golf . Under Kraus's care, JFK was able to resume playing golf again .
 Travell, who was well-known to the public as the first female White House doctor, was allowed to keep her title and observe at least the fiction that she was still caring for the President . Travell was allowed by the White House to keep the title .
 An estate in Middleburg, Virginia, which the Kennedys rented in 1961 and 1962 .
 Campaigns, travels, and pregnancy had kept Jacqueline from riding regularly since her marriage in 1953 . Campaigns and travels kept her away from riding since her pregnancy .
 John VERNOU BOUVIER III was the debonair father whom Jacqueline adored . John Vernou Bouvier III was a debonarious father who Jacqueline loved him .
 In 1963, the Kennedys built a seven-bedroom yellow ochre stucco and fieldstone house, with a breathtaking view of the Blue Ridge Mountains, on thirty-nine acres in Atoka .
 JFK spent the long weekend before Texas in Tampa and Miami, where he made speeches . He stayed at his father's house with his Harvard friend Torbert Macdonald .
 He had lost substantial support in most of the Deep South states he had won in 1960 over his stand for civil rights . He considered it essential to his reelection to carry Florida in 1964 .
 EVANGELINE BELL BRUCE was the second wife of David Bruce . Bruce was JFK's ambassador in London after occupying the same job in Paris and Bonn . BELL BELL was the wife of JFK's first wife .
 Clare Boothe Luce was the second wife of Henry Luce, founder of the Time-Life organization . She was the wife of Luce's son-in-law, Henry .
 When Kennedy became President, his doctrinaire wife tended to lecture him as if he were still the student he was when they had first met . But when Kennedy became president, he tended to be lectured by his wife, a former Connecticut congresswoman .
 Used by presidents from Andrew Johnson to Theodore Roosevelt as Cabinet Room . Restyled by Mrs. Roosevelt, it was restyled into a Cabinet Room by the former president .
 Kennedy as a dark green Victorian chamber featuring Ulysses Grant's omate cabinet table, other late-nineteenth-century furniture and fixtures, and framed facsimiles of agreements signed in the room .
 Kennedy planned to be ""taking the veil"" and winding down her public commitments from the brisk regimen pressed on her by Tish Baldrige . Kennedy was "trying to be 'taken the veil'
 ELIZAETH VIRGINIA BEALE was an extroverted and widely read Washington social columnist . She was extrovert and a widely read social columnist.
 The first White House curator was an alumna of the Winterthur graduate program . She was a specialist in the French impact on decorative arts in America .
 Kennedy was displeased by what she saw as Pearce's desire for the limelight . Kennedy was unhappy with Pearce's request to be photographed with her .
 With no political experience, Pearce felt baffled by the complex interplay among the First Lady, her Fine Arts Committee, the White House Historical Association, du Pont, and Boudin . For her part, Pearce said she was baffled by her work .
 Jacqueline had her reassigned to oversee the new White House guidebook .
 In September 1962, the First Lady wrote du Pont, "Why are some people so avid for publicity— when it poisons everything" du Pont .
 ANDRé Meyer was a French Jewish refugee who headed American operations for the Paris investment bank Lazard Freres . He headed the bank's American operations in New York .
 He met the First Lady when he contributed the Aubusson rug for the French Empire—inspired Red Room . He first met her when he worked for the first time .
 After President Kennedy's death, Meyer became one of Jacqueline's closest friends . Meyer became a close friend of the late president .
 FIDEL CASTRO RUZ and his guerrilla army entered Havana in triumph in January 1959, having overthrown the Cuban dictator Fulgencio Batista .
 That April, he visited Washington, D.C., at the invitation of the National Press Club . He was refused an audience by President Eisenhower . That April he visited the nation's capital, Washington .
 Castro began importing Soviet oil and expropriating American firms . The following year, Castro imported Soviet oil . Castro's government began importing American oil .
 President Kennedy's wife, Florence Pritchett Smith, had been a friend of Kennedy's since school days . President Kennedy had been friends with President Kennedy for years .
 Smith's 1962 book The Fourth Floor lambasted Eisenhower officials for being too relaxed about letting Castro seize power in Cuba . Smith's book was published in 1962 . He lambasted Rubottom and other officials for letting him seize power .
 ALLEN DULLES was a Wall Street lawyer and brother of Eisenhower's secretary of state . He served as director of Central Intelligence from 1953 to 1961 . Dulles served as CIA director from 1953 until 1961 .
 Along with J Edgar Hoover, he was JFK's first reappointment as President-elect . JFK's reappointment was in the name of continuity .
 On July 23, 1960, Dulles came to Hyannis Port to brief the newly minted Democratic nominee on national security . Dulles was the president of the United States in 1960 .
 Nixon complained JFK had abused this access to classified information in October 1960 to criticize Eisenhower's government for failing to help "fighters for freedom" eager to overthrow Castro . Nixon complained that JFK had used the access of classified information .
 In order to preserve the operation's secrecy, Nixon felt compelled during the debates with Kennedy to argue the other side . In secret he had actually been a champion of CIA plans to upend Castro .
 The Agency had given Kennedy to believe that if the exiles, after landing, managed to establish a beachhead in Cuba, public dissatisfaction with Castro might generate a national uprising . If they failed, they could ""melt into the mountains” of Cuba as guerrillas as gu
 None of these assurances proved accurate, which inflicted a severe blow to Kennedy's prestige . None of Kennedy's assurances proved to be accurate, and the loss of his prestige was devastating .
 CIA and its partisans blamed Kennedy for refusing to suspend his order that U.S. military forces stay out of the battle .
 CIA provided President Kennedy with the first hard evidence, gathered from U-2 photographs, of the missiles on the island . This was weeks before President Kennedy .
 Six U.S. B-26s painted with Cuban insignia had already destroyed almost half of Castro's air force . By that Sunday afternoon, April 16, 1961, six American B.26s had already killed almost half the Cuban air force.
 CIA officials had presumed JFK would allow U.S. military forces to openly support Cuban freedom fighters . JFK had pledged not to invade Cuba, but the invasion was under way .
 Rusk warned the President of the importance of concealing any American role in the invasion . Rusk's call was made in response to the President's call .
 Kennedy thus witheld U.S. air power until exiles were established on Cuba, at which time such a strike might be plausibly explained as coming from Cuban soil . Kennedy therefore witheld United States air power till exiles had been established .
 At that moment, a ban on American air strikes was likely to doom the invasion, and Kennedy knew it . Kennedy knew he was going to risk a disastrous invasion of Vietnam .
 Eisenhower appointed the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff in 1960 . He was appointed by Eisenhower in 1960 as chairman of Joint chiefs of Staff . Eisenhower died at the age of 92 in September 1961 .
 Lemnitzer approved a highly classified plan, called Operation Northwoods, for the U.S. government to commit acts of terrorism in Miami and other American cities and blame Castro as a pretext for a full American invasion of Cuba . The plan was approved in March 1962, and Lemn
 The plan even had suggested that if a U.S. astronaut perished during a mission, the finger should be pointed at Castro . Castro was Castro's first president of the Soviet Union .
 JFK denied Lemnitzer a second term that fall as chairman of the Joint Chiefs . JFK still fuming over the general's ham-handed advice during the Bay of Pigs, JFK denied him a second seat .
 Jose MIRO CARDONA was briefly Castro's prime minister before he broke with him and fled to Florida . He was a lawyer, professor, and prominent Batista critic who fled to Cuba .
 Before the Bay of Pigs, Cardona was leader of anti-Castro Cubans who were quietly cooperating with the CIA and the tiny group of Kennedy officials involved in the invasion .
 Had the Cuban exiles managed to seize a substantial portion of their island, they would have declared Cardona provisional president of Cuba . Cardona is the son of a former Cuban president .
 ADOLF BERLE was a law professor, economic theorist, and FDR-era diplomat . He was assisting the State Department on Latin America . He is credited with his work in Latin America.
 JFK was summoned from the annual White House reception for Congress to a Caribbean map with tiny magnetic ships . The Caribbean map was set up in the Cabinet Room of the White House .
 MARK SHAW was one of the most well-known fashion and celebrity photographers of the time . He was known for his work as a fashion photographer .
 By Wednesday evening, when the Kennedys attended a Greek embassy dinner hosted by Karamanlis, the President knew that the invasion was an inescapable failure .
 JFK appointed JFK to succeed Allen Dulles, after firing the latter in the wake of the Bay of Pigs disaster . JFK was a California businessman, chairman of Eisenhower's Atomic Energy Commission and Nixon supporter .
 President Obama had the highest approval ratings of his presidency . Americans rallied to him and gave him the highest Gallup Poll approval ratings . Obama's approval rating was 81 percent .
 The Air Force chief of staff was known for his leadership of World War II strategic bombing and the postwar Strategic Air Command . He was also known for leadership of the post-war Strategic Air Force Command .
 The metric was created by FDR to fight the Great Depression during the first hundred days of his presidency . The metric has been used by the press ever since to issue wildly premature assessments of new presidents .
 Charles Wrightsman was an Oklahoma oil tycoon and social friend of the Kennedys . His wife was a close friend to Jacqueline and served on her Fine Arts Committee to supervise and raise funds for the White House .
 J. JOZSEF CARDINAL MINDSZENTY of Budapest was sentenced, after a 1949 show trial, to life imprisonment for ""treason"" against the Soviet-dominated government of Hungary .
 Fabled commander of the 505th Parachute Infantry Regiment on D-day, was JFK's first ambassador to Paris . James Gavenin, who served in the Army in World War II, is JFK's most famous ambassador .
 General Gavin quit Eisenhower's Pentagon over defense strategy and published a book explaining why . Like Maxwell Taylor, General Gavin had quit the Pentagon over strategy .
 JFK convinced his brother to become his confidential adviser and troubleshooter on foreign, defense, and intelligence policy . After the Bay of Pigs, JFK convinced him to expand his portfolio and become his secret adviser .
 President Kennedy asked Taylor to head a committee to conduct a postmortem on the Bay of Pigs failure . Taylor was asked to head the committee to investigate the failure of the Cuban coup .
 Other panel members were Robert Kennedy, Allen Dulles, and Admiral Arleigh Burke . Kennedy, Dulles and Burke were on the panel .
 Castro's ransom demands for $60 million worth of tractors, drugs, baby food, and medical equipment in exchange for their freedom . Castro encouraged a public campaign, including a ""Tractors for Freedom"" committee .
 In December 1962, the Kennedys welcomed the liberated Cubans at a raucous rally in Miami's Orange Bowl . Jacqueline told Jacqueline that she hoped John would grow up to be as brave as they were .
 OLEG PENKOVSKY was a valuable secret agent for Western intelligence in Moscow when he was exposed, arrested, tried, and executed . He was exposed and tried, tried and executed in Moscow .
 The President and First Lady leased the neighboring home of Mr and Mrs. Kennedy to avoid disrupting the Joseph Kennedy household in Palm Beach .
 ERNEIDO OLIVA GONZALEZ was deputy commander of invasion Brigade 2506 . He had just been released from Castro's prison . He was just a few days after being released from prison .
 The following year, he and some of his comrades received U.S. Army commissions . He and others received commissions .
 XAVIER CUGAT was a popular Spanish-born bandleader who had spent his childhood in Cuba . Cugat was born in Spain and spent most of his childhood there .
 President Johnson had just shut down the program of covert action against Cuba that had been quietly supervised by the Kennedy brothers . Oliva and his comrades were disillusioned .
 DONALD BARNES was the government's senior Spanish interpreter, and was duly interviewed for the Kennedy Library's oral history program .
 Raids from the sea were part of the U.S. covert action waged against Castro's Cuba . Raids came from sea as part of a covert operation waged by the United States .
 Before his departure for Havana, his friend Ben Bradlee arranged for him to see President Kennedy in the Oval Office . President Kennedy was assassinated in November 1963 .
 EVELYN NORTON LINCOLN was JFK's personal secretary from 1953 until his death . JFK's secretary was his personal secretary until he died in 1963 .
 Kennedy's Alliance for Progress was designed to increase economic cooperation with Latin American countries . U.S. is the friend and champion of reform, not dictatorship, says Kennedy . Kennedy's alliance for Progress aims to position the United States as a friend and not dictatorship .
 President Adolfo Lépez Mateos was president of Mexico from 1958 to 1964 . The Kennedys rode through crowds in Mexico City in June 1962 as guests of Lépe Mateos, president of the country .
 JFK met with Khrushchev in June 1961 . JFK was in the midst of a meeting with the Soviet Union's leader .
 Conservative British prime minister from 1957 to 1963 visited Kennedy in April 1961 .
 Kennedy's sister Kathleen married William Cavendish, Marquess of Hartington, nephew of Macmillan's wife, Lady Dorothy . They were related through the marriage of Kennedy's late sister Kathleen, known as "Kick,"" to William .
 Alberto Lleras Camargo was a former journalist and the Colombian president from 1958 to 1962 . He was the first president of the country from 1958- 1962 .
 The Colombian palace was a glittering museum of Colombian history, which she later considered to be an inspiration for her restoration of the White House .
 Kennedy resisted pressures to deploy the U.S. military against pro-Communist forces in Laos . In 1961, Kennedy resisted pressure to use the United States military in the region .
 He authorized negotiations, which resulted, the following year, in the country's neutrality . Instead he authorized negotiation, which led to the country being neutralized .
 The Allies left Berlin deep within the Soviet zone of occupation at the end of World War II . The Allies drew up plans for postwar Germany in 1945 .
 The city itself was effectively divided into two sectors -- East Berlin for the Soviets, West Berlin for Americans, British, French, and French .
 By the late 1950s, Soviet-backed East Germany was an economic ruin, in contrast to the ""miracle"" of West Germany . West Germany was the "miracle" of the West Germany in the 1950s .
 Khrushchev demanded that the city be unified, which, because of its geographical position, would make it subject to Soviet whims . This would effectively force the West out of the German capital .
 Western allies committed themselves to preserve their rights in Berlin, if necessary, by going to war . The Western allies had committed themselves by going on war .
 When Kennedy left Khrushchev after their harsh Vienna encounter in June 1961, the Berlin Crisis was on, with the President calling up American reservists . The President called up reservists in the wake of the Berlin crisis .
 The Soviets and East Germans built a hideous wall around West Berlin to stop the ""brain drain"" to the West . Then suddenly in August, the Soviets and east Germans built the wall . The wall was built to stop a 'brain drain'
 Although Kennedy opposed the wall politically, he privately realized that the Soviet leader was providing himself a face-saving means to wind down the Berlin Crisis . Kennedy: "I'm not sure what I think about the Berlin Wall."
 Inventor DINH DIEM was president of South Vietnam from the French withdrawal in 1955 until his death in a military coup . He was president from 1955 until he died in a coup .
 Buddhist priest burned himself to death in Saigon in the summer of 1963 to protest Diem's repressive policies . Jacqueline refers to protests like that of the Buddhist priest who burned himself .
 Both Kennedys were engaged by the literary quality and humor of the cables from JFK's ambassador to India .
 Jacqueline would cheer the President up by leaving him hand-drawn cartoons and limericks, bringing the children to his office, and having him served some of his most preferred foods .
 In private, she performed uncanny impersonations of JFK . She also performed uncanny impressions of some of the people JFK had to deal with .
 She could imitate the French ambassador doing his own impersonation of de Gaulle . She could also imitate him impersonating the ambassador .
 WILLIAM WALTON had been dropped into France at the start of the D-day invasion . He was a journalist, novelist, painter, painter and soldier .
 Walton hung paintings in JFK's Oval Office after the inauguration . Walton accepted Jackie's appeal to serve as chair of the United States Commission of Fine Arts . Walton oversaw the aesthetic design of federal buildings and monuments .
 KWAME NKRUMAH became the first president of an independent Ghana in 1960 . He was Ghana's first president and first Ghana president .
 Nkrumah was busy amassing a corrupt fortune, placing restrictions on his people's freedoms, and flirting with the Soviet Union . Soon he had become a corrupt businessman and a corrupt dictator .
 HAILE SELASSIE was the Ethiopian emperor, known as the ""Lion of Judah,"" and by tradition descended from King Solomon .
 SUKARNO was Indonesia's first president from 1945 to 1967 and widely known for both lust and corruption . He led Indonesia to independence from the Dutch .
 ALBERTO VARGAS was a Peruvian-born painter who created pinups of beautiful women, both nude and clothed, which appeared in Esquire and Playboy .
 George Petty painted female subjects in poses similar to those of Vargas . George Vargas was the subject of a series of paintings by George George Vidal .
 JFK received him in November 1961 at Hyannis Port for an interview that was published in both of their countries . JFK's interview with JFK was published both in both countries .
 Kennedy presumably refers to the daughter-in-law who accompanied the Khrushchevs to Vienna . Kennedy was the daughter in-law of Khrushchev's wife .
 ANATOLY DOBRYNIN came to Washington as Soviet ambassador in 1962 . He is a lifelong professional diplomat .
 Walton called on Soviet officials in Moscow on a trip arranged before the President's death to meet Soviet artists . Walton met Soviet artists in Moscow before his death . Walton's visit was arranged before he died to visit Soviet officials .
 The Kennedys and Khrushchevs were feted with a dinner and performance at Schonbrunn Palace .
 The Soviet Union's space program in 1961 was ahead of America's . Khrushchev loved to boast, but the Soviet Union had a better space program .
 ANDREI GROMYKO, the severe Soviet foreign minister, fouled his relationship with JFK in October 1962 by denying to his face in the Oval Office that the Soviets had placed missiles in Cuba .
 JFK: "You're offering to trade us an apple for an orchard. This was in October 1961, during a conversation in the White House family quarters, in which JFK deflected Gromyko's bargaining attempts on West Berlin by saying, ""You're offered to trade an apple
 Jacqueline was the second wife of the philanthropist and arts patron Paul Mellon . She was Jacqueline's close friend . Jacqueline had a close relationship with pharmaceuticals heiress and second wife .
 Mellon and JFK collaborated on the transformation of the Rose Garden into a tree-edged setting for outdoor ceremonies . Mellon served on her Fine Arts Committee and advised her on the restoration of the White House gardens .
 The British prime minister made his first White House visit to Kennedy in April 1961 . The British Prime Minister visited the White House in 1961 and 1961 .
 David Ormsby-Gore was British ambassador to Washington during the Kennedy years . He was Britain's ambassador to the U.S. during that period .
 A descendant of the Tory hero and British prime minister Lord Salisbury . He had known JFK since before World War II, when Joseph Kennedy served in prewar London . Joseph Kennedy was a member of the Kennedy family, a descendant of former British Prime Minister .
 As a Conservative member of Parliament, Ormsby-Gore had sporadically discussed disarmament with JFK throughout the 1950s .
 Both he and Macmillan pushed the President to fight hard for a comprehensive test ban treaty that would reduce the harshness of the Cold War arms race .
 In October 1963, suffering from a prostate ailment, Macmillan resigned from the Labour Party . MacMillan resigned in October 1963 .
 His defense minister, John Profumo, had recently been embroiled in a sex and espionage scandal that tarnished the Macmillan government's reputation . Profumo's defense minister was recently embroiled in an espionage scandal .
 Friends speculated that the ordeal might have led to Macmillan's malady . Or that he was grateful to use the excuse of ill health to resign .
 HUGH GAITSKELL and Harold Wilson were leaders of the Labour party opposition to Macmillan . They were both Labour party leaders in the 1950s and 1960s .
 Kennedy's official visit to India, accompanied by her sister, was in March 1962 . Kennedy's sister was also in India during her official visit .
 Charles James Fox was a Whig political leader and the scourge of King George III, whom he considered a tyrant . Fox supported the American Revolution against George III .
 St Clair-Erskine, 6th Earl of Rosslyn, and St. Clair Erskin, both served as postwar members of Parliament . Both served as members of the House of Lords .
 William DOUGLAS-HOME was a playwright who ran unsuccessfully for Parliament during World War II . He opposed Churchill's insistence that the struggle be fought until Germany surrendered unconditionally .
 His brother Alec succeeded him as prime minister in October 1963 . Alec was Macmillan's foreign secretary and succeeded him in November 1963 .
 Douglas-Home had written two plays, The Reluctant Debutante and The Peer Peer . He had also written the Reluctuctant Peer . Douglas Home died at the age of 92 .
 Aristotle Onassis based his family, business, and yacht Christina in Monaco in the late 1950s and was frequently host to Churchill and his wife Clementine .
 The Kennedys actually met Churchill aboard Onassis's yacht during both the summers of 1955 and 1959 . Onassis yacht was Onassis' yacht .
 KONRAD ADENAUER was the first chancellor of postwar West Germany . He retired in 1963, retiring in 1963 . Adenauer was a member of the West German parliament .
 JFK's admiration for Adenauer's role in building German democracy was tempered by his annoyance at his demands that the U.S. demonstrate its commitment to defend West Berlin from Communist threat . JFK was annoyed at Adenauer for demanding that the United States demonstrate its support for West Berlin .
 Conservative prime minister of Canada when the Kennedys made their first official foreign visit there in May 1961 . John DIEFENBAKER was the Conservative PM of Canada at the time .
 During their talks, the prime minister could not disguise his low opinion of the informal, young new President .
 Allegedly one of the Americans accidentally left behind a document, written by Kennedy's aide Walt Rostow, on which the President had casually scribbled his view that the fusty Diefenbaker was an ""S.O.B.,"" and urged an effort to ""
 The following year, JFK further antagonized Diefenbaker by inviting the leader of his opposition, the Liberal party's Lester Pearson, to a White House dinner . JFK had known Pearson during his tenure as ambassador in Washington, whom he had known .
 Diefenbaker tried to shake the Americans' obvious preference for Pearson's party by threatening to release the offending memorandum of 1961 . The memo of 1961 was released by Pearson in 1961 .
 Charles AUBREY SMITH was a British actor and stereotypical Englishman, who looked like Georges Vanier . He was a typical Englishman and looked like a Frenchman .
 This was in May 1960, when de Gaulle came to Washington as Eisenhower's guest . De Gaulle's visit to Washington was the first time he had been there since 1960 .
 Referring to the Kennedys' triumphal reception in France when they were received by de Gaulle for state visit in May 1961, before the Vienna summit with Khrushchev .
 De Gaulle's efforts to distance France from NATO and the United States in order to demonstrate French singularity and grandeur . The U.S. and NATO have been allies of France since the Second World War .
 ANDRé MALRAUX was a hero of the French Resistance during World War II . He was de Gaulle's minister of culture . André Malraux was a French Resistance hero .
 His 1938 novel L'Espoir was based on his experience fighting alongside anti-fascist forces during the Spanish Civil War . He wrote a novel about his experience during the war .
 She asked to meet Malraux during the state visit to Paris and hear him speak about some of the paintings she most admired . She asked him to speak to her about his paintings .
 Jacqueline had sent word that in his grief, Malraux need not bother with her, but he insisted on keeping his commitment to be her host, which touched her deeply . Jacqueline sent word of her grief, but that he would not bother to bother her .
 At the Galerie Nationale du Jeu de Paume, the great French museum, Malraux stood before canvases by Manet, Renoir, and Cézanne .
 He had also had Bouguereau's The Birth of Venus moved beside Manet's Olympia so that Mrs. Manet could be seen in the gallery .
 During their visit to the Chateau de Malmaison, Napoleon's Empress Josephine lectured her about the turbulent Bonaparte marriage . Napoleon had been restored by Napoleon and served as the seat of French government from 1800 to 1802 .
 She was inspired by her knowledge of French literature, history, and art . After touring the house and its famous rose garden, she felt newly inspired in her efforts to improve the White House .
 Her instant intellectual communion with Malraux led to a correspondence by diplomatic pouch . She met with him in Paris, France, where she married him . She became a friend of the world's most famous artist .
 In April 1962, she happily showed him through the National Gallery in Washington and, along with the President, honored him at a dinner for the Western Hemisphere's Nobel laureates . JFK, in his toast, pronounced the most extraordinary White House gathering of talent since Jefferson had dined there alone
 Jacqueline suggested an American visit by the Mona Lisa, which rarely left the Louvre . Jacqueline suggests a visit to the famous painting by the famous artist .
 Malraux defied the Paris arts bureaucracy and arranged ""a personal loan"" of the Mona Lisa to the President and Jacqueline . With the assent of de Gaulle, de Gaulles was willing to make a friendly gesture .
 In January 1963, the Kennedys welcomed Malraux and his wife to the National Gallery for the unveiling of the portrait .
 When Malraux published his autobiography, Anti-Memoirs, in 1968, he dedicated it to Jacqueline .
 The Kennedys gave Malraux and his wife a Sunday champagne brunch . Referring to Glen Ora, where the Kennedy gave the couple a Sunday brunch .
 The Madquis were guerrillas of the French Resistance, mainly in the countryside . They were mainly in France's countryside, mostly in the French countryside .
 Richard Goodwin was slated in November 1963 to replace August Heckscher as the President's chief adviser on the arts . Goodwin had worked for JFK since 1959 as a campaign speechwriter, assistant special counsel, and diplomat .
 Jacqueline consulted Malraux about the possibility of creating an American counterpart to the culture ministry and what to expect . Jacqueline had consulted him about the idea .
 Since 1958, Khrushchev had been issuing deadlines and using other tactics in an effort to force the United States and other Western powers out of West Berlin . The U.S. and West Berlin were not allowed to leave West Berlin in 1958 .
 JFK's television speech from the Oval Office on the Berlin crisis of July 25, 1961 . In which he announced a defense budget increase and call-ups of American reservists .
 Kennedy ordered his aides not to crow about the apparent American victory, explaining that if Khrushchev felt embarrassed, the Russian might feel compelled to launch some other gambit that might take the world to the edge of destruction . Kennedy also warned that if the U.S. felt embarrassed about
 The President also knew that his private settlement with Khrushchev was less clear-cut than the public impression that he had managed to win the Soviet leader's unconditional surrender .
 Khrushchev had made a tacit deal with Kennedy to remove the missiles if the President would force the withdrawal of NATO missiles from Turkey . In fact, Kennedy had agreed to remove missiles if he forced the withdrawal . In exchange for removing the missiles, Kennedy promised never to authorize a U.
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU came to the U.S. in November 1961 . He was imprisoned during India's independence struggle .
 From Newport naval station, the Kennedys took Nehru to the Auchincloss estate, Hammersmith Farm . Nehru was the prime minister of India's first government .
 During his visit to Southeast Asia, Kennedy greatly annoyed the commander of French forces in Indochina, Jean de Lattre de Tassigny, by asking why the Vietnamese should want to give their lives merely so that their country would remain a French possession . Kennedy's visit to
 GI GIER BIDDLE DUKE was a tobacco heir and diplomat . He served as JFK's chief of protocol .
 Jacqueline was transforming the Yellow Oval Room in the family quarters, which she was transforming into an elegant parlor .
 VENGALIL KRISHNAN KRISHNA MENON was Nehru's defense minister . He was an impassioned critic of U.S. foreign policy .
 MARIAN CANNON SCHLESINGER was the painter daughter of a Harvard physiology teacher who endorsed Stevenson in 1960 .
 When Schlesinger announced his support of JFK before the 1960 convention, some old friends and Stevenson backers denounced him as Benedict Arnold . Some old friends of Stevenson backers called him a Benedict Arnold.
 Kennedy's official visit to India of March 1962 balanced with a stopover in Pakistan . Kennedy's visit was part of a diplomatic effort to ease tensions with India's rival Pakistan .
 KRISHNA NEHRU HUTHEESING, a writer, was the prime minister's youngest sister . She was the PM's sister .
 Khrushchev tried to demonstrate Soviet might by ordering the largest nuclear test explosions ever . In the fall of 1961, after the Vienna summit, the Berlin Crisis, and the building of the Berlin Wall, he ordered the biggest nuclear test explosion ever .
 British pacifist, philosopher, and Nobel laureate in literature . Nobel laureate of literature .
 David Wallace was a conservative journalist and founder of U.S. News & World Report . He founded the conservative U.N. News and World Report in 1964 .
 Kennedy did not know Macmillan remotely as well as the President had . She achieved a moving kind of intimacy with her husband's British friend by letter by letter .
 On June 1, 1964, Jacqueline reported to Macmillan that she was feeling better now and the worst had passed . The next day, the day before this oral history interview, she said she was in good spirits .
 Later she wrote him that she was trying to raise her children as Jack would have wished . She wrote that if she prevailed, then that would be her vengeance against the world .
 Telstar was the first communications satellite to allow television images to be beamed across the Atlantic . Launched in 1962, Telstar allowed television images of the world's most famous satellite to be broadcast .
 On the President's forty-seventh birthday, Jacqueline and Robert Kennedy appeared from Hyannis Port in an international tribute that included Macmillan, Berlin mayor Willy Brandt, and other foreign leaders . The tribute was a tribute to the Kennedy family .
 In August 1963, Kennedy, Khrushchev, and Macmillan consented to a treaty to ban nuclear tests in the atmosphere, outer space, and under water . The treaty was signed in August 1963 .
 De Gaulle, eager to build his own French nuclear deterrent, refused to sign the treaty . The treaty was signed by the French president in 1961 .
 Despite Kennedy's large efforts, the document did not preclude underground testing . The document represented the first serious mutual effort by Americans and Soviets to control the Cold War nuclear arms competition .
 Kennedy considered it his proudest achievement, especially after the almostapocalypse of the missile crisis .
 He signed the treaty on October 7, 1963, in the Victorian splendor of Jacqueline's new Treaty Room .
 ARTHUR DEAN, William Foster and John McCloy were asked by JFK to help negotiate a test ban treaty with the Soviets . JFK had all been asked to help to negotiate the treaty .
 W. AVERELL HARRIMAN was the son and heir of one of the late nineteenth century's most famous railroad barons . He was a son of a railroad baron .
 The President sent Harriman to Moscow to demonstrate the seriousness of his commitment to achieving a treaty . He was impressed by his success .
 Kennedy was given to the Kennedy family as they waited to move into their new home . Kennedy's new home is being used as a temporary home for her family . Kennedy is now living in a new home in New York City .
 THEODORE WHITE, a friend of JFK's who had overlapped with him at Harvard, wrote the landmark book on presidential politics, The Making of the President, 1960 . White was JFK's friend .
 In that volume, White wrote that ""no man proved more capable of exercising the end form of American power around the globe"" than Harriman, but that he was incapable of understanding American domestic politics .
 He soldiered on as a senior diplomat for the two Democratic presidents who followed John Kennedy . The diplomat was a key diplomat for both Kennedy and Kennedy .
 Eminent officials of the Kennedy government attended what came to be called ""Hickory Hill seminars" The seminars were held in various of their homes by officials .
 Academic would lecture and take questions on his own expertise . Organized by Schlesinger, academic would lecture, take questions .
 Lincoln historian David Herbert Donald took part in the Yellow Oval Room . The evening with the Lincoln historian took place in the White House's Yellow Oval room .
 JFK ruminated to Robert Kennedy that it might be the night to go to the theater, referring to Lincoln's assassination in Ford's Theatre . JFK was at the zenith of his political reputation at the time of the assassination .
 MAUD ALICE BURKE, known as Lady Emerald Cunard, born in America, was a famous pre-World War II London hostess . She was a hostess before World War II .
 The French ambassador was intensely jealous of Ormsby-Gore's extraordinary relationship with the Kennedys . He was also jealous of his friendship with the French ambassador .
 The President and First Lady placed some distance between themselves and the Alphands also because of de Gaulle's growing resistance to JFK's overtures and efforts to keep France firmly in the Western Alliance .
 U THANT was a Burmese diplomat who served as secretary-general of the UN from 1961 to 1971 . He was a member of the United Nations from 1961-1971 . U THant was a diplomat for Burma Burma .
 Kennedy met with Macmillan for three days at the Lyford Cay Club in the Bahamas in December 1962 . Kennedy met the British Prime Minister at the club in December .
 The U.S. cancelled its program to build Skybolt missiles, citing technical problems . The missiles had been promised to the U.K. for its nuclear deterrent force . They had been due to be used as a nuclear deterrent .
 When this was announced by the defense minister, Peter Thorneycroft, Macmillan suffered political embarrassment . Parliament critics complained that he was too close and subservient to Kennedy .
 At Nassau, President tried to bolster Macmillan by offering him Polaris missiles in return for lease of a submarine base near Glasgow .
 The President's air force aide reported that whatever technical difficulties Skybolt had suffered, they had evidently vanished .
 JFK asked the Columbia political scientist Richard Neustadt to investigate the gaffe . JFK was mortified to have injured Macmillan, and asked him to investigate it . JFK died of a heart attack in November 1963 .
 Kennedy urged Jackie to read Neustadt's report in November 1963 . Kennedy urged her to read it .
 Roger Blough was board chairman of United States Steel from 1955 to 1969 . He was chairman of the steel company from 1955 until 1969 .
 Kennedy Administration brokered an agreement with the Steelworkers Union and industry chieftains to hold down wage and price increases that were potentially inflationary . In March 1962, the Kennedy administration brokered a deal with the union and industry leaders .
 In April 1962 Blough told JFK that United States Steel was raising prices by 3. percent, thereby violating the deal . But in April 1962, 1962, Blough said the price hike was only 3.5 percent higher than the previous 3 percent .
 He had a grand jury consider antitrust indictments, and ordered the FBI to "interview them all" The FBI had to examine the moguls' expense accounts and other personal records for evidence of unlawful collusion .
 Clark Clifford and other administration officials badgered the steel men to rescind their price increases . The steel men's price increases have been rescinded by the government .
 Kennedy had to send the army to put down the resulting riots, which left two people dead . The riots were the result of riots in which two people were killed .
 George Wallace served the first of his four terms as governor of Alabama from 1963 until 1967 . Wallace was governor from 1963 to 1967 . He served four terms in Alabama .
 Deputy Attorney General Katzenbach, backed by a federalized Alabama National Guard, asked the governor to step aside . The governor did . He did .
 President Eisenhower used the 101st Airborne Division to compel integration of Little Rock Central High School in Arkansas in 1957 . Eisenhower's use of the division forced the integration of the high school .
 Martin Luther King Jr. was the best-known leader of the American civil rights movement . He delivered his ""I Have a Dream" address at the March on Washington (which Jacqueline calls the ""freedom march") of August 1963 .
 Kennedy refers was of King and his colleagues relaxing at the Willard Hotel after the march . Kennedy refers to the photo of King at the hotel he was taken in .
 Robert Kennedy grudgingly authorized J Edgar Hoover to tap King's telephone calls and bug his rooms . King's private comments made by King while watching President Kennedy's Capitol Rotunda and funeral ceremonies .
 Hoover was only too eager to share them with the attorney general, and the shocked brother of the late President conveyed their essence to Jacqueline . Hoover's brother was shocked to find out the contents of the book .
 A PHILIP RANDOLPH was chief of the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters . He was one of the organizers of the March on Washington march .
 In May 1963, on the hundredth anniversary of Gettysburg, LBJ had delivered a civil rights speech at the battlefield that went beyond anything the President had previously said about the issue in public .
 In private, the vice president complained to Sorensen that the President wasn't doing enough about civil rights . The vice president stridently complained about the President's actions in private .
 U-2 photography by the CIA had revealed the Soviets installing offensive missiles in Cuba . JFK had assured the public the previous month that he would never accept . Bundy told the President in his White House bedroom that the Soviets had installed offensive missiles .
 Kennedy tried to maintain his normal schedule, flying to Chicago for a campaign address, before returning to Washington on the pretext that he was suffering from a cold . Kennedy was anxious to keep the missile problem secret until he and his advisers agreed on a strategy .
 JFK gave his television speech announcing that his ""initial step"" would be to throw a naval blockade around Cuba and demand the missiles’ removal . On Monday evening, October 22, JFK announced that his "initial step" would be throwing a blockade .
 This has echoes of the British royal family's determination in 1940 to remain in London through the dangers of the German Blitz .
 Even had the U-2 photographed Cuba a few days earlier, it would probably have given the Americans little advantage in trying to have the missiles withdrawn . Kennedy, even had the photo taken, even .
 On the final weekend of the crisis came two messages from Khrushchev . The first was conciliatory, the second fire and brimstone . The second was fire-and- brimstone, a message from the Soviet leader .
 In what scholars later called the ""Trollope ploy"" (in Anthony Trollope's fiction, a woman hastens to interpret a friendly gesture as a marriage proposal) The Kennedy brothers opted to treat the first one as the definitive Soviet message, which helped save the situation .
 At the height of the crisis, an American U-2 accidentally flew into Soviet airspace . It was an act of war that might have inspired retaliation that could have spiraled into nuclear conflict .
 U.S. destroyer Joseph P Kennedy, Jr. was one of the ships blockading Cuba . By coincidence, the destroyer was also on the Cuban blockade .
 Each was a little silver Tiffany calendar for October 1962, with the fateful thirteen days highlighted in bold, and engraved with ""J.F.K."" and the recipient's initials .
 Ambassador to India was an advertising executive, governor of Connecticut, and Dean Rusk's number two before succeeding Galbraith as ambassador .
 After the Bay of Pigs, RFK poked his finger at Bowles's chest and told him that his position had henceforth better be that he was for the invasion . RFK told Bowles that he better be a supporter of the invasion.
 Members of the Washington cognoscenti mistakenly took the piece as a signal that Kennedy wanted his UN envoy out . Because Bartlett was known to be close to the President, members of the D.C. cognoscienti mistakenly thought it was a signal .
 Clayton Fitchy was an ex-journalist and Stevenson aide . He was a social friend of the Kennedys .
 During the missile crisis, the vice president attended only one meeting of ""Ex Comm,"" the ad hoc presidential panel quickly formed by JFK to fashion a solution to the problem by meeting around the clock . JFK was the president of the United States during the Korean missile crisis .
 Rusk, McNamara, Dillon, RFK, Bundy, McCone, and Taylor were members of the original group . RFK was RFK's first president .
 The reference to Laos is the covert efforts by both North Vietnam and America to undermine the 1962 agreement at Geneva to preserve the country's neutrality and independence . The agreement was meant to preserve Laos's neutrality .
 Powers and O'Donnell had agreed to stay on with Johnson for a transitional period . Powers, O’Donnell and Johnson will stay on for a transition period .
 Kennedy was eerily prescient about the problem that would doom America's involvement in Vietnam . Kennedy was prescient that the problem would doom the war .
 In other words, even if the President orders the invasion halted, proceed anyway . Even if the invasion were halted, the invasion would proceed anyway, says President Obama .
 Onetime Republican "boy governor" of Minnesota was once a serious presidential contender . He later ran for the job so many times and so long after he had any remote chance of election that he became a joke .
 JFK had had to deal with a worrisome drain of gold reserves to Western Europe . JFK had been dealing with a worrying drain of the gold reserves .
 By now, Jacqueline's once-benign attitude toward Johnson as leader has hardened, along with Robert Kennedy's . Kennedy's attitude toward the former president has hardened .
 He grew more and more concerned about what would happen if LBJ ever became president . He grew concerned about LBJ's potential to become president .
 In later years, time, distance, the end of Robert Kennedy's rivalry with Johnson, the death of LBJ, and her cordial relationship with Lady Bird softened Jacqueline's attitude toward her late husband's successor .
 She distinguished her objections to certain Johnson policies from her personal fondness for both Lyndon and Lady Bird, whom she made an effort to see during the 1980s and early 1990s when both former first ladies were on Martha's Vineyard .
 Jacqueline said that after the assassination, LBJ ""was extraordinary" In a 1974 oral history about LBJ for the Johnson Library, Jacqueline described him as "extraordinary"
 JFK appointed Johnson to chair the President's Committee on Equal Employment Opportunities, as well as his space council . JFK had appointed Johnson as chair of the Committee of Equal Employment .
 Kennedy was eager to give his vice president dignity, but not a great deal to do . In Johnson's defense, Kennedy's tendency to overreach if given the chance to do is not a good thing .
 Johnson sent Johnson on so many trips in order to distract him from his boredom and powerlessness . He sent him on many trips to distract himself from boredom, Johnson said .
 LBJ's aide and friend Jack Valenti later described LBJ as "this great, proud vessel was just simply unable to move" LBJ was "unable to move," according to Valenti .
 JFK was debating whether to send a civil rights bill to Congress when he asked Johnson for his opinion . Johnson acidly said he could not respond because no one had given him enough information to have a judgment . The vice president said he couldn't respond because he had not been given enough information
 During a 1961 trip to Pakistan, LBJ invited a camel driver named Bashir Ahmed to see him in the U.S. The camel driver was the first to see LBJ in the United States .
 Ahmed offered Johnson an invitation to visit his Texas ranch . Ahmed accepted Johnson's invitation, and Johnson hosted him there .
 Johnson made a misguided attempt to persuade Democratic members of the Senate to allow him to continue to lead their caucus . Before the inauguration, Johnson had tried to persuade Democrats to let him continue leading the caucus .
 Other sources have it that the President was vaguely pondering the liberal North Carolina governor Terry Sanford as a possible 1964 running mate, if necessary, or as the 1968 presidential nominee . Other sources say he was also looking at the governor of North Carolina .
 Senator from Illinois was leader of Senate Republicans from 1959 until his death . He was a member of the Illinois Republican Party .
 Dirksen's nineteenth-century style was so different from the President's, JFK had long had an excellent relationship with him . JFK had a long relationship with the former Vice President .
 House Speaker McCormack still resented Kennedy's meteoric political ascent . McCormack won control of Massachusetts Democrats in the 1980s . Kennedy won the House of Representatives .
 McCormack's ill humor toward the President was Edward Kennedy's victory over the Speaker's nephew Edward in 1962 for the state's Democratic Senate nomination . Edward Kennedy won the state Senate nomination in 1962 .
 EDWARD STOCKDALE was a real estate speculator and Smathers aide . He served as JFK's first ambassador to Ireland .
 Stockdale fell to his death from a Miami office tower in December 1963 . Reportedly grief-stricken over the President's assassination, Stockdale was reported to have fallen from the tower .
 Kenneth O'Donnell gauged senators in terms of their support for Kennedy measures . Kennedy measures include a measure that would require the president to step down from a seat in Congress .
 HALE BOGGS was Democratic congressman from Louisiana and House majority leader . He was Louisiana's House Majority Leader and Democratic House Speaker .
 Randolph Churchill was the journalist son of the ex-prime minister and a Kennedy family friend . Randolph Churchill is the son of former Prime Minister Edward Kennedy .
 As JFK was preparing to leave Nassau, Canadian prime minister John Diefenbaker arrived for his own meeting with Macmillan, compelling the President to lunch with him . JFK was leaving Nassau when he was forced to meet with the British prime minister .
 During the meal, JFK and Macmillan diplomatically pretended that they liked Diefenbaker, and the Canadian pretended to believe it . The two men were married at the time of the war .
 The force de frappe refers to the independent nuclear deterrent that de Gaulle was trying to create . The force was created during the Second World War . De Gaulle tried to create a nuclear deterrent with the French .
 She balked at a stop in Paris on the way home from Paris . She was angry at de Gaulle's rebuffs of his efforts to improve French-American relations .
 In December 1961, Nehru ordered his troops to seize Portugal's colony of Goa . Goa lay on India's west coast, surrounded by Indian territory . The Portuguese colony was located on the Indian coast .
 The Indian prime minister labored to explain how this differed from the Soviet invasion of Hungary . India's prime minister was asked to explain the difference between the two .
 The cigar-chomping John ""Muggsy"" O'Leary was JFK's driver during the Senate years, then an agent for the Secret Service . He was also a Secret Service agent .
 De Gaulle said the missile crisis had shown that when the crunch came, the U.S. was willing to act on its own . The missile crisis showed that the United States might not reliably fulfill its commitments to defend Western Europe, he said .
 When President Johnson's diplomats tried to make good on de Gaulle's promise, the French president refused to schedule a visit to America . He insisted that his attendance at Kennedy's funeral had already fulfilled his pledge .
 De Gaulle allowed that President Kennedy had had great influence around the world . President Kennedy's influence had been great in the world, he said .
 With her insistence that every nuance be right, at six that morning, before walking to the service in St. Paul's Cathedral, she insisted that she was right .
 During the missile crisis, Dean Acheson offered to show the French president photographic evidence proving that Soviet missiles were in Cuba, de Gaulle replied that Kennedy's word was good enough for him .
 Charles ""Chip"" BOHLEN was JFK's second ambassador to France . He was an old Soviet hand who became JFK's first ambassador .
 JEAN MONNET was considered the architect of an integrated post-World War II Europe . He was considered to be architect of a post-war integrated Europe .
 President Kennedy had established the Presidential Medal of Freedom in 1963, but did not present it to its first recipients, including Monnet, in December 1963 . President Kennedy was upset that there was no proper award for civilian achievement .
 De Gaulle hosted Macmillan at the French diplomatic retreat Chateau Rambouillet in December 1962 . The French president hosted the British Prime Minister at the retreat .
 AMINTORE FANFANI was Italian prime minister for most of the Kennedy years, the third of his five tours of duty in that job . He was Italian Prime Minister during most of Kennedy years .
 As leader of his Christian Democratic party, he had attended the Democratic convention of 1956 as an observer .
 JOSIP BROZ TITO was the unifying founder and strongman president of Yugoslavia . He was given a luncheon by JFK at the White House in October 1963 .
 VIJAYA LAKSHMI PANDIT was sent by her brother, Prime Minister Nehru, to London, Moscow, and Washington as his ambassador . She was sent to Washington, London and Moscow as his envoy .
 MOHAMMAD AYUB KHAN was president of Pakistan from 1958 to 1969 . He was the leader for whom the Kennedys had arranged their glittering dinner at Mount Vernon .
 Foreign Service officer had previously served in Burma and South Korea . He was the American ambassador to Pakistan from 1962 to 1966 .
 The State Department wished to suggest that, as with New Delhi, the President had sent an old friend to Islamabad . The State Dept. wished to . suggest that the State Department had sent . to Islamabad.
 WILLIAM MCCORMICK BLAIR was an investment banking heir and close Stevenson aide . He was Kennedy's ambassador to Denmark .
 William Battle, who had helped to rescue JFK in the South Pacific during World War II, was his ambassador to Australia . William Battle helped JFK rescue JFK from a sinking submarine in the Pacific .
 The Republic of the Congo suffered domestic upheavations during the Kennedy years . The postcolonial Republic of Congo suffered internal upheavals during those years .
 Edmund Gullion and William Attwood were JFK's ambassadors to the Congo and Guinea, respectively, respectively . They were both ambassadors to both countries .
 In 1963, Kennedy considered Gullion for ambassador to South Vietnam before choosing Henry Cabot Lodge, Jr., whom he had defeated to enter the U.S. Senate in 1952 . Kennedy considered him for ambassador before choosing Lodge instead .
 In the summer of 1963, President Diem was cracking down on critics, especially Buddhists . In 1963, the government cracked down on Buddhists, especially those who opposed the government .
 The President was forced to think about how much he wished to use American military force to support a South Vietnamese leadership that was growing more erratic, autocratic, and corrupt .
 He approved a coup d'état by South Vietnamese military officers against the Diem brothers, which went out of control and culminated in their assassination . He approved the coup, which led to the brothers' assassination .
 Madame Nhu blamed Kennedy for the deaths of her husband and brother-in-law . Nhu said Kennedy was responsible for her husband's death . Kennedy was the prime minister of Vietnam .
 In ironic retrospect, this historical moment was like the one Kennedy had asked Professor Donald about . In ironic hindsight, this is like the moment Kennedy asked President Donald about.
 For Lincoln, it's what decisions he would have made about Reconstruction, had he lived, and whether they would have changed history . Lincoln: "I would like to know what I would have done if I had lived"
 Luce grandly told him that every president could be described ""in one sentence,"" and that she had been wondering what his sentence would be . Luce told him she had wondered what he would be described in one sentence .
 She had not looked forward to watching her former boss do battle with her current boss over this luncheon .
 WAYNE MORSE was a Democratic senator from Oregon . He was JFK colleague on the Senate Foreign Relations Committee .
 She refused to retract her insult and asked Ike to withdraw her nomination . Ike has been nominated to be the next senator to be confirmed to the US Senate .
 Brazilian president from January 1961 until he quit in August of that year . Janio Quadros was president of Brazil from 1961 to August 1961 .
 JFK was not delighted by Goulart's inclusion of Communist sympathizers in his government, his opposition to American sanctions against Castro, and his efforts to improve relations with Soviet-bloc countries . JFK was also unhappy with the inclusion of communist sympathizers .
 JFK was JFK's ambassador to the Dominican Republic in 1963 . Juan Bosch Gavifio was the country's first legitimately elected president, who was deposed by a military coup . John Bartlow Martin was a journalist and onetime Stevenson aide .
 Rusk insisted that he and JFK had had a private understanding from the start that he could only afford to serve one term at State. In his 1991 memoirs, Rusk said that JFK and Rusk had an understanding that he would only be able to serve a term .
 Rusk continued for five more years in the job under President Johnson . But if this was true, it was obviously unknown to Jacqueline, and he changed his mind .
 Nigerian slave brokers once used Portuguese coins to create ornamental ""slave bracelets" Not the most helpful image for a U.S. diplomat at a time of tumult in his country over civil rights .
 Chester Bowles was Kennedy's first undersecretary of state, George Ball the second . Bowles and Ball were Kennedy's undersecretaries of state . Ball was the second to Bowles, Bowles' first secretary of state.
 Former MIT economist was Bundy's deputy before Bundy's resignation . State director of policy planning is Bundy's former deputy at MIT . Bundy resigned in March .
 JEROME WIESNER had been MIT's president when JFK appointed him as his science adviser . JFK appointed Wiesner as president of MIT when JFK was president .
 The son of Colorado sheep ranchers, son of a sheep rancher, joined the United States Foreign Service in 1929 . Came to specialize in the Soviet Union, serving as ambassador to Moscow from 1957 to 1962 .
 JFK had wanted Bohlen to delay his departure at the start of the missile crisis . JFK had asked Bohlen's departure to be delayed .
 As ambassador to Moscow from 1953 to 1957, Bohlen had developed a sophisticated understanding of Khrushchev and his circle . He knew Bohlen well and that, as ambassador to Russia, he said .
 Thompson was in a position to provide insights on the Soviet leadership that were of more recent vintage than Bohlen's . The self-effacing Thompson had been little acquainted with Bohlen .
 JFK created the Agency for International Development, which dispensed foreign aid and was suffering growing pains . In November 1961, JFK had created the agency .
 HENRY LABOUISSE, known as "Harry," was JFK's ambassador to Greece in 1962 . He had been chief of AID's forerunner agency and became JFK's Ambassador to Greece .
 Navy intelligence officer wrote reports on Kennedy's heroism commanding the PT-109 . By coincidence, he was one of the naval intelligence officers who wrote the reports .
 White joined the Supreme Court in April 1962 and proved more conservative than Kennedy and his people had expected . White was the most conservative Supreme Court member in history .
 Paul Freund, a Harvard Law School professor, turned down President Kennedy's invitation to be solicitor general .
 JFK also considered him for the high court before choosing Arthur Goldberg . Arthur Goldberg was considered for the Supreme Court .
 Liberal, civil libertarian, and environmentalist had been a close Kennedy family friend since his work with Joseph Kennedy on the Securities Exchange Commission in the 1930s . William O. Douglas was a close friend of Kennedy family .
 RALPH de TOLEDANO was a founder of the conservative William F Buckley's National Review . He was close to Nixon . He founded the conservative magazine National Review in 1970s .
 As a girl touring the White House in 1940, Jackie was disappointed that there was no guidebook available . Jackie's tour guidebook was published in 1940 .
 Jacqueline Salinger was horrified when Salinger once told a reporter about one of their pets, a beer-loving rabbit called Zsa Zsa . Eager to preserve her children's privacy, Jacqueline was horrified .
 She refers here especially to the turf-conscious Ken O'Donnell, who disliked Sorensen and Schlesinger . She refers to the "turbulence-conscious" O’Donnell .
 JFK never had a chief of staff . JFK's ability to keep all of these disparate factions working together is a sign of his ability to do so .
 All top members of his staff report directly to him . Always wary of finding himself on the ""leading strings" of an aide .
 While living in the White House, Caroline attended a school established by her mother in the solarium . Her mother established the school .
 George Burlley was a navy admiral and served as the President's primary physician after Dr. Dr. George served as President George W. Bush's physician . He was a Navy Admiral .
 Travell was removed from his case , although Travell publicly retained her official title . Travell has since been removed from her official post .
 JFK once privately forecast that John would be able to lift him before he could ever expect to lift his son . JFK once predicted that JFK would be lifting his son, John . JFK suffered a back injury in the Ottawa tree planting .
 The First Family by the nightclub comedian Vaughn Meader was the fastest-selling record in history, selling an astonishing 7. million copies . Meader's book sold 7.6 million copies, the fastest selling record in the world .
 In 1962, My Daddy Is President, by the seven-year-old ""Little Jo Ann"" Morse, sung in baby talk with a bossa nova beat, was a 45-rpm jukebox favorite .
 NICHOLAS KATZENBACH was imprisoned by the Italians and Germans as a prisoner of war for two years during World War II . He served as RFK's deputy, and under President Johnson, as his successor .
 It was ultimately LBJ who established ""Volunteers in Service to America" in 1964 as part of his ""War on Poverty" program .
 Kennedy had wanted to help poor families like those who had so affected him while campaigning in West Virginia in 1960 . He had been worried that his proposed tax cuts would do little to help the jobless and poor .
 New President Johnson seized the notion with both hands. Told about this, Johnson seized upon the notion . Johnson: "I'm sure it's a good idea"
 In 1964, President Johnson posed for pictures with poor families in Appalachia . President Johnson was the one who posed for photos with poor people .
 Eisenhower's trip to Japan in 1960 was cancelled just before his planned arrival because of anti-American riots . Eisenhower's visit to Japan was cancelled because of riots in 1960 .
 Barry Goldwater was Republican senator from Arizona and most prominent conservative of the day . He was Arizona's most prominent senator from the 1950s .
 JFK had met Goldwater before World War II when he went to an outdoor work camp near Phoenix, Arizona . JFK and Goldwater remained warm and jocular friends for the rest of their lives . JFK had a warm relationship with Goldwater .
 Goldwater later insisted that JFK had agreed to fly around the country and debate with him if they should be the two presidential candidates in 1964 . Goldwater said JFK agreed to debate with JFK if they were to be the presidential candidates .
 JFK responded pleasantly when Goldwater raised the idea, but it does not seem likely that in 1964 JFK would have so gingerly offered so weak a challenger as Goldwater the benefit of being seen all over the country arguing with the President as an equal .
 Kennedy had committed himself to face his 1964 opponent in televised debates like those of 1960 with Nixon . Kennedy had pledged to face Nixon in televised televised debates .
 George Romney was president of American Motors before his election as governor of Michigan in 1962 . He was elected to office in 1962 after being a Republican governor .
 He seriously considered challenging Nixon, whom he loathed, in the 1960 Republican primaries . Two years later, he decided to stay out of the 1960s presidential race .
 JFK had worried that Rockefeller might be a strong opponent when he ran for reelection . However, he divorced his wife and in May 1963 remarried a younger woman, which at the time was a mortal sin in presidential politics .
 WILLIAM SCranton was a moderate Republican congressman when elected governor in 1962 . He was elected governor of Pennsylvania in 1963 .
 Washington and Moscow relaxed relations after missile crisis and test ban treaty in 1963 . Washington-Moscow relations have been strained since the missile crisis .
 In 1963, the Senate Permanent Investigations Committee examined the award to General Dynamics of a $6 billion contract to build a new TFX fighter plane . The contract was the most lucrative such mandate in American history .
 Before his appointment as McNamara's deputy, Gilpatric had been counsel to General Dynamics . He had been criticized for participating in the TFX decision . He was criticized for his role in the decision .
 Gilpatric had announced his return to the law in March 1963 . He remained at the Pentagon until January 1964 in an effort to clear his name .
 TIMOTHY REARDON was JFK's administrative assistant in the House and Senate and special assistant in White House . JFK's administration assistant in House, Senate and White House was his secretary .
 The pagination of this electronic edition does not match the edition from which it was created . Inpex is based in Tokyo, Japan, and is based at Inpex .
 Use the search feature of this ebook to help you find the author of your book . The author's name is listed below the bottom of the page . Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on iReport .
 JBK to Bernard Boutin, March 6, 1962. xxvii ""practically nothing"": White House History, #13, 2004 . xxviii ""would walk halfway"": Jacqueline Kennedy to Edward Kennedy in September 1970 .
 Ted Sorensen, Kennedy (Harper and Row, 1965), 80), 80. 10 ""a stormy meeting"": 10 . 10 "stormy meeting": 10 "Stormy meeting"; 10 "a storming meeting": 10 "storms"
 William Manchester, The Death of a President , 186. 25 ""as if Jack were President of FRANCE"": Oleg Cassini, A Thousand Days of Magic , 29. 27 ""a Stevenson with balls"": Dallek, 259. 25 "as if ... Jack were
 JBK to James MacGregor Burns, handwritten, undated, 1959. 55 ""forgot Goschen"": Winston Churchill, Lord Randolph Churchill . 61 ""that I had privately boasted"": Sorensen, Counselor, 150. 61 .
 Edward Kennedy, 24, "could see around corners"": Anthony, As We Remember Her, 60 . Anthony's "true compass": "Could see around corner" Edward Kennedy .
 Lyndon Johnson to JBK, December 23, 1963, transcription of recording of telephone call, in Beschloss, Reaching for Glory, 18.3 . Lyndon Johnson was president of the United States in 1964 .
 There are many people whose support and encouragement have helped immensely during the preparation of this project . There are also people who have been supportive of the project .
 First, foremost, and always to my husband and children for their love, integrity, and interest. First, first, always to me, always thanks my husband, children .
 Arthur M Schlesinger, Jr. was a beloved friend to my mother . He was a friend to many, including his family and Bill van den Heuvel . He will be buried in New York City, New Jersey .
 Lauren Lipani, who read, listened to, and checked every detail along the way, is the author of the book . Lauren's book is published by Lauren's publisher, The Muse, at the end of the year .
 John F Kennedy Presidential Library director Tom Putnam and archivists are among those behind Kennedy Library's collection .
 The unusual and unfamiliar photos that add so much to this book result from the efforts of Laurie Austin and Maryrose Grossman . Laurie Austin is the photographer behind the project .
 Thanks also to Sharon Kelly, Jane Silva, and Stephen Plotkin for additional research assistance .
 I am also grateful to Tom McNaught, the director of the John F Kennedy Library Foundation; Rachel Day, for coordinating requests and new technology in connection with this book . All the Foundation staff for their commitment to excellence .
 I would like to thank Bob Barnett, Deneen Howell, Jim Fuller, Tom Hentoff, and Esther Newberg. For their legal and publishing advice and expertise, we thank them for their advice .
 "People always did their best for my mother, and this project was no exception. People always did the best for me," she said .
 Sharon Kitter, Linda Prather, Kristin Kiser, Jill Sansone, Marie Coolman, SallyAnne McCartin, and Ellen Archer are all women at Hyperion .
 I am grateful to Marcos Sueiro Bal, Paul Fowlie and Karen Dziekonski for their work on the audio restoration and production .
 "I wish my mother could have had the good fortune to work with Gretchen Young, Shubhani Sarkar, Navorn Johnson, Gretchen and Shubani Sarkar," she says .
 Ranny Cooper, Stephanie Cutter and Debra Reed are among the writers of this week's new book .
 Caroline Kennedy is the daughter of President Kennedy and the late Senator Kennedy . The Kennedy family is proud of their legacy .
 Author of more than twenty-five books, he was twice awarded the Pulitzer Prize . Author of over twenty-25 books, author of two Pulitzer prizes .
 The eloquence, insight, and power that characterized his style continue to influence generations of historians who follow him . "The eloquence and insight that characterized him will never be forgotten"
 Arthur Schlesinger was the author of major biographies of Andrew Jackson and Franklin Delano Roosevelt as well as John and Robert Kennedy . He also wrote books that significantly defined the modern presidency .
 He served as Special Assistant to the President during the Administration of John F Kennedy . He served in the Kennedy administration .
 Caroline Kennedy is the author/editor of eight bestselling books on constitutional law, American history, politics, and poetry . Kennedy is also the author of eight bestsellers .
 Michael Beschloss has been called “the nation’s leading Presidential historian” by Newsweek . Beschoss has been a historian for more than 30 years .
 He is the author of nine books, including The Conquerors and Presidential Courage . He also has two volumes on Lyndon Johnson's presidential tapes .
 He is a graduate of Williams College and Harvard Business School . He holds five honorary degrees, as well as an Emmy award . He is also an Emmy winner .
 In order to make the transcript as comprehensible for the reader, we have deleted some interjections and broken phrases where they interrupted the flow of the conversation, but only where such changes would not alter the meaning . The transcript is published in the style of other published oral histories .
 Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data has been applied for . Library has applied for cataloging in-publication data to be cataloged .