 These revision cards are for AQA GCSE History B for the following topic . Crises of the Cold War is the topic of the revision cards .
 The standard of living became much worse there were food shortages and labourers had to work longer hours with less pay . Food shortages meant that labourers were forced to work more hours and longer hours .
 After the death of Stalin, the harsh leader Rakosi was replaced in leadership by Nagy . This impacted events in Hungary . In 1955 Rakosi took over, the Hungarians hated him .
 The riots in Poland encouraged the Hungarians to revolt for a change . Khrushchev had accepted a change in leadership in Poland .
 As the protest gathered strength, protesters and security police clashed at a radio station . Soviet tanks rolled into the city and a battle developed . The battle developed as the protesters gathered strength .
 The protests kept increasing and in October, riots broke out in Budapest . In October, protesters broke out and rioted .
 Stalin's statue was pulled down and dragged through the streets, and prisoneres were released . Stalin’s statue pulled down, dragged through streets of Moscow, Russia .
 The more popular Nagy became Prime Minister and the Soviet troops withdrew . Nagy was the most popular Prime Minister in the Soviet Union .
 Hungarian Rising II, 1956 saw the end of secret police and the removal of the Soviet army of occupation . The Hungarians celebrated what looked like a victory . The new Hungarian government started to make reforms .
 If Hungary withdraws from the Warsaw Pact, there would be a gap in the Iron Curtain . The Soviet buffer zone with the West would be broken . If Hungary withdrew, the gap would be bridged between the Soviet and West .
 Other satellites might follow suit that would lead to the end of the Soviet Union's precious 'buffer-zone' against the West .
 By 4th November, 1000 Russian tanks had reached Budapest to crush the rising tide . By 4 November, Russia had had 1000 tanks and troops in Budapest .
 Nagy himself pleaded to the West for help, but none came . Desperate radio appeals were broadcasted by Nagy . Nagy was killed by the Soviet Union in 1991 .
 The Soviets seized the radio station and there was no organised defence after the 4th November . The Soviets took over the station from the 4 November .
 30,000 Hungarians were killed and 200,000 fled through Austria to the West . Two weeks of street fighting followed, in which 30,00 Hungarians died in two weeks of fighting .
 The Hungarians were no match for Soviet forces and a new pro-Soviet Communist government was set up under Kadar . Kadar was the prime minister of the Hungarian Revolution in Hungary .
 Nagy captured and promised a free passage out of Hungary but was later shot . Nagy was captured in Hungary but later shot dead by Hungarian soldiers .
 Hungary was now firmly in Soviet control . Changes were made to avoid a repeat of events, but Hungary was still in control .
 The Soviets claimed they were forced to do this because the government of Nagy had allowed itself to be dominated by a fascist mob, financed by the imperialist West . The Soviets said this was because of the government's failure to allow it to be controlled by the fascist mob .
 UN found no evidence of popular support in Hungary for Kadar’s new government . UN looked into the details of the rise in Hungary .
 There was no active support for the rising in the West the Americans simply protested . The West simply protested against the rise in Russia .
 Other satellite states in Eastern Europe did not dare to challenge Soviet authority after Hungary . Hungary was one of the last few satellite states to break away from Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev strengthened his position in the USSR and showed the West that peaceful co-existence had its limits . The West showed the limits of the Soviet Union's rule of peaceful coexistence .
 When the Hungarians appealed for help from the Western countries, the USA did not send any aid, only sympathy . They were preoccupied with a presidential election, and were angry with Britain and France over their recent invasion of Egypt, so world attention had moved to the Middle East .
 The Uprising challenged Khrushchev’s ideas of ‘different roads to socialism’ The Hungarians wanted to have more freedom by leaving the Warsaw Pact, the Soviet troops crushed the rebels .
 The Soviet Union developed the technology to fire a satellite into space before the USA . This upset the Americans, as they considered that they were superior to communist countries, but also affected their security .
 The space race was closely tied in with the development of nuclear weapons and the nuclear arms race . This was because of the space race . Space race was tied to the development and development of the nuclear weapons .
 There was a fear that every crisis in this period of time could result in nuclear war . There was also a fear of a nuclear war in the 1950s and '60s . There were fears that nuclear war could be possible in the future .
 Up to 1957, the U.S. was always ahead in the development of nuclear weapons . The USA were always ahead of the developing nuclear weapons.
 To use nuclear weapons agains the Soviets, the U.S. would have to carry them in aeroplanes, which could easily be shot down . The USA would need to carry the nuclear weapons in planes .
 The USA developed its own Intercontinental Ballistic Missiles in 1957 and, by 1959, they could be stored underground and ready for use in 30 seconds .
 Polaris missiles meant that a missile could be fired from the sea close to the USSR and therefore be more accurate . The firing of a Polaris missile meant that the missile was more accurate than a missile fired close to Russia . Polaris missiles were launched in the Soviet Union in the early 1950s .
 The USA placed missiles in Turkey in 1959 and the USSR tried to place them in Cuba in 1962 . Both superpowers were intent on having enough nuclear weapons to be able to respond to an attack .
 Spy networks kept a check on the progress being made by the other power by a series of spy networks . The spy networks were used to check on progress made by other countries .
 Each superpower possessed enough weapons to destroy the other and therefore they were less likely to use them . Each superpower had enough weapons capable of destroying each other to destroy them .
 "They had to continue to build up these weapons to keep the balance, which was expensive, but prevented war," says President Obama . "The balance of war prevented war. They had to . continue to . build up . weapons to ... prevent war," he says .
 By the end of the 1960s, the superpowers had enough nuclear weapons to destroy the rest of the world . The world's nuclear superpowers were able to destroy all the world with nuclear weapons .
 The arms and space race may have prevented war, but they were extremely expensive . Khrushchev had visited the USA in 1959 and it was agreed to hold a Summit Meeting of the leaders of the USSR, USA, Britain and France .
 The meeting was to be held in Paris and its purpose would be to solve some of the Cold War problems . The meeting would be held to solve Cold War issues .
 There were high hopes that the USSR would since since a peace treaty with Germany and there would be an end to the Cold War . There were also hopes that there would also be a peace deal with Germany .
 The Americans had been using them successfully for four years to spy on the Soviets . The Americans were able to use them successfully in four years .
 The first part of the flight was successful, but then the U2 was hit by a Soviet missile near the town of Sverdlovsk . The U2's first mission was to fly over the Soviet Union, but was hit hard by a missile .
 Powers was forced to eject from the plane and was captured by the Soviets . Powers was captured and forced to flee the plane . Powers survived the crash and was taken prisoner .
 One of their weather planes went missing over Turkey and must have gone off course . They announced that one of them had gone missing over the country .
 Powers had been captured and admitted to spying . Powers was captured by the U.S. but the Americans did not know he had admitted to the spying .
 The photos that had been found on the U2 had been taken by the Soviets . The photos were found in the photos that were found on U2 . The Soviets had the proof, according to the photos .
 Khrushchev announced this to the world on the 16th May 1960, demanding an apology from the USA and a promise to stop any future flights and punish those responsible . The world was outraged by the incident .
 The Americans had been caught spying and lying about it, but Eisenhower refused to apologise . Eisenhower, the American President, refused to say sorry . The Americans were caught spying and lying, but never apologised .
 Eisenhower claimed on the 16th May 1960 that the USA had to use spying missions to protect itself . Eisenhower claimed that the U.S. had to rely on spying missions in order to protect its own interests .
 The Paris Summit and the thaw in relations between the superpowers were at an end . The Paris summit and thaw of relations between superpowers was at the end of the Paris Summit .
 It ended the Paris Summit Meeting and the progress towards a solution to the Cold War . After serving part of his sentence, he was released in 1962 in exchange for a top Soviet spy .
 There was no Test Ban Treaty and the problem of Berlin remained, which led to the building of the Berlin Wall . This meant that there was no test ban Treaty and Berlin remained . This led to Berlin Wall being built .
 Eisenhower’s Vice President, Richard Nixon, was defeated by the democrat John F Kennedy in the 1960s . In the presidential election at the end of 1960, Nixon was defeated .
 Eisenhower had promised an end to all American spying missions . It led to an acceleration of work in the USA on new methods and systems for spying .
 After WWII, the West poured money into West Berlin as part of the Marshall Plan . They felt that a country with a weak economy was very susceptible to Communism . The Chinese felt that it proved that the USA could not be trusted .
 West Berlin was an island of capitalism behind the Iron Curtain . The city was used as an advertisement for capitalism to the other communist countries . They also realised that by rebuilding the economy in West Berlin, they could use the city as an example .
 A rich West Berlin showcased to the communist countries behind the Iron Curtain the positive values of capitalist life . West Berlin's high quality living standards and luxurious goods readily available were few of the things the city boasted to the East .
 Perhaps their tactic was to make the communist satellite states envious, and resist against Soviet influence . Perhaps they wanted to make them envious of the Soviet Union's influence .
 Khrushchev demanded a) all allied forced to withdraw from Berlin leaving Berlin a demilitarised city . East Germany, the German Democratic Republic, would gain control of the access routes to West Berlin .
 This might have left West Berlin defenceless and under East German/Soviet pressure . West Berlin might have been under pressure from the East Germans and Soviets .
 Khrushchev had demanded the West give up West Berlin, but when the new American President, John F Kennedy, refused to give up it . The West resisted and Khrushche climbed down and the West resisted .
 On the 13th August 1961, the Berlin wall was put up, later to be fortified in stone . The wall was the first of its kind to be put up in Berlin . It was later fortified into stone .
 Over two million people defected from the East to West Berlin between 1945 and 1961 . They were jealous of the extravagant lifestyles of the West Berliners .
 Many of the people who defected were educate people and skilled workers whom the East could ill afford to lose . Many of those defected are educate people, skilled workers who the East needs to keep .
 The East Berliners were terrified. It was also a hole in the Iron Curtain, which the Soviet Union had to plug before it influenced the other satellite states bordering the USSR .
 Many had family in West Berlin and jobs, but could no longer see them without obtaining a permit to cross the border . Many were forced to leave West Berlin without permission to see relatives in the city .
 Some people still managed to escape in the early days of the wall through the barbed wire separating East and West . But later, those who tried to escape were shot dead .
 There were several advantages to the Soviet Union for building the Berlin Wall, arguing that Khrushchev’s decision was justifiable . The Wall Wall was built in the 1960s and 1970s .
 The number of people shot dead trying to cross the wall could have been as many as 200 . The building of the wall was completely inhumane, and the building of it was unjustifiable .
 There were around 5,000 successful escapes from East Berlin after the wall compared to over 2 million in the years before the wall . There were over two million successful escapes in East Berlin between 1961 and 1989 .
 Americans criticised the tyranny of the Communist rule, which had to use walls and force to stop its citizens from escaping . The shooting of people attempting to defect added to this as the Americans criticised .
 The economy of East Germany certainly grew after the building of the wall . East Germany gained greater control of its citizens after the wall was built . The Wall Wall was built in East Germany during the 1960s .
 Kennedy's reaction showed that he did not want to lose face, but he did want to go to war over Berlin . Kennedy: "I'm not going to lose my face. I'm going to go for war," he said .
 He overcame criticism from those in West Germany who wanted him to react in an aggressive manner . He successfullly overcame criticism for his aggressive style .
 USSR had clearly given up all hope of taking control of West Berlin . The USSR had given up hope of winning control of the West Berlin city .
 Berlin had been a problem area since it was divided and almost came to blows over it in 1948 1949 . Berlin had almost come to blows with Berlin in 1949 1949 .
 American businessmen owned property and industry in Cuba and the USA was a major market for Cuban goods .
 Castro wanted to get rid of all foreign influence in the country . Castro became leader of Cuba and wanted to rid of foreign influence .
 He seized all the land owned by the Americans and nationalised American businesses . The land was seized by the American government in the 1930s .
 Castro was believed to be a communist and the USA feared any expansion of Communism . Castro was the prime minister of Cuba in the 1960s .
 Before Kennedy came to power, there was a plan to invade Cuba and link up with the opponents of Castro on the island . The plan was based on plans to join opposition to Castro in Cuba .
 Kennedy was advised by the CIA that Castro could be over thrown if the USA supported a group of Cuban revels . The CIA advised that the U.S. should not support the Cuban revelers .
 With American support, a force of around 1,400revels landed at the Bay of Pigs in Cuba in Cuba . With U.S. support, the force landed on the island .
 Castro forces trapped on the beach by Castro’s forces were unable to link up with any rebels on the island . They were trapped by Castro forces and unable to join up with other rebels .
 Many in the USA blamed him because he had refused to give air cover to the invasion as he did not want to be seen openly supporting the revels . He refused to back up the invasion because he was seen as a traitor .
 Castro feared that the Americans would attack Cuba again, so he turned to the USSR for help . The Americans still had a naval base at Guantanamo in Cuba, so Castro sought help .
 Khrushchev began to provide him with weapons and surface-to-air missiles that would be able to shoot down any attacking American planes . He announced that he was a communist and began to give him weapons .
 Because of the events of the Berlin Wall and the Bay of Pigs, Kennedy's reputation was tarnished . JFK's reputation has since been tarnished by the events in which he was involved .
 Khrushchev thought he could exploit Kennedy's youth and inexperience as a world leader to the USSR's advantage . Kennedy was a young, inexperienced leader who had no experience in world politics .
 In August 1961 the Russians erected the Berlin Wall cutting off East Berlin from the Western part of the city . The Wall was erected in August 1961 cutting off the West from the eastern part of Berlin .
 By the late 1950s the Arms race between the USA and USSR was in full swing . The Arms Race was the biggest arms race in history .
 In August 1965, 30 Soviet ships carrying missiles arrived in Cuba to establish military bases on the USA's doorstep . The U.S. military bases were established in Cuba by the Soviet Union .
 In April 1961, the USA backed an invasion by Cuban exiles, the 2506 Erigade, who supported General Batista, the right-wing former dictator who was overthrown by Castro .
 By 1962, many Cuban exiles were living in Florida and were keen to return to the island . They were prepared to use force against the government in order to get them back .
 Kennedy had warned Khrushchev not to put Soviet nuclear missiles on Cuba . Kennedy had also warned against putting Soviet nuclear weapons on Cuba in Cuba .
 An American U2 plane took photos of launch pads being built for long-range missiles on Cuba . The launch pads were being built in Cuba .
 At this stage, there are no missiles but, when in place, they could carry H-Bombs and could reach and destroy most cities in the USA within 20 minutes . At this point, there were no missiles . When in place they could .
 If he ignored the missiles on Cuba and simply made a diplomatic protest as he had done over the Berlin Wall, it would appear that he had backed down and was weak . But he would appear to have backed down if he had ignored the missile threat .
 If he launched an attack on Cuba to remove the missile bases, it would involve loss of live . If he attacked Cuba, he would have to deal with the problem .
 If there was a nuclear attack, it could provoke a nuclear war with the USSR and results in the destruction of much of the world . If there were a nuclear strike, it would provoke a war with Russia and result in a world war .
 Kennedy announced that the sea within 800km of Cuba would be placed in quarantine and that no ships carrying weapons would be allowed through by the U.S. navy .
 Plans for an invasion of Cuba were drawn up in 1940s and 1950s . Plans for a Cuban invasion was drawn up by the US government . U.S. bombers, armed with nuclear bombs, flew patrols .
 Rules for stopping and boarding Russian ships were agreed between politicians and U.S. naval forces . Rules were agreed by politicians and America's naval forces.
 USSR offered to remove missiles from Cuba if Kennedy promised not to invade Cuba and to end the blockade . In it, the USSR agreed to remove the missiles if Kennedy agreed to end Cuba's blockade . The USSR offered the deal in exchange for Kennedy's promise to end its blockade .
 Another letter came saying that if the Russians remove the nuclear missiles, the U.S. would have to remove their missiles from Turkey . The letter also said that if Russia removed the missiles, America would have had to remove them from Turkey.
 This crisis is normally regarded as the nearest that the world has ever been to nuclear war and mass destruction . The crisis is usually regarded as a near-collapse of the world's nuclear weapons programme .
 Kennedy's reputation was increased because he stood up to Khrushchev and forced him to back down over the missiles . Kennedy was seen as strong, because he had stood up against Khrush .
 It restored his prestige after the failure of the Bay of Pigs invasion . It restored him to the prestige of the country after the failed invasion .
 Khrushchev had successfully protected Cuba and claimed that he was the peacemaker who had listened to the appeal of the UN to avoid war and seek peace .
 Both leaders understood how close they had come to war and realised that this was due to their policies of brinkmanship . Both leaders realised how close it was to them to war .
 A hotline was set up between Washington DC and Moscow so the leaders of the two superpowers could talk to each other directly . The hotline was established between Washington D.C. and Moscow in 2003 .
 A Disarmament COnference was held in 1962, which resulted in the signing of a Nuclear Test Ban Treaty . The treaty banned testing of nuclear weapons in the air or on the ground to avoid polluting the atmosphere .
 Czechoslovakia was the last of the satellite states to be communist in 1948 . Kennedy had refused to withdraw American missiles in Turkey because it would cause a division in NATO .
 It had applied for Marshall Aid from the USA but Stalin had prevented this . Stalin prevented this from being granted by the Soviet Union .
 Czechoslovakia had been a democracy from 1919 to 1938 and objected to the control that the Soviets placed on it . The country was a democracy until the end of the war .
 The USSR were worried that the introduction of free speech would lead to demands for more freedom in the USSR and its satellite countries . The USSR was worried that it might lead to more freedom demands .
 Communist leaders felt increased freedom would weaken the position in their own countries . Communist leaders believed increased freedom was to weaken their own country's position in the world .
 Czechoslovakia would look more to the West, causing a gap in the Iron Curtain . Brezhnev, the Soviet leader, tried to negotiate with the West .
 Dubcek was consulted and the position of Czechoslovakia was discussed by all the Warsaw Pact countries . Dubcec was consulted by all of the countries .
 Soviets invaded from Warsaw Pact countries with tanks and 400,000 soldiers in troops . Soviets invaded Warsaw Pact nations with tanks, troops in troops. Soviets invaded Soviet Union statesmen with tanks .
 Some Soviet tanks were attacked with homemade bombs or covered in whitewash . Demostrations against invaders were carried out by Soviet tanks . Some tanks were covered with whitewashes .
 In January 1969, Jan Palach set fire to himself in Prague in protests at the restrictions of Czech freedom . Palach was protesting against the restrictions in the Czech Republic . He set himself alight in January 1969 .
 He was allowed to return as a minor official, but eventually, he was dismissed from the Communist party . He returned to the Communist Party, but was eventually dismissed .
 The Brezhnev Doctrine was the name given to the statement to explain Soviet intervention in Czechoslovakia . After about a year, the opposition died down; the Soviets had restored their control by force .
 The Soviet leader made it a policy in a speech in November 1968, which made it clear that any country which attempted to break away from Soviet control would be regarded as a threat to all the Warsaw Pact countries .
 The Doctrine remained in force until it was revered in 1989 by President Gorbachev . The Doctrine remains in force .
 The suppression of Dubcek’s reforms and the Brezhnev Doctrine sent a clear signal to the rest of the satellite countries that the USSR would resist any attempt to break away from Soviet-controlled Communist countries . The suppression was a signal to other satellite countries .
 Czechs became even more resentful of Soviet rule, but realise that there was little they could do about it . The Czechs were even more resented by the Soviet regime .
 Relations had been better with the USSR since Cuba and the YSA realised that any action on behalf of Czechoslovakia would ruin this . The YSA decided to take action against the USSR as a result .
 The USSR was allowed to control its area of influence without interference . It was another example of the USSR being allowed to influence its area without interference.
 International Relations 1943-1991 4. / 5 based on 6 ratings . GCSE HISTORY COURSE PLANNER 0.0.1.2.5.