 The following is an outline of how I have used it as the basis for a quasi-simulation that can be run in as little as one hour and as long as several days, depending on how much preparation you want students to have as they play their roles .
 The outline could repeat or elaborate the summary overview on the next page . The outline of this page is a summary overview of the book's contents .
 It is important to help students appreciate the tensions during the Cold War, and the anti-communism in the U.S. in the United States. It is also important to teach students about Cold War tensions .
 You can visit each group and help the students formulate their responses, and understand how the country they represent might have been thinking about the situation . As the students discuss their answers within the groups, you can help them formulate their answers .
 Each group answers the first question in turn, then the second question, and then the third question . The group answers each other's answers in turn .
 As one group answers, students from the other two groups can interrupt by challenging the logic or validity of the claims a group is making . Students from each group can interrupt the answers .
 On October 16, 1962 President John F Kennedy was informed that the Soviet Union was building launching sites in Cuba for ballistic missiles with a range of 1000 miles . Three Perspectives: The Basic Scenario . The President of the United States, President Kennedy, President of Cuba and President of Soviet
 The missiles could have carried warheads 60 times more powerful than the atomic bomb that destroyed Hiroshima . They could have been 60 times the size of the Hiroshima bomb .
 Kennedy called together a group of advisors who weighed several strategies for responding to the presence of missiles in Cuba . Kennedy called on advisors to weigh up several strategies .
 On October 22, Kennedy announced to the world that the United States was imposing a naval blockade around the island of Cuba . He demanded that the Soviets pull out all of their offensive weapons from Cuba . The blockade was imposed to prevent the further shipment of missiles and parts for the completion of the
 During the next five days, tension ran quite high, particularly when a Soviet boat came to the point of crossing the blockade line . The tension ran high during the five-day stand-off .
 Nikita Khrushchev proposed that the Soviet Union would withdraw the missiles if the U.S. promised not to invade Cuba . Kennedy's demands were met with an impassioned letter from the Soviet Premier . Khrushchchev responded to Kennedy's request with a letter of support for
 A U.S. surveillance plane was shot down by a Soviet surface-to-air missile on October 27 . The incident occurred in the morning of that day .
 Similar surveillance flights had flown over Cuba at least twice daily without interruption since October 14 .
 The United States Joint Chiefs of Staff recommended that the President order an invasion of Cuba . Sensing trouble, the U.S. Joint chiefs of Staff said the President should order a Cuban invasion . The Cuban invasion was ordered by President George W. Bush .
 The Soviets had placed “tactical” nuclear missiles in Cuba, which would have been used to stop an invasion force . In addition to ballistic missiles, the Soviets placed ‘tacticals’ in Cuba .
 The United States was poised to invade Cuba with 180,000 troops on October 29 . The U.S. was poised for the invasion of Cuba . The invasion was the first of its kind .
 If U.S. forces were hit with tactical nuclear weapons, Kennedy was sure to launch a retaliatory nuclear strike . Kennedy was the president of the United States during the Cold War .
 The Soviet leader saw that the Soviet Union and the United States were headed toward nuclear war . The Soviet Union was headed toward a nuclear war with the U.S. President Richard Nixon was assassinated .
 The public announcement would follow the lines of Khrushchev’s first letter . The announcement would be a public announcement .
 Khrushchev accepted this offer, and on the morning of October 28 he announced that the Soviet Union was withdrawing its missiles from Cuba in return for a U.S. promise not to invade the island .
 Decisions based on inaccurate information could have been catastrophic . Decisions should have been made based on incorrect information, experts say .
 During the Cuban missile crisis, the world came closer to the brink of nuclear war than at any other time . For this reason, many observers have said that many observers said that during this time the world was at risk of war .
 In October 1962, the Soviet Union had fewer than 50 ballistic missiles capable of hitting the U.S. The United States was the only major threat to Soviet Union in October 1962 .
 The lack of Soviet strategic capability gave the U.S. significant power in the world . The United States gained significant power during the Cold War .
 By placing missiles in Cuba, the Soviet Union enhanced its capability of striking the U.S. by placing missiles there, it enhanced its ability to strike the United States . The Soviet Union placed missiles in the Cuban territory in 1959 .
 This suggested to the EX COMM policymakers a strategic analysis and a psychological analysis . The EX COMM. analysis suggested to policymakers a . strategic analysis . This suggested a strategic . analysis and . psychological analysis.
 West Berlin was the one that most concerned the EX COMM was West Berlin, where the Soviet Union had built a wall one year earlier . West Berlin had a wall built by the Soviets in 1961 .
 EX COMM believed that Khrushchev thought Kennedy was a weak person . Kennedy had not been firm enough with the Soviet leader in their 1961 summit meeting in Vienna .
 Backing down on the missiles would add to Khrushchev's sense of a weak Kennedy . Backdown on the missile could add to a sense of the weak Kennedy, says Kennedy .
 The basic assumption of both analyses was that the Soviet Union was acting aggressively . The U.S. had to act swiftly, decisively, and forcefully to defend itself against this Soviet aggression, the author says .
 The U.S. must maintain military superiority over the Soviet Union . Therefore the United States must maintain its military superiority . The United States needs to maintain a military advantage .
 This interest can transcend their ideologies and differences, and enable the two superpowers to negotiate arms control agreements which might reduce the chance of war . It can also help reduce the risk of war between the US and Russia .
 John F Kennedy had campaigned against Vice President Richard Nixon by charging that there was a ""missile gap"" that favored the Soviet Union . Kennedy had charged that the Eisenhower-Nixon Administration was wrong not to support the overthrow of the Castro regime in Cuba .
 By the end of 1962, the United States had ten times more missiles and warheads than the Soviet Union . Soviet analysts believed the U.S. military buildup was the preparation for a nuclear attack against the Soviet . The United States also believed the buildup was an effort to intimidate the Soviets .
 The attacks, and the suspension of Cuba from the Organization of American States, appeared to be forewarning of such an invasion . Cuba's suspension of the OAS suspension was also foreshadowing of such a invasion .
 The 1959 Cuban revolution occurred without any Soviet support, and it was more than a year before the Soviet Union even began to trade with Cuba .
 Castro declared that the Cuban revolution was ""socialist"" for the first time during the 1961 Bay of Pigs invasion . Castro declared the revolution was 'socialist' during the invasion of Cuba in 1961 .
 Cuba believed the U.S. was intent on destroying the Cuban revolution whether or not it was linked to the Soviet Union . Cuba believed that the United States was trying to destroy the revolution . But Cuba believed it was going to be destroyed by the US .
 This led Cuba to fear a United States invasion and seek ways to defend itself . Cuba feared a U.S. invasion and sought ways to protect itself . This led to Cuba to seek ways of defending itself .
 The CIA also tried to assassinate Castro . Cuba assumed these efforts were preparations for a U.S. invasion that would involve United States military forces .
 The planned United States invasion was based on an estimate of only 100,000 armed Cubans . Cuba wanted to retain old Soviet bombers after the crisis as a continued defense against future attacks .
 The United States included these weapons on the list of ‘offensive” weapons to be withdrawn . But the U.S. included these on the United States' list of "offensive" weapons to withdraw .
 Despite Soviet promises not to take back the bombers, Khrushchev agreed to Kennedy’s demands . Kennedy was forced to withdraw the bombers from the Soviet Union .
 This convinced Cuba that it could no longer trust the Soviets, which led to six years of tension between the two countries . d) Fidel Castro has said that that crisis was not resolved. d)
 Peace was achieved, but from Cuba’s viewpoint, the cause of the crisis–US aims to destroy the Cuban Revolution—continued . Cuba's view is that the U.S. is trying to destroy Cuba's revolution .
 Its strategy was to support revolutionary movements throughout Asia, Africa, and Latin America, to develop a coalition of like-minded Third World nations . It was intended to support the movements of the Third World countries .
 Great powers must learn to respect the sovereignty of small countries, says David Cameron . Great powers should respect small countries' sovereignty, he says .