 The U.S. and the Soviet Union built up their nuclear arsenal . Both sides had enough weapons to destroy the world .
 Americans after October 1962 believed that the Soviet Union had equalled the United States' nuclear capability . Americans believed that it equalled that of the U.S. in October 1962 .
 Castro and his regime became an important Cold War ally for the Soviets . With Cuba's proximity to the United States, Castro's regime was an important U.S. ally . Castro's Cuba was an ally of the Soviets during the Cold War .
 The relationship was, for the most part, an economic one, with the Soviet Union providing military, economic and political assistance to Cuba . Cuba's relationship with the USSR was an economic relationship .
 In June 1950, the first military action of the Cold War began when the Soviet-backed North Korean People's Army invaded its pro-Western neighbor to the south . North Korea was invaded by the Soviets in June 1950 .
 Many U.S. officials feared this was the first step in a communist campaign to take over the world . Many feared nonintervention was not an option . Many American officials believed this was a step in the communist campaign .
 During the Cold War the two Superpowers were the United States and The Soviet Union . Currently China is emerging as a superpower as well .
 U.S. and Soviet Union fought in 1962 over presence of missile sites in Cuba . Cold war was one of the “hottest” periods of the cold war .
 Kennedy of the U.S. set up a naval blockade of Cuba and insisted that Khrushchev remove the missiles . Kennedy insisted that the missiles were removed from the country .
 The Soviets believed the military spending policies of the Reagan-Bush years forced the Soviets to the brink of economic collapse . They believed the policies forced the Soviet Union to the verge of collapse .
 Democrats argued containment of communism was a bipartisan policy for 45 years begun by Harry Truman . Democrats argued that containment was bipartisan policy begun by Truman .
 When Neil Armstrong stepped onto the moon in 1969, America went down in popular history as the winner of the space race . America's Apollo 11 mission was the first manned mission to reach the moon .
 The real pioneers of space exploration were the Soviet cosmonauts . However, the real pioneers were the Soviets, the Soviet Union .
 In response to the Soviet blockade of land routes into West Berlin, the U.S. begins a massive airlift of food, water, and medicine to the citizens of the besieged city .
 On June 26, 1948, the first planes took off from bases in England and western Germany and landed in West Berlin . West Berlin was the first city to have its own own airbase .