 Fidel Castro in 1959 . Fidel Castro was assassinated by the Cuban government in 1961 . Castro was the Cuban president of Cuba .
 Cuban dictator Fidel Castro was born near Birán, Cuba, in 1926 . Fidel Castro is the son of former Cuban President Salvador Castro .
 Beginning in 1958, Castro and his forces began a campaign of guerrilla warfare to overthrow Fulgencio Batista . Castro became the country's new leader after the dictator died .
 He was responsible for fomenting communist revolutions in other countries around the world . He also fomented communist revolution in other communist countries .
 Under Castro, improvements were made to health care and education, while civil liberties were severely eroded . Civil liberties were also severely eroded under Castro .
 The 1991 collapse of communism and its negative impact on Cuba's economy led Castro to relax some restrictions . Castro relaxed some restrictions over time, but some restrictions were later lifted .
 In 2008, Fidel Castro ofﬁcially handed over power to his brother Raúl Castro . Fidel Castro still wields some political inﬂuence in Cuba and abroad .
 Fidel Alejandro Castro Ruz was born on August 13, 1926, near Birán, in Cuba's eastern Oriente Province . He was born in 1926 . He is one of Cuba's most prominent leaders .
 He was the third of six children, including two brothers, Raúl and Ramón . He also had three sisters, Angela, Emma and Agustina .
 His father, Ángel, was a wealthy sugar plantation owner originally from Spain . He did most of his business with the American-owned United Fruit Company . His father was originally a plantation owner .
 Fidel's mother, Lina Ruz González, had been a maid to Ángel's wife, Maria Luisa Argota, at the time of Fidel's birth . Lina was born to a maid of his father's first wife, who was also a maid
 By the time Fidel was 15, his father dissolved his ﬁrst marriage and wed Fidel's mother . Fidel's father was 15 when his mother wed him .
 Fidel Castro was formally recognized by his father and his name was changed from Ruz to Castro . At age 17, Fidel was officially recognized by Fidel Castro .
 Castro grew up in wealthy circumstances amid the poverty of Cuba but was also imbued with a sense of Spanish pride from his teachers . Castro was educated in private Jesuit boarding schools .
 From an early age, Castro showed he was intellectually gifted, but he was also something of a troublemaker . Castro was often more interested in sports than studies and was often interested in studying .
 He attended Colegio Dolores in Santiago de Cuba . He pitched for the school's baseball team as well as playing basketball and running track .
 By 1947, Castro had become increasingly passionate about social justice . He traveled to the Dominican Republic to join an expedition attempting the overthrow of the country's dictator, Rafael Trujillo . Castro was arrested and charged with treason .
 Castro traveled to Bogotá, Colombia, the following year to participate in anti-government rioting there . Castro participated in the rioting in Colombia . Castro's passion for reform was fueled by a failed coup attempt .
 Castro considered another run for president in 1951 after losing in 1948 election to Eduardo Chibás . Chibas was the Cuban presidential candidate who lost the 1948 election but inspired Castro to be an ardent disciple .
 He pledged to expose the government's corruption and warn the people about General Fulgencio Batista, himself a former president, who was plotting a return to power . He was elected to the presidency in 1959 .
 Chibás' efforts were cut short after his supposed allies refused to provide evidence of government wrongdoing . However, Chibés' efforts to get evidence of wrongdoing were stopped short .
 In August 1951, Chibás shot himself during a radio broadcast after failing to keep his promise . He shot himself in the head during a live broadcast .
 Castro had married Mirta Díaz Balart, who was from a wealthy political family in Cuba . Meanwhile, Castro was married to another wealthy Cuban woman . Castro had been married to a wealthy Cuban family .
 The marriage exposed Castro to a wealthier lifestyle and political connections . Castro's marriage to Castro exposed him to a wealthy lifestyle and connections . The marriage led to Castro's political success .
 At the same time, he developed an interest in the work of Karl Marx and became intent on running for a seat in the Cuban Congress . At the time he became interested in Karl Marx's work .
 Castro was left without a legitimate political platform and little income with which to support his family . But in March 1952, a coup led by Batista successfully overthrew the government and the upcoming election was cancelled .
 Batista set himself up as dictator, solidiﬁed his power with the military and Cuba's economic elite . Batista got his government recognized by the United States. Batista's government was recognized by U.S.
 Castro was captured, tried, convicted and sentenced to 15 years in prison . However, the attack failed and he was captured and tried again . Castro was convicted of attempted murder in 2009 .
 While incarcerated, Castro renamed his group the ""26th of July Movement" and continued to coordinate its activities through correspondence . Castro was imprisoned in 1959 .
 He and his compatriots were ultimately released in 1955 under an amnesty deal with the Batista government . He traveled with Raúl to Mexico, where they continued to plan their revolution .
 In Mexico, Castro met with other Cuban exiles, as well as Ernesto ""Che"" Guevara, who believed that the plight of Latin America's poor could be rectiﬁed only through violent revolution .
 He joined Castro's group and became an important conﬁdante, helping to shape Castro's political beliefs . Castro was an important member of the Castro family .
 On December 2, 1956, Fidel Castro returned to Cuba aboard the boat Granma with little more than 80 insurgents and a cache of weapons . He landed near the eastern city of Manzanillo, Cuba .
 In short order, Batista's forces killed or captured most of the attackers . Batista forces kill or capture most of them in short order .
 Castro, Raúl, Guevara and a handful of others were able to escape into the Sierra Maestra mountain range along the island's southeastern coast . Castro was among those who escaped into the mountains .
 Over the course of the next two years, Castro's growing forces waged a guerrilla war against the Batista government . Castro's steadily growing forces organized resistance groups in cities and small towns across Cuba .
 Castro was able to organize a parallel government and carry out some agrarian reform . Castro was also able to control provinces with agricultural and manufacturing production . Castro also managed to organize an independent government and control provinces .
 Castro and his forces mounted a series of successful military campaigns to capture and hold key areas throughout Cuba . Castro's forces captured and held key areas in Cuba beginning in 1958 .
 Castro's efforts led to the collapse of Batista's government in 1959 . Batista himself moved to the Dominican Republic in January 1959 .
 At the age of 32, Castro had successfully concluded his guerrilla campaign to take control of Cuba . Castro was 32 when he took control of the country .
 A provisional government was quickly created, with Manuel Urrutia installed as president and José Miró Cardona as prime minister . José Miro Cardona was prime minister of the government .
 Castro arrived in Havana to cheering crowds and assumed the post of commander-in-chief of the military . It quickly gained the recognition of the United States, and Castro himself arrived in Cuba . Castro was the first Cuban to arrive in Havana .
 In February 1959, Miró suddenly resigned, and Castro was sworn in as Cuba's prime minister . Castro became Castro's first prime minister in 1959 .
 Hundreds of members of Batista's government were tried and executed . Batista government members were executed in the wake of the revolution .
 Castro implemented far-reaching reforms by nationalizing factories and plantations in an attempt to end U.S. economic dominance on the island . Castro implemented reforms in a bid to end United States economic dominance .
 The new government will base compensation to foreign companies on the artiﬁcially low property values that the companies themselves had negotiated with past Cuban governments .
 American companies soon felt the negative effects of such measures, leading to a signiﬁcant strain in relations between Cuba and the U.S. The measures have led to a sharp decline in American exports to Cuba .
 Castro's policies closely resembled a Soviet-style control of both the economy and government . During this time, Castro repeatedly denied being a communist, but to many Americans, his policies closely resemble a Soviet style .
 Castro and a delegation visited the United States as guests of the National Press Club in 1959 . Castro visited the U.S. in April 1959 as a delegation .
 President Dwight Eisenhower refused a meeting with Castro . Castro hired a renowned public relations team to help promote his tour . Eisenhower refused to meet with Castro to discuss his tour of Cuba .
 Castro signed the ﬁrst Agrarian Reform Act, which limited the size of land holdings and forbade foreign property ownership . That May, Castro signed a law limiting the size and ownership of land .
 "On the surface, the intent was to develop a class of independent farmers," says the farmer . "I'm not a farmer, but I'm a farmer," he says. "I want to be a farmer in my own way"
 In reality, this program led to state land control, with the farmers becoming mere government employees . The program was meant to be a model for farmers, not just farmers, but farmers .
 By the end of 1959, Castro's revolution had become radicalized, with purges of military and government leaders . The suppression of any media critical of Castro's policies led to the purges .
 Castro's government also began to establish relations with the Soviet Union . Castro also established diplomatic ties with the USSR .
 Cuba signed a trade agreement to buy oil from the Soviet Union in February 1960 . In February 1960, Cuba established diplomatic relations with the USSR . Cuba signed an oil agreement with the Soviets and established diplomatic ties .
 When U.S.-owned reﬁneries in Cuba refused to process the oil, Castro expropriated them . The United States retaliated by cutting Cuba's import quota on sugar, thus beginning what would become a decadeslong relationship .
 On January 3, 1961, Eisenhower broke off diplomatic relations with the Cuban government . Eisenhower broke ties with Cuba in 1961 . The U.S. broke away from Cuba in January 1961 .
 Some 1,400 Cuban exiles invaded Cuba at the remote Bay of Pigs in an attempt to overthrow the Castro regime . Three days later, some 1,000 Cuban exile invaded Cuba in a failed invasion .
 The incursion ended in disaster, with hundreds of insurgents killed and more than 1,000 captured . Hundreds of insurgents were killed, more than a thousand captured . More than a million insurgents were captured .
 The Cuban exiles were trained by the Central Intelligence Agency and armed with American weapons . Though the United States denied any involvement, it was revealed that the U.S. had trained them .
 National Security Archive revealed that the U.S. had begun planning an overthrow of the Castro government as early as March 1959 . Decades later, it was revealed the United States had been planning to overthrow the government .
 The invasion was conceived during the Eisenhower administration and inherited by President Kennedy . President Kennedy reluctantly approved its action but denied the invaders air support in the hopes of concealing a United States role .
 Castro, in turn, was able to capitalize on the incident to consolidate his power and further promote his agenda . Castro was in the midst of a crisis in the 1980s and 1990s .
 On May 1 he announced an end to democratic elections in Cuba and denounced U.S. imperialism . The Cuban leader also denounced American imperialism .
 Castro declared himself a MarxistLeninist at the end of the year . He announced the Cuban government was adopting communist economic and political policies .
 On February 7, 1962, the United States imposed a full economic embargo on Cuba . The embargo continued for decades . The U.S. has been involved in the Cuban crisis since then .
 Castro intensiﬁed his relations with the Soviet Union by accepting further economic and military aid . In the wake of the Bay of Pigs incident, Castro took advantage of further economic, military aid from the USSR .
 In October 1962, his increasing reliance on Soviet support brought the world to the brink of nuclear war . The world was at risk of a nuclear war in October 1962 when the world was on the brink .
 Fidel Castro and Nikita Khrushchev conceived the idea of placing nuclear missiles in Cuba, just 90 miles off the coast of Florida . The Cuban missile base is 90 miles from Florida .
 Khrushchev justiﬁed the move as a response to United States Jupiter missiles that had been deployed in Turkey . The U.S. had deployed the missiles in Turkey in response to the move .
 U-2 reconnaissance plane discovered the base construction before the missiles were installed . Kennedy demanded the removal of the missiles, with orders for the United States Navy to search any vessels headed for the island .
 Khrushchev, Kennedy and their agents agreed to remove the missiles in exchange for the United States' public agreement not to invade Cuba . Over 13 anxious days of secret communications between Khrushchchev and Kennedy, the Soviets agreed to pull the missiles .
 The Kennedy administration also agreed to secretly remove the Jupiter missiles from Turkey . The Jupiter missiles were removed from Turkey in the 1960s .
 The United States was able to persuade the Organization of American States to end diplomatic relations with Cuba, in response to Castro's ""shameful"" actions . Furthermore, the United States also managed to persuade OAS to end its diplomatic ties with Cuba .
 He began a campaign of supporting armed struggle against imperialism in Latin American and African countries . Within a few years, he began to support armed struggle .
 Castro founded the Organization for Solidarity with the Peoples of Asia, Africa, and Latin America in 1966 . He founded the organization to promote revolution and communism on three continents . Castro was born in 1961 .
 In 1967, he formed the Latin American Solidarity Organization to foster revolution in select Latin American countries . In 1967 he also formed Latin America Solidarity Organisation .
 Castro continued to promote himself as the leading spokesperson for Third World countries . In the 1970s, Castro provided military support to pro-Soviet forces in Angola, Ethiopia and Yemen . Castro was the leader of the Cuban revolution in the 1960s .
 Cuba was still heavily subsidized by the Soviet government during this period . Those expeditions ultimately proved unsuccessful and put a strain on the Cuban economy .
 The U.S. agreement not to invade Cuba had not precluded attempting to topple the Castro regime in other ways . Meanwhile, the United States agreed to not invade Cuba, but tried to topple it .
 Over the years, Castro was the target of numerous CIA assassination attempts . The CIA has attempted numerous attempts to assassinate Castro .
 Castro took great delight in the fact that none of the attempts ever succeeded . Castro was quoted as saying that if avoiding assassination attempts was an Olympic sport he would have won gold medals .
 Castro's regime credited with opening 10,000 new schools and increasing literacy to 98 percent . Castro regime has been credited with increasing literacy in Cuba to 98 per cent .
 At the same time, civil liberties were whittled away, as labor unions lost the right to strike . Independent newspapers were shut down and religious institutions were harassed .
 Castro removed opposition to his rule though executions and imprisonments, as well as through forced emigration . Castro's rule removed opposition from his rule through executions, imprisonments and imprisonment .
 During Castro's rule, hundreds of thousands of Cubans moved across the Florida Straits in Miami . Hundreds of thousands now live in the U.S. during the Castro era .
 Castro opened up the port of Mariel to allow exiled Cubans living in Miami to come claim their relatives . The largest of these exoduses occurred in 1980, when Castro opened the port to allow Cubans to claim relatives .
 Castro loaded the ships with Cuban prison inmates, mental patients and other social undesirables . Castro also loaded Cuban prisoners and mental patients . The ships were also loaded with Cuban prisoners .
 In all, nearly 120,000 Cubans left their homeland in 1980 to ﬁnd sanctuary in the U.S. In the 1980s, Cubans fled their homeland to the United States .
 The 1991 collapse of the Soviet Union sent Cuba's economy into a tailspin . Castro's revolution began to lose momentum after the collapse of Soviet Union in 1991 .
 Without cheap oil imports and an eager Soviet market for sugar, Cuban unemployment and inﬂation grew . Without cheap imports and a Soviet market, unemployment grew .
 The contraction of the Cuban economy resulted in 85 percent of its markets disappearing . The contraction resulted in the collapse of the country's economy .
 Castro was very adept at keeping control of the government during dire economic times . Castro was also adept in keeping control at the height of the Cuban crisis .
 He pressed the United States to lift the economic embargo, but it refused . The U.S. refused to lift it .
 Castro then adopted a quasi-free market economy and encouraged international investment . Castro's government has been criticized for its policies in the 1980s .
 In 1996 he visited the United States to invite Cuban exiles living there to return to Cuba to start businesses . He also legalized the U.S. dollar and encouraged limited tourism in Cuba .
 In 2001, Castro declined U.S. humanitarian aid but proposed a one-time cash purchase of food from the United States . Castro declined humanitarian aid in 2001 after massive damage from Hurricane Michelle .
 In the late 1990s, speculation began to arise over Castro's age and well-being . Castro was president of Cuba in the 1990s . Castro has been in charge of Cuba since 1993 .
 Numerous health problems have been reported over the years . Castro underwent surgery for gastrointestinal bleeding in 2006, when he underwent surgery .
 In a dramatic announcement, on July 31, 2006, Castro designated his brother Raúl as the country's temporary leader . Castro's brother was designated as the temporary leader of the country .
 Raúl had served as Castro's second in command for decades and had been ofﬁcially selected as his successor in 1997 .
 On February 19, 2008, 81-year-old Fidel Castro permanently gave up the Cuban presidency due to his deteriorating physical condition . Fidel Castro was 81-years-old when he stepped down as president of Cuba .
 Raúl Castro easily won election as the party's new secretary, taking over for his brother . He chose famed revolutionary José Ramón Machado Ventura to serve as party's second in command .
 Fidel Castro claimed that he had actually resigned the post years earlier . Fidel Castro said he had resigned from the post in 2009 .
 Castro has taken to writing a column about his experiences and opinions . In 2007 his autobiography My Life was published . In his retirement, Castro has written a column called Re�ections of Fidel .
 From mid-November to early January of 2012, however, Castro failed to publish any columns . Castro has not published any columns since then .
 This sudden silence sparked rumors that Castro had taken a turn for the worse . Castro's sudden silence has sparked rumors he is in trouble .
 Castro put out a ﬂurry of articles later that January that January . But these stories soon proved to be unfounded, as Castro later published them .
 Fidel Castro has maintained a certain degree of political inﬂuence both at home and abroad . Though not involved in the day-to-day affairs of running Cuba, Fidel Castro is still a major figure in Cuba politics .
 In recent years he has continued to meet with foreign leaders, such as Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, during visits to Cuba .
 Pope Benedict arranged a special audience with Castro in March 2012, seeking to obtain greater religious freedom for Catholics living in the communist nation . Pope Francis met privately with Castro as well in September 2015 .