 The Crisis had its origins in the Cold War, the struggle between Western and Eastern powers that dominated the second half of the 20th Century . The Crisis was the result of a crisis between Russia and the West .
 To counter the spread of Communism, the United States joined with countries of Western Europe to form the North Atlantic Treaty Organization . The U.S. joined with Western Europe in the fight against Communism .
 The Soviet Union was the prime mover in the Communist sphere, also having a controlling interest in most nations in Eastern Europe . It was also having control over most of Eastern Europe's nations .
 In response to the formation of NATO, the U.S.R. and its Eastern European allies formed a similar mutual support strategy called the Warsaw Pact . The Warsaw Pact was formed in response to NATO's formation .
 The Cold War played out largely far from the United States until Fidel Castro became the leader of Cuba . Cuba is 90 miles off the coast of Florida, 90 miles from Florida .
 He made no secret of his distaste for the U.S. and its leaders, and the two countries became locked into a trade dispute .
 Among the particulars of this trade dispute were a refusal of American markets to buy Cuban sugar . American suppliers to sell oil to Cuba are refusing to sell it to Cuba .
 Castro's purchase of military equipment and weapons from Eastern European nations didn't endear him to Western leaders . Castro bought military equipment from Eastern Europe .
 American leaders, including newly elected President John F Kennedy, made no secret of their dislike of Castro, especially his preference for Communism . Castro was the leader of the Cuban Revolution in Cuba in 1959 .
 Castro became an ally of the Soviet Union, and the Cold War came closer to the U.S. mainland . Castro was Castro's ally, and became a key ally of Soviet Union .
 In early 1961, the American Central Intelligence Agency trained a group of Cuban exiles with the express purpose of invading Cuba and overthrowing Castro . The group was trained to overthrow Castro .
 In 1961, the Cuban military easily repelled the invasion, which came to be known as the Bay of Pigs invasion because of its location . The invasion came to an end because of the location of the invasion .
 Cuban exiles weren't given much training or support in the end, so the island remained firmly in Castro's hands . The United States could claim that it did not participate directly in the invasion attempt .
 Later that year, Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev hinted at a takeover of West Berlin . West Berlin was the only part of the former German capital city not occupied by Communist forces .
 Khrushchev made it known that he intended for Soviet forces to permanently occupy East Berlin . More broadly, he made it clear he intended to occupy Berlin .
 At a meeting in Vienna, Kennedy ostensibly agreed to the permanent occupation of West Berlin . But he made it clear that Western nations would continue to assert their right to occupy West Berlin.
 On August 13, 1961, fortifications divided the city, creating two cities and a long-term division between East and West . Fortifications were built in 1961 to divide the city into two cities .
 U.S. invasion at the Bay of Pigs emboldened Khrushchev to support Castro more militarily . Kennedy's refusal to insist on a full-throated defense of Berlin emboldened Castro to support him . The combination of the invasion and the failure of a defense at Berlin embold
 Khrushchev convinced Castro Castro to allow Soviet missiles onto Cuban soil . Thinking that Kennedy wouldn't object, he convinced him to allow missiles on Cuban soil. Khrushche convinced Castro to let missiles onto Cuba's soil .
 Soviet ships carrying nuclear missiles began arriving in Cuba in September . In September, Soviet ships began arriving with nuclear missiles in Cuba .
 Placing IRBMs in Cuba would enable the Soviet Union to target the entirety of the United States with nuclear warheads . The U.S. would be able to target Cuba with warheads .
 American U-2 spy planes had flown secret missions over Cuba and taken pictures that confirmed the existence of surface-to-air missiles at eight locations in Cuba . U.2 planes flew secret missions to Cuba and had taken pictures of the missiles .
 Soviet officials insisted that the missiles were for defensive purposes only . Soviet officials, when confronted with intelligence to this effect, insisted that they were only for defense purposes .
 The photos convinced U.S. intelligence and military experts that the missiles were, in fact, nuclear in nature . Further investigation convinced them that the photos were, indeed, nuclear .