 If Kennedy had known that Khrushchev had all but lied on Oct. 4, the hawks in Washington might have won their push for an all-out U.S. invasion of the island .
 Soviet Deputy Prime Minister Anastas Mikoyan got them out of Cuba after telling him that Soviet law did not permit the transfer of nuclear weapons to other countries . Instead, he said that the “hothead” Castro could not be trusted with any nuclear weapons .
 Castro asked Mikoyan during a tense meeting on Nov., 1962, according to a new book by his son and researcher Svetlana Savranskaya . The book is published by Sergo Mikoyans and a researcher from the same period .
 Research in recent years has shown the crisis impacted a broader swath of the world than previously known, said James Hershberg, editor of the Cold War International History Project .
 Moscow’s concessions to Kennedy likely pushed North Korea to launch its own search for nuclear weapons, a study showed . Moscow's concessions likely pushed the North to look for nuclear arms, the study said .
 Another argued that it led North Vietnam to step up its armed campaign against the south . Another argued it led to the rise of North Vietnam's armed campaign in Vietnam .
 The book includes 50 Soviet government documents, including official notes from the Mikoyan-Castro talks . The book is based on 50 documents from the Soviet government and family documents . It was published in October 2013 .
 Khrushchev tells Kennedy that he will withdraw from Cuba the “weapons which you call offensive” The Soviet R-14 and R-12 missiles with nuclear warheads and ranges of up to 1,550 miles . The IL-28 bombers, aged but still capable of carrying nuclear
 Khrushchev did not reveal 98 tactical nuclear warheads also had been deployed in Cuba for the Luna and FKR-1 missiles . The weapons were deployed essentially to destroy a possible United States invasion armada .
 Documents released from the archives of Robert F Kennedy, then the attorney general and advisor to his brother . Documents show conversations between U.S. and Soviet officials about sending Cuba weapons .
 Cold War exchanges centered on removal of weapons “capable of offensive war,’’ Not the weapons that could be used to repel a possible U.S. invasion . The United States apparently unaware such weapons had nuclear capabilities .
 On Oct. 1962, a surprise U.S. air strike to take out the strategic missiles was still under discussion . Some advisors thought the option would ultimately lead to a full-scale invasion . On Oct., 1962, some advisors thought it would lead to an invasion .
 President Kennedy had reservations about the potential loss of thousands of lives . A surprise strike might be perceived “as a Pearl Harbor in reverse” and spark retaliatory strikes by local “Soviet” commanders .
 JFK told Castro that JFK had promised he would not invade Cuba . JFK also told Castro not to shoot at U.S. spy planes overflying the island . Cuban troops would control tactical warheads after receiving training .
 Moscow’s withdrawal of its missiles would leave him without any real deterrence against a U.S. attack . 18 months after the failed Bay of Pigs invasion and amid a confirmed CIA plot to assassinate him, he says .
 Castro said Mikoyan pushed too hard on one issue, “What do you think we are?” Castro shot back, saying: “I'm not sure what we are. I'm sure we're not going to be the same thing.”
 Initially, Mikoyan and the Soviet military favored allowing Castro to keep the tactical nukes for self-defense, he says . The younger Mikoyans says the nukes were intended to protect the Soviet Union .
 Castro sent Khrushchev a cable all but urging a preemptive nuclear strike on U.S. targets . But on Oct. 1962, Castro sent a cable urging a pre-emptive strike on United States targets . The cable was all but but urging the strike .
 President Obama ordered U.N. ambassador to announce that tactical warheads were in Cuba . He ordered his United Nations ambassador, Carlo Lechuga, to announce it .
 The issue of tactical warheads came to a boil when Mikoyan met with Castro, Ernesto “Che” Guevara and other Cuban government officials .
 Castro is quoted as asking Mikoyan in notes of the meeting taken by the Soviet delegation . Castro was quoted as being quoted as saying the Soviet Union should not be allowed to hold talks with the West .
 Moscow “has not given any promise regarding the removal” of the tactical weapons, Mikoyan says . Mikoyans says Moscow has not promised to remove tactical weapons . Moscow says it has not made any promises regarding removal .
 Mikoyan replies that there is a law prohibiting the transfer of any nuclear weapons to anybody . The law also prohibits transferring of any weapons, including the tactical ones .
 Sergo Mikoyan's son says it's not clear whether such a law existed . Sergo said it was not clear if the law existed in Cuba .
 Perhaps it was a secret policy of the Soviet leadership, perhaps a convenient lie . The Soviet leadership may have been behind the move, perhaps it was just a cover-up .
 The younger Mikoyan argues that the "old men" who ruled the Kremlin in the early 1960s saw in Cuba a young and virile socialist revolution that needed Moscow’s support . He argues the “old men” who ruled Moscow in the 1960s essentially saw
 The “romantic” Khrushchev sent nuclear weapons to defend Havana from U.S. attacks, he says . The ‘romantic,’ Khrushchevitch did not fully realize the risks, he noted .
 Moscow’s military was more pragmatic, and the Cuba deployment doubled the number of Soviet missiles that could hit U.S. territory . The Cuba deployment doubles the size of the Soviet missiles .
 Mikoyan met with presidential advisor John J McCloy, U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations Adlai Stevenson and Charles W Yost, Stevenson’s deputy .
 Sergo Mikoyan was one of Moscow’s top Latin America specialists . He served as editor of the journal Latin America, published by the Soviet Academy of Sciences .
 General Anatoly Gribkov, army chief of operations during the missile crisis, revealed that Moscow had deployed nine nuclear tipped Luna in Cuba to be used against any United States invasion force .
 There were 80 nuclear tipped FKR-1 cruise missiles, 12 nuclear warheads of the Lunas, also known as FROG missiles, and six nuclear bombs for the IL-28s . In fact, there were also 12 nuclear weapons for the missiles .
 Sergo Mikoyan wrote that all the tactical warheads left Cuba Dec., 1962,on the cargo ship Arkhangelsk . The warheads arrived in the Soviet port of Severomorsk .