 John F Kennedy’s majestic funeral, planned in detail by wife Jacqueline, provides no closure . Two days later, alleged assassin Lee Harvey Oswald is shot by small-time hustler Jack Ruby .
 Oswald's televised murder precludes a trial, and greatly encourages conspiracy theories . Oswald’s televised murder can’t be proven to have been a crime .
 In 2013, there were floods of books, articles and commentaries marking the 50th anniversary of JFK's death . Kennedy’s legacy is complex, including highly publicized shortcomings .
 JFK's legacy might be an attitude that all things are possible for Americans . Eric Sevareid of CBS noted that JFK had major achievements .
 The early disastrous invasion of Cuba at the Bay of Pigs undercut Kennedy, and provided Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev strong incentive to deploy nuclear missiles . Sevareid was perceptive in emphasizing the emotional dimensions of political leadership .
 President Kennedy resisted powerful pressure to invade Cuba . President Kennedy, a World War II combat veteran, resisted powerful opposition to invasion .
 The missiles were removed following a blockade and overt invasion preparations, combined with a secret Cuba-Turkey missile trade . The missile trade was a secret between Cuba and Turkey .
 In the aftermath of the missile crisis, Kennedy and Khrushchev achieved a treaty banning nuclear tests in the atmosphere . Kennedy’s restraint and imagination are extremely impressive .
 JFK had other success with Congress, including negotiation authority key to the 1967 Kennedy Round trade agreement, and successor Tokyo and Uruguay accords . Civil rights and organized crime were an obsession of Attorney General Robert F Kennedy .
 JFK was cautious on race relations, addressing the subject actively only when pressed by a massive march on Washington . JFK was relentless in pursuit of the mafia, while simultaneously gangsters and mercenaries were recruited to kill Castro .
 People around Robert Kennedy were puzzled by his marked disinterest in possible assassination conspiracy . Nixon administration re-energized prosecution of organized crime 6 years later .
 Then-Senator John Kennedy’s book “Profiles in Courage,” about United States Senators who put principle above political expediency, received the Pulitzer Prize . RFK avoided that dark tangled path because he might come face-to-face with himself .
 Professor Parmet has documented extraordinary health problems that plagued JFK from birth . Critics cracked President Kennedy should show less profile .
 He nearly died in infancy, and received Catholic last rites at least three times . He received last rites three times before he was born .
 U.S. astronaut Seesareid demonstrated exceptional courage during his time in the Navy . He enlisted in the United States Navy, then volunteered for hazardous PT boat duty .
 Associated technological innovations include electronics miniaturization and electronics mini-manufacturing . Associated technology innovations include electronic mini-batteries .
 In the mid-1970s, revelations about JFK’s personal behavior along with the Castro plots startled people . Today, computers, cell phones and a range of other products reflect this. In the 1970s, people were shocked by the revelations .
 Understanding human complexity involves growing up, more achievable in our democracy than in a dictatorship . Understanding human complex is more achievable than a dictatorship, says Julian Zelizer .