 Robert McNamara, George Ball, Roswell Gilpatric, Theodore Sorensen, and McGeorge Bundy . Douglas Dillon, anatoly Dobrynin, and Raymond Garthoff . Robert Kennedy, Nikita Khrushchev, Harold Macmillan, Dean Rusk
 Crises are sometimes not about power, but about whether states flout international norms . “We didn’t react immediately, of course, and that’s very important,” says President Obama .
 “I would like to emphasize…the importance of not taking irrevocable action. Take your time to decide a course of action," says Obama .
 The threat of even some degree of nuclear devastation proved decisive . Nuclear superiority did not matter during the crisis .
 The Missile Crisis did not spread to any of the areas we expected it to . At beginning of any crisis, focus on limited, flexible steps, says David Cameron .
 Nuclear weapons are major deterrents in any international crisis . “That impulse to be very cautious is something that is becoming ingrained today.”
 One in a thousand is too high if you aren’t steadily reducing it as you go . But, over the long haul, it's too high for you to reduce it as a result .
 One in fifty is acceptable at one time if running the risk results in a later risk of one in a hundred, then one in thousand, and so on. On the other hand, one in fifty could be acceptable at the other time . The risk is one in 50, then a
 Sometimes you should pursue crises with an unacceptably high risk of nuclear war if and only if the crisis results in a later, lower risk of war . Sometimes, sometimes, the risk of a nuclear war is too high to pursue .
 ‘No real victory can come from nuclear war.’ – ‘You had an advantage that was sixteen or seventeen to one to one, and despite this fact, you could not use it.‘’s the question of superiority – you had a advantage that
 In a nuclear crisis, no side has an advantage that it can actually use; the question of superiority becomes irrelevant . ‘Both sides must be prepared for compromise and negotiation,’ says author .
 The crisis transformed Soviet thinking about the U.S. prior to it the Soviets were convinced the United States would use nuclear weapons to put an end to communism . Prior to it, the Soviets had been convinced they would use such weapons to end communism .
 Governments have a duty to prevent nuclear war; the only way to do that is by getting rid of all nuclear weapons . Governments must get rid of nuclear weapons to prevent war; only way is to stop it .
 In an international crisis, try to avoid overreaction that could risk nuclear war . In the world's first nuclear war, try not to overreact to a nuclear crisis .
 In a country so full of construction projects, with so many chicken farms and things everywhere, it would have been the easiest thing in the world for us to build those emplacements under the guise of something totally different and they would have never been discovered .
 In international crises, realize that sometimes your allies cannot be trustede.e. Know that sometimes you can't trust your allies .
 Cuba’s Struggle with the Superpowers after the Missile Crisis, . .
 In a nuclear world, even a small, ‘ragtag’ nuclear deterrent can significantly alter one’s behavior . We should obviously use our Soviet specialists, but there's a problem with relying on expertise too heavily . These people often have a very particular reading of the Soviet
 Nothing substitutes for a little direct experience of the Soviets, he says . "There is a strong argument for much wider contacts with them," he adds .
 As far as world opinion is concerned, it would be a mistake to overemphasize this today . Use experts who have direct experience with the other sideg.
 You don’t garner world opinion in the last week of a crisis, you need to have it going in, he says . You need to be going in. You don't garner world support in last week, he adds .
 The tendency is for us to compartmentalize the different options. You will need their support going in. You need to be able to get the support of your team .
 Multiple approaches conducted together will do much more than just one option by itself, say experts . Multiple approaches will work together more than one option, they say. Multiple approaches are possible, but not just one one .
 In de Gaulle’s view the Soviet Union would be unlikely and unable to risk any such confrontation again for a long time to come, he says . Having been forced to retreat before American power, he said .
 For him the crisis opened up a new period of diplomatic opportunity in Europe, the era of détente and cooperation with the Soviet Union that he had regularly sought and that he saw as the only alternative to confrontation . Therefore, for him for him, the crisis . For him, for
 The crisis demonstrated that Europe’s fate could be abruptly determined by a superpower conflict that had nothing whatever to do with Europe itself, says de Gaulle .
 He had been loyal to the United States, but when it was all over, the lesson he drew was that Europe must never be put at risk in such a manner again . The lesson he learned from the U.S. was to never put Europe at risk again .
 Crisis encouraged France to develop foreign policy more independently and rely more on its own nuclear deterrent than on American security guaranty . Crisis prompted France to rely more heavily on its nuclear deterrent .
 Americans have never had to live with security threats at their borders, like Europeans have . Europeans have had to deal with the threat of terrorism in their own countries . Americans have to live in a different way of dealing with security, not in Europe .
 The implication is that Khrushchev did not consider this, which is why he was surprised by the sharpness of the U.S. reaction to the missiles in Cuba . "Krushchev didn't consider this," he says .
 The pair had differing perceptions of the risk involved in the use of force in the nuclear age . They had differing views on the risk of using force in nuclear power .
 I didn't believe there would be any Soviet military reaction to an airstrike even if accompanied by an invasion of Cuba, because of their awareness of our military superiority . I didn’t believe any Soviet reaction would be . even if it was accompanied by a . invasion .
 "We didn’t think the Russians would start anything anyway. That may well be right, but we didn't worry about that,’s not worried about that . That may be the case, but it's not the case anyway, says CNN.com's John S
 Be wary of a gradual approach when using military force: use “all you’ve got” or do not use it at all . Use ‘all you've got’ or ‘do not use’t use it all at all. Use “
 Kennedy was proclaimed the big winner in the crisis because no one knew about the secret deal . Kennedy was declared the winner of the crisis by the White House .
 Khrushchev had been humiliated into withdrawing our missiles from Cuba with no obvious gain . He had to withdraw his missiles with no apparent gain . The U.S. withdrew its missiles from the Soviet Union in Cuba .
 The terms of the final settlement were neither a great defeat nor a great victory for Kennedy or Khrushchev . In fact, the terms were neither great defeat or victory for either of the two men .
 Kennedy looked like the big winner in the crisis because Khrushchev did not demand a public missile swap, even though he got what he asked for: an American pledge not to invade Cuba .
 Many Soviets were humiliated by the way the crisis ended, which led the Soviet military establishment to begin a new large-scale nuclear weapons program to achieve strategic balance with U.S. forces .
 Those days revealed the mortal danger of direct armed confrontation of the two great powers, a confrontation headed off on the brink of war thanks to both sides’ timely and agonizing realization of the disastrous consequences of the consequences .
 It was this insight that made the political settlement possible, he says . A substantial role was played by a direct confidential channel between the leaders of two countries .
 The political and diplomatic solution at which the two states jointly arrived may be regarded as a model of successfully controlling a crisis . Even now that so many years has passed, it may be a model for successfully controlling the crisis .
 The crisis had a dramatic influence on subsequent Soviet-American relations . The crisis led to dramatic changes in relations between Russia and the U.S.
 The threat of mortal danger faced by the great powers opened a path to a political settlement through confidential channels that controlled the crisis . “Those days revealed the mortal danger of a direct armed confrontation of the two great powers,’s author says .
 If both sides recognize a war’s disastrous consequences, they can avoid war . Both sides also were left keenly conscious of the need to ease tension, he says .
 Easing tension between two adversaries with good faith agreements is crucial to avoid war . “The importance of the confidential channel was proven as well,” says the Russian diplomat .
 I cannot tell how the Cuban crisis would have ended if these contacts had not been there . If it had ended badly, the consequences could have been truly disastrous, he says .
 The whole experience also provided guidelines for my future diplomatic activity, which I followed for the remainder of my quarter-century as an ambassador . The experience provided guidelines .
 "I tried to be an active participant in the constantly functioning confidential channel at the highest level," she says .
 Keeping a confidential channel of communication open between two powers plays a huge role in ensuring conflicts do not escalate . ‘You will never agree on anything if you are already tuned in to a specific notion and cannot or will not hear the other side.’
 Moscow's Ambassador to America’s Six Cold War Presdients . ‘I agree with Bob McNamara’�s main conclusion that it's more important to avoid crises than to plan them .
 “We have overstated the cautionary effect of nuclear weapons, I think, because the historical records shows that when we warn them against doing something, sometimes they back off and sometimes they do not. Avoid crises and try to understand adversary’s thinking,” he says
 “C Crises requires people with solid knowledge of situation and adversary, regardless of “rank or position” “ was distressed that the representatives with whom he met…seemed to give so little consideration to the implications of steps they suggested.”
 May they not be that, under the cover of terrible nuclear war, which nobody dares to start, you can get away with anything you can do by conventional means . May be that under . the cover . of terrible . nuclear war which nobody . dares . start, they say
 Nuclear deterrence between two nations allows for both nations to conduct conventional war against one another without fear of nuclear escalation . Nuclear deterrence allows both countries to conduct nuclear war against each other without fearing escalation .
 Nuclear weapons will destroy nations. “Rationality will not save us.” says President Obama . “I’m sure we’re going to have nuclear weapons,” he says .
 "The indefinite combination of human fallibility and nuclear weapons carries a very high risk of nuclear catastrophe" The Fog of War, directed by Errol Morris, is released on DVD and on sale .
 Only way to avoid nuclear catastrophe is to eventually eliminate nuclear weapons . Only way of avoiding nuclear catastrophe: Elimination of nuclear weapons is to eliminate nuclear arms .
 In crises, consider all the consequences of your actions, especially long-term . “A little deterrence goes a long way” was certainly true as far as our group was concerned,’s leader says .
 First, keep open your channels of communication with the other side, and keep the dialogue going . Second, keep your channels open, and your dialogue going, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Have people experienced in national security running U.S. national security policy? Have people . experienced national security . policy? Do you know? Email us at CNN.com/foreignpolicy@dailymailonline .
 Each administration should draw preliminary guidelines for the use and non-use of nuclear weapons . Have experts of the other side readily available, says Obama .
 In any international crisis, avoid escalating risk of total nuclear war . Avoid escalating risks of nuclear war in any world crisis .
 The nuclear weapons we have, and the Soviets have, are useless militarily. Even a small risk is too much, says President Obama .
 “Mistakes happen. Beware of people in power who are either ignorant or closed to new knowledge,” says Obama .
 “Crisis management is a very uncertain and very difficult thing to do, and therefore, you’ve just got to avoid the crises in the first place. They can happen very easily in crisis situations and can change things dramatically,’s Mr. Robinson says .
 Plan ahead for crises. Plan ahead of crises, plan ahead for the president with knowledgeable associates, says Obama . Plan for crises? Plan ahead .
 “Don’t force the adversary into a corner. Put yourself in your opponent’s shoes.” “Put you in your own shoes,” says Daley Thompson .
 Leave the other side in a crisis room to maneuver and retreat, if necessary . Leave the opposing side in the crisis room . If necessary, leave it in the room and retreat .
 The idea of a prolonged nuclear war from which one side can emerge with some sort of advantage is nonsense, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: The idea that a prolonged nuke war from the start is nonsense .
 One has to have an alternative government in place made up of people who had nothing to do with the events which unfold . One must be made-up of people not involved in the events that unfold, he says .
 "People in the government are not going to abandon all their colleagues and their families to get in a helicopter and go charging out to West Virginia. In the first place, people in the . government . People in . the government . are not . going to be abandoning all their . colleagues
 Emergency plans to evacuate top officials and reconstitute the government with people involved in the crisis are unrealistic . Emergency plans for evacuation top officials are unrealistic, says CNN's John Defterios .
 Essay does not mention that the authors all opposed trade of Jupiter missiles in Turkey for Cuban missiles . Essay doesn't mention that it was opposed to the trade in Turkey .
 Fear can drive both sides to moral action in the nuclear age . “We have to establish more general levels of contacts.” says Russian President Vladimir Putin .
 ‘Our great superiority in nuclear weapons contributed little to the outcome of the Cuba crisis. Secrecy and surprise are necessary during crisis negotiations,’s author says . ‘The U.S. contribution to the Cuban crisis was little,” he says .
 Khrushchev felt such confidence in his risky plan as to make no provision for any escape hatch in case that things went badly . Superpowers were not willing to go as far as nuclear war .
 Even more disastrous was Khrushchev's error in picking a fight far from home in his adversary’s front yard . Plan ahead for the possibility of failure .
 Zbigniew Brzezinski was sent abroad by a beleaguered President of the United States. “orty years ago almost to the day an important Presidential emissary was . sent abroad,’s “emissary” was sent to beleague
 Dean Acheson's mission was to brief President de Gaulle and to solicit French support in what could be a nuclear war involving not just the United States and the Soviet Union but the entire NATO Alliance and the Warsaw Pact .
 The former Secretary of State briefed the French President and then said to him at the end of the briefing, I would now like to show you the evidence, the photographs that we have of Soviet missiles armed with nuclear weapons .
 The French President responded by saying, "I do not wish to see the photographs. I do not want to see photographs"
 Do not shut out allies from evidence or intelligence during crisis management, say officials . Do not close out allies with evidence from evidence and intelligence, they say .
 The U.S. did not exploit the success to press the Soviet Union to withdraw from the Caribbean through an arrangement for the full neutralization of Cuba or to structure a more stable and more cooperative relationship with the Soviets . The United States did not use the success of the Cuban success to
 We deluded ourselves with the belief that the Soviet Union had accommodated itself indefinitely to strategic inferiority . Instead, they deluded themselves with the comfortable belief, he says .
 Take advantage of successful resolution of a crisis to push forward on national goals . Take a photo of a successful resolution to a crisis .
 World Politics, 27:2 . “We no longer live in an age in which the president`s word is trusted internationally the way Kennedy`s was during the Cuban missile crisis. His Finest Hour Now”
 Missile crisis may have represented height of American political influence abroad . Since then, United States appeal abroad has declined . U.S. appeal abroad is declined .
 The 1960s saw a surge in national anxiety over the ‘missile gap’ - demonstrated by growing fears that nuclear deterrence was inherently unstable . A growing preoccupation among strategists over the possibility of a disarming Soviet nuclear strike .
 U.S. no longer invincible from proliferation of nuclear weapons, says U.N. Secretary of State John Kerry . U.K. President Barack Obama has been criticized for being naive about nuclear proliferation .
 It must instead pursue mutual nuclear restraint in order to ensure stable nuclear order . The U.S. should instead pursue nuclear restraint, the U.N. Korea says .
 It was pushing hard to get the world community to understand, going to the UN, making a presentation, getting international opinion against the placement of Russian weapons in Cuba . The deal eventually led to the removal of the weapons from Cuba was made with the Russians .
 Define your goals clearly to your adversary and your allies during a crisis . Define goals clearly in order to avoid a crisis. Define them clearly in advance of the crisis .
 Had the democracies not become so consumed by their internal disputes, they might have interpreted the Berlin crisis for what it was-a demonstration of latent Soviet weakness .
 Henry Kissinger: 'Our reaction to the building of the Berlin Wall may have indicated a propensity to accept just about any fait accompli.’ Henry Kissinger, Diplomacy . Kissinger: ‘Our reaction . to the opening of the . Berlin Wall . may have shown a propensity
 In Cuba, however, the Soviets chose to challenge us in the most direct and brutal fashion . The Soviet Union chose to do so in Cuba, the country's most brutal way, the Cuban government .
 The dilemma of any statesman is that he can never be certain about the probable course of events . It is above all a question of the criteria of certainty by which a government operates .
 Dilemma of crises is that you must sometimes act in face of uncertainty without “hard,” or definite, intelligence, intelligence . You must sometimes sometimes act without ‘hard’ or definite intelligence, says CNN.com .
 Include individuals with different perspectives in decision-making process during crisis . Include individuals from different perspectives during crisis. Include individuals who have different perspectives on crisis .
 The 1962 Cuban missile crisis is highly instructive in regards to the demands made on the system of strategic command and control at all levels, writes Podzorov .
 Necessity for firm leadership during crisis, with minimum delegation to lower-level officials . Develop crisis management mechanism before a crisis occurs . Need politically and psychologically stable leaders; Must have control over the military . Know your adversary’s decision making process; Know your adversaries’ decision
 We were glued to the set every evening during the thirteen-day standoff . The standoff lasted 13 days .
 We’d never bothered with a bomb shelter in the house, even at the height of the Cold War . We'd never bothered to get a shelter even though it was a good idea .
 Some of our friends stocked with provisions to survive a nuclear exchange . But some of their friends did have them, fully stocked with food .
 The missiles were deployed just ninety miles from the Florida coast . The newscasters reported, probably incorrectly, that Birmingham was in range .
 "I could tell that my father was worried, and I realized this was something my parents couldn’t save me from," she said . "This was something that my parents can't save me," she added .
 "Daddy explained our country had never last a war, and he was sure we weren’t going to lose this one," he said . "He was sure he wasn't going to win this one."
 He was visibly relieved when the Soviet ships turned around, ending the crisis . He was nevertheless visibly relieved .
 I once told an audience of Cuban Americans that Fidel Castro had put the United States at risk in allowing those missiles to be deployed . Fidel Castro put the U.S. at risk, I said .
 The U.S. can be made vulnerable by rash actions of hostile actors, says President Obama . The United States can't be left vulnerable by hostile actors' actions, he says .
 What happened in Berlin was even more decisive in shaping the era between the end of World War II in 1945 and German unification and Soviet dissolution in 1990 and 1991 .
 It was unknown to him that Soviet commanders were delegated the authority to use these missiles on their own judgment . He said Soviet commanders had been delegated the power to use the missiles . The missiles were used by Soviet commanders, he said .
 Three commanding officers on one Soviet submarine were split two-to-one over whether to launch a nuclear-tipped torpedo against the U.S. Also unknown to him was that the three commanding officers split two to one over launching a torpedo .
 Kennedy’s statesmanship worked because a few lucky events prevented an accidental start to World War III .
 The world is still waiting to close the door on nuclear testing through the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty . Other means of engagement, such as geopolitical brinksmanship, only exacerbate tensions .
 We must utilize all the cooperative tools at our disposal to avoid conflict and achieve nuclear disarmament . We must use all of the tools we have to use in order to avoid nuclear conflict and avoid conflict .
 In order to avoid further nuclear confrontations, we must engage in nuclear diplomacy . We must engage nuclear diplomacy. We must avoid further confrontations. We need to engage in diplomatic diplomacy.
 For the first time the U.S. found itself in a position of 'equal danger' with USSR in what made the American ruling elite conclude that their country's enormous nuclear potential, that guaranteed defeat of any hostile country, cannot protect United States citizens . The United States is now in
 Experts predicted 80 million Americans would die in a U.S. nuclear exchange with Russia . American experts predicted that 80 million people would die if a nuclear war broke out .
 The U.S. leadership had to make a compromise in resolution of the crisis, CNN's John Sutter says . The United States had assessed such damage as unacceptable .
 Neither the United States nor the Soviet Union could consider themselves entitled to a victory in nuclear war . A parity of fear took shape, in which neither the U.S. nor the . Soviet Union considered themselves entitled .
 The strategy of nuclear deterrence is based on the idea of deterrence, it says . And that became one of the main tenets on which the strategy is based, he says .
 Mutual nuclear deterrence – that took shape during the Cuban missile crisis – turned out to be a very stable concept that transcended even the Cold War itself . Mutual deterrence took shape in the 1960s and '90s, but was never fully realized .