 The Soviet Union dispatched a fleet of commercial cargo ships filled with nuclear missiles, launchers and anti-aircraft guns to Cuba in 1962 . The ships were filled with weapons and missiles under false manifests . The U.S. sent the weapons to Cuba under false names .
 Forty thousand Soviet soldiers and technicians began clandestinely erecting an array of armed missile sites . They aimed their nuclear-tipped medium range ballistic missiles at the United States .
 Nikita Khruschev and his key military advisors thought that the missiles would remain unnoticed until November . Then he planned to suddenly reveal them to the United States as a fait accompli .
 U-2 spy planes and CIA photo analysts detected several missiles on Cuban soil in mid-October . The missiles were still under construction and their sites were under construction .
 In the weeks that followed, both nations stood at the brink of nuclear holocaust . Both nations were at the verge of a nuclear war . In the years following the war, the U.S. and the Soviet Union faced each other's nuclear weapons .
 Never before in history has the world come closer to a general nuclear war . Never before before has been closer to nuclear war than in the past .
 Ted Sorenson was one of President Kennedy's closest advisors . Ted Kennedy was a close friend of Kennedy . Ted says he's proud of Kennedy's legacy .
 This seminal event in our nation's history continues to be studied at all of our nation’s war colleges . The seminal event is studied at every nation's war colleges, including the National War College .
 There are so many supremely talented lensmasters with superb lenses on Squidoo. And I'm humbled--there were so many .
 The United States ends all exports to Cuba except nonsubsidized foodstuffs, medicines, and medical supplies . The U.S. ended all exports except nonsubidsized food and medicine .
 The Soviet Defense Ministry formally decides to send nuclear missiles to Cuba . The Soviet defense Ministry formally decided to send the missiles to the island .
 United States surveillance of heavy volume of Russian shipping bound for Cuba . U.S. surveillance of Russian ships bound for Cuban island .
 He increases U-2 overflights, concerned that the Soviets might introduce offensive weapons into Cuba . He increases overflights to Cuba .
 The first photographic proof of surface-to-air missile deployments in Cuba was obtained on August 29, 1962 . The first photo proof of Cuban missile deployments was obtained in 1962 .
 Also confirms seven KOMAR guided-missile patrol boats in the naval port of Mariel, twenty-southwest of Havana . Seven KOMar guided missile patrol boats also confirmed in Mariel .
 Reveals a cruise-missile launch site that could be launched against invading forces .
 Republican Senator Kenneth Keating warns of possible Soviet ""Rocket installations in Cuba"" and urges President Kennedy to act . Senator Keating: "Rocket installations may have been in Cuba" Senator Kennedy leads President Kennedy to act .
 This sentiment echoes in Congress through the first three weeks of October . Congress continues to be divided on immigration .
 The SS-4 Sandal MRBM could launch a three-megaton warhead to an estimated range of 1,020 nautical miles . It could reach targets as far away as Washington, D.C., Dallas, or the Panama Canal .