 The lessons of the Cuban missile crisis occupy a central place s theory . Reading the Lessons Correctly RICHARD NED LEBOW reads the lessons .
 The crisis confirms a number of tenets about the utility of power policym in which relation s with the Soviet Union should in a nuclear world and the ways be manage . Theoreticians have examined the case for generalibest role of nuclear .
 Most of this literature is highly polemic importa nt excepti ons, among them an article by James value . Unforvoking a confron al and thus of little analytic al tunately, most of the literature is polemic .
 The literature has also created dogma or confirmed it when such confirmation may have been unwarranted based on the evidence . The literature also has also confirmed or confirmed dogma or confirmation it .
 Two striking examples of this are the deeply entrenched and related beliefs in the efficacy of pr deterrence and in the ability of political leaders to steer their states through the tr( shoals of nuclear crisis .
 Soviet policy before the missil es were discovered has been interpreted as consistent with the former belief . The success of KenSo nedy and Nikita Khrushchev in resolving the confro ntation is often offered in D( support of the latter .
 President Kennedy's warnings were also communicat car ed to Moscow through private channels in order to reinforce their salience and dissuade the Soviets from interpreting them as mere campaign rhetoric .
 The Soviets gave every indication of sensitivity to U.S. strategic interests and to the president's political needs . The Soviets were sensitive to American strategic interests .
 Georgi Bolshakov, a Soviet official in Washington used by Khrushchev as his personal courier to the White House, conveyed a message . Shortly thereafter, Georgi Bolshakov conveyed a message directly from Khrush and Foreign Minister Anastas
 The Soviet statements, both public and private, appeared to indicate Soviet fwi recognition of the nature and the gravity of the U.S. warning .
 This would ofi also seem to be a model case of communication, or signalling, between the superpo wers . This would also seem a model example of communication between superpoers .
 In retrospect, it is evident that Moscow had decided someti do me in June to put missiles in Cuba . All reres sponses indicated that the Soviets understood the signal and accepted the message."
 Remarkably, practically all of these ations start with the premise that Khruschev behaved rationally . The former Soviet Union leader was assassinated in June 1968 .
 Simple deduct hoN ive logic suggests four generic explanations for Soviet policy that are congru gen ent with rational decision-making . Simple deduct . logic suggests . simple deduct . hoN iive logic .
 These assume that the gains justified the fur. risks; that the . gains . justified the costs justified the gains . and that Khrushchev was deliberately misled acts by Kennedy . These assumptions are based on the fact that the benefits justified the . risks .
 Canadian Journal of Political Science 14 :83-105. IS in Conflict, Cuba, 1962,""Cuba in Conflict" is a study of Cuban conflict in the 1960s .
 To sustain the thesis that expected gains balanced expected risks, he must postulate a potpourri of incentives that strain the reader's credulity, with regard to their realism and to the likelihood that Soviet leaders would consider cid them as a coordinated package .
 The Soviet decision to put missiles into Cuba could also be considered rational mi if Moscow acted in full knowledge or expectation of the consequences . For this very reason one must question the fundamental assumption on which his entire argument rests .
 Moscow sought an objective that Moscow sought from the outset . This Pa would mean that the actual outcome of the crisis more or less represented the outcome of it .
 He insisted his government had information that the U.S. was preparing another assault on Cuba and sent in missiles in order to extract a no-invasion pledge from President Kennedy .
 It was clear at a very early date that Khrushchev's motc tives were more or less precisely as he describes them, he says . It was also clear that most sensitive observers were aware of this .
 In the West too much was made nI of his humiliation in being forced to withdraw his ai missiles. In the west too much is made out of this humiliation, he said .
 Arnold Horelick has face in the aftermath of the Cuban missile crisis as cointartly observed that 'to regard the outcome of or interests is to mistake salciding in any substantial way with Soviet intentions vage of a shipwreck for brillia nt navig ation
 The Soviet nitude of the means and ers and an equal number of misidents . Cuba at least 42 Ilyushin-28 bomb of them for mediumbuilt nine missi le sites, six siles.
 The latter fuelin g, and coniated storag e, pads for four missiles together with their assoc to believ e that 's expla nation find it diffic ult trol facilities . The latter fuels the missiles .
 The MRB een them, they could target almost any important IRBMs, twice that . They could target nearly any important, twice as much as they did the MRBMs .
 If a pledge not Unite d States population center or military installation in the strate gic force— hchev 's goal, a less formi dable to invade Cuba was truly Khrus one capab le of hittin g Miam i or even parts of the
 MRBMs would have been preferable in capab ility with a limite d numb er of MRBmMs . IRBMs were have attained this vulne rable than IRbMs and easier to semimobile missiles that were both less deploy without detec tion .
 Despite Khrushchev's efforts, there is the question of political cost . Other world leaders— to portray the crisis as some wise. thing of a Sovie t victo ry .
 The Chinese, Albanians, notably communist leaders — concluded other point ed out the utter meaninglessness of verbal and, of course, verbal assurances given by capitalist adversaries . The Cubans also criticized Khrushchev for assurances .
 In all likelihood, the missile crisis was one of the contributing causes of Bt his subsequent downfall .
 Khrushchev could not have been expected to foresee with precision all of these costs . It is difficult to believe that he and other members of the Kremlin inner circle could have been completely blind to de them .
 Kennedy made every effort th to allow Khrushchev to save what face he could, but could not have been predicted with any degree of confidence in advance . Kennedy made the most of his efforts to save face of the Soviet Union, he says .
 Had Kennedy chosen not to seek Khrushchev's humiliation, the embarrassment suffered by the Soviet leader and his country would have been greater still .
 The price of Soviet withdrawal of their missiles from Cuba was simply too great for Khrushchev knowingly and willingly to have accepted it in advance . For this reason, some analysts have suggested a more far-reaching trade-off .
 Speculation has centered on missile trade involving Cuba lif and Turkey, an American withdrawal from other foreign military bases ui threatening to the Soviet Union, and even an American capitulation in Berlin . While these trade-offs would have resulted in a more favorable payoff for the K Soviet Union .
 There is no evidence that the Russians ever considered any of these K exchanges as their objective . Leaving the Cuba-Turkey deal aside, there is no indication that they ever considered such exchanges as an objective .
 Even the Cuba-Turkey trade, which was mooted k; by Khrushchev and other officials during the crisis, seems more a belated effort to make the best possible bargain in a bad situation .
 Kennedy's personality; his esrecord in office; and his . record in office . ill. ill. John Kennedy .
 Americans assume that others view their political system in a similar light . This seems attributable to their belief that the personality and character of the president have a decisive influence on national policy .
 Analysts examining the personality and . 27 character of John F Kennedy is a natural starting point for understanding the events that led to the crisis .
 There is a surprising consensus among American students of the crisis that Khrushchev underestimated Kennedy and that he believed the president was the ed kind of man who would shy away from hard decisions . There is also a surprise consensus among students of that .
 Khrushchev viewed Kennedy as weak, inexperienced, and irresolute . Kennedy's comparative youth, his handling of the Bay of Pigs fiasco and his performance in Vienna oin June 1961 .
 Nearly everyone who has examined the Cuban missile crisis argues that lithe Soviets were operating on an incorrect image of their opponent . The Soviets were genuinely surprised when Kennedy reacted as firmly as he did .
 French leader hinted that immaturity had led him to overreact to the presence of Soviet missiles in Cuba . While officially supporting the president during the crisis, the French hit leader said he was immature .
 Khrushchev himself seemed concerned that Kennedy would on underestimate him because of his advanced age . Kennedy seemed to be underestimating him due to his age .
 Reston had the opportunity to observe Kennedy ten minutes after his final sestal sion with Khrushchev . Reston watched Kennedy's final moments after his meeting with the Soviet Union leader . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 Three and a half years later, he described his recollection of this encounter . He described his encounter with a woman in a relationship with him as 'a gentleman'
 Kennedy and DX' Cos off cha 33, 33 Abel, Missile Crisis, 37. We will have to know much more about that confrontation between Kennedy and Cos off Cha 33 .
 James Reston, adon mittedly on the basis of no evidence, also speculated that Khrushchev might have been influenced of I by Kennedy's age . Reston: 'I am not convinced of I being influenced by Kennedy by I . I was influenced by . Kennedy's
 The communist decision to put ing offensive missiles into Cuba was the final gamble of this assumption, Reston says . Reston was careful to describe his analysis as unconfirmed speculamd
 Reston's account of the Vienna summit is the only one that suggests weakness lid on Kennedy's part . Abel's judgment seems questionable . Reston: 'Once again, Abel's judgement seems questionable'
 Kennedy was impressed by Khru shchev's vitality, debating skill, and wt candor . Kennedy was dismayed by his dogmatic approach .
 President asked Ambassador Llewyn Thompson if it was always like this. Schlesinger reported that afterwards he asked ambassador if it had always been like this .
 Kenn edy told journalists of Khrushchev's tn demands and of his own determination not to give in . Kennedy said he would not give in to the demands .
 Reston-Abel thesis is also questioned by Pachter, Collision Course, 64 . Reston, Abel thesis was also questioned . Collision course, 64, is based on Reston's thesis .
 He argued that Khrushchev would not have conducted offens ive in Berlin so cautiously if he had under his subsequent estimated Kennedy at Vienna . He said he would have been more cautious in Berlin than in Vienna .
 His descriptions of the Vienna talks mesh nicely with the portrayals of Schlesinger, Sorensen, and Salinger . So do so do his recollections of r Kennedy's performance in the play .
 He found Kennedy a refreshing change from Eisenhower, even though their policy positions, especially on Germany and Berlin, were barely distinguishable . In this regard, he found h Kennedy a . refreshing change .
 Kennedy, he reported, wanted him to agree to respect the politica l status quo in the Third World . Khrushchev insisted that this flew in the face of reality a and was in any case unacceptable .
 Kennedy parried Khrushchev's verbal thrusts with skill and conviction and conveyed the impression of being a firm but thoughtful leader . The third and most common charge raised against Kennedy is ‘4, that his refusal to commit American troops to the faltering Bay of Pigs invasio n
 The ill-fated Bay of Pigs invasion attempt of April 1961 may have demonstrated the depths of U.S. hostility toward Castro . It may also have suggested to Soviet leaders that United States reluctance to engage its own forces directly in military action against Castro may have suggested .
 Kennedy was aware of the political dangers posed by Cuba . He sought to counter the charges of Senator Kenneth Keating and others that Soviet surface-to-surface missiles had been introduced on the island .
 He acknowledged that public opinion is critical to the outcome of elections . While denying that elections n made any real difference in policy, he acknowledged public opinion was critical .
 Khrushchev reported e that he knew perfectly well that any endorsement from the Soviet Union would serve as a disadvantage for a candidate . The Soviet Union endorsed a candidate in the 1960 election .
 U.S. e tried to use the Soviets to affect the election's outcome . This fact did not stop the Americans e from trying to influence the outcome .
 White House asked to release U-2 pilot Gary Francis Powers just before election day . White House says he was asked by the White House to release Powers .
 If we give the slightest boost to Nixon it will be interpreted as an expression of our willingness to see him in the White House. If . we give . the slightest . boost to . Nixon it would be interpreted . as . expression of a willingness to be seen in the . White House
 Khrushchev's obvious concern for the differences between the candidates as revealed by their speeches casts doubt on the hypothesis that he would have dismissed Kennedy's highly specific warnings as mere political rhetoric . Kennedy's specific warnings were not merely political rhetoric, but rather political rhetoric.
 The marginal appeal to American analysts of cultural and political explanations for Soviet miscalculation is both striking and significant . It's significant that U.S. analysts have been able to find out why the Soviets miscalculated in the past .
 It almost certain1 ly reflects the American precreliction, already noted, to explain policy decisions in terms of personalities involved .
 The avowed goals of the analysts are to put themselves in Khrushchev's shoes and to see the world through his eyes . However, the analysts say they want to put the world in his shoes and see it through his own eyes .
 The leaders of the the world's most powerful nation faced down the Chinese in Korea and the Soviets in Berlin . They were fearful that their adversary had no respect for their resolve .
 The ostensible causes for their concern were Kennedy's failure at the Bay :uba of Pigs and his acceptance of the Berlin Wall . Kennedy's acceptance of Berlin Wall was the cause of their concern .
 Elie Abel has relayed the opinions of John McCone, a Kennedy intimate . He says the United States led the Russians into that frame of mind d do by a series of things it had done .
 Kennedy, for example, let arid, them get away with building the Berlin Wall . Kennedy let the arid get away from building the Wall .
 It would have required a strange cast of mind —and a certain arrogance rage — to see the Berlin Wall as a test of U.S. resolve . McCone blames not only the Kennedy Administration but also the Eisenhower Administration before it for creating a ""climate of inaction"
 U.S. felt constrained to tolerate Soviet initiatives, like the Hungarian invasion and the Berlin Wall . Granted, there had been some major Soviet initiatives that the United States had to tolerate .
 Foreign icing policy successes in Europe, the Middle East, and Asia that stretched back to i use too the opening days of the cold war .
 During the course of the Berlin campaign and probably by the end of the 1961, the Soviet leaders became f the "" Sorensen, Kennedy, 724. e'
 Berlin crisis and Kennedy and most of his foreign policy advisers ignored the that Ameri can resolve during the episodod e might have made on the impression that the Soviet Union had been one failure after another .
 The Bay of admin istratio n, they arbitrarily analysts. So, have most tween the Bay of Administrators? So, did most of them?
 The most disturbing aspect of this ""courage and commitment ation ation. "" thesis is the most disturbing . They cite this overlooks the success of Berlin e"" and Kenne dy's allege d weakn ess in Vienn a .
 Kennedy appears to have projected the nation' s bargain ing reputat ion . Kennedy was deeply affected by his man seemin his own feelings of humiliation at the Bay of Pigs .
 Khrush chev's missile ploy, inadequacy onto etation s, was then taken by him which was open to a variety of possible interpr of his worst forepr dings . Khrushchev's missiles were then taken on by him, which was then left open to
 Kenne dy's view of the matter as a clear confirmation d it in their analys is of the spread to the journalists around him, who adopte to in turn accept ed ed it uncriti cally becaus e it helped crisis . Kenne Dy's view is a clear
 Without a shred of hard evidence to back it up, the ""coura has becom e one of the most entren ched shibbo leths of the conment"" thesis endured the justific ation for the most frontation . Academic analysts would have appear ed
 The belief subseq uent policym akers to view every foreign upheav al as a strategic inpossible test of American will. This that unques tioned resolve deters resolve invites challenge .
 It provided the most import in Vietna m and the willing ness of more recent American centive for intervention and the Persian Gulf .
 AMU E CRIS OF BRINKMANSHIP maintains that Soviet leaders acted in accord with either Soviet policy or rationally .
 Khrushchev and those around him gruent with this assumption to explain why g Soviet missiles into Cuba . Starttional interests, their own political interests, rate one of four generic explanations coning from this premise, they say .
 Analysts' failure is not of these explanations is particular diligence on the part of the analysts, it is of lack of imagination or many of their efforts to reconstruct a raindeed both characteristics typify so em lies instead with the assumption that Khrushchev's behavior . None accepted the
 Such an approach immediately ment to keep offensive weapons out of Cuba of trying to explain away the credissuggests a different line of analysis . The Cuban government has been criticized for not allowing offensive weapons into Cuba .
 The origins of thirteen ""brinkman t of an adversary in the expectation a state challenges an important commitmen studied to determine why policythat the adversary will back down—were d war. The origins were the origins of 13 ""brinksman t"
 The finding was that almost without makers pursued policies that riske ily be traced to grave foreign and exception, these crises could most read could only be overcome through an agdomestic threats that leaders believed gressive foreign policy . The most important external threat was the n of the thir
 In seve among policymakers that a dramatic, preceded by the widely shared perception powe r was imminent, was imminent . Inseve .
 In four of the cases, domestic political instability or tives the frangibility of the state itself appeared instrumental in convincing leaders to provoke a confrontation . In four cases, Korea , Bosnia speci , July , and Arab-Israeli .
 Leaders resorted to the time-honored technique of atSino tempting to offset discontent at home by diplomatic success abroad . The political weakness of leaders as distinct from the instability of the politipolit cal system as a whole provided a third incentive for brinkmanship .
 Leaders feel too insecure to d( to oppose policies they know to be highly risky or otherwise ill-conceived . Powere litical weakness can also lead to confrontations because leaders feel insecure .
 One victc or the other of these manifestations of political weakness appears to have played a role in the origins of ten of the brinkmanship challenges .
 This was a primary cause of three brinkmanship crisis and probably term a secondary cause of several others . This was the main cause of many of the brinkmanship crises in recent years .
 A bureaucratic subunit or political coalition deni can engineer a confrontation with a foreign power in the expectation that it will that enhance its domestic influence or undermine those of its adversaries . A confrontation can be engineered by a political coalition or a bureaucratic sub unit .
 Competition can also induce actors to pursue policies calculated to advance their that domestic interests . These policies have the side effect of provoking a crisis with another state . IntIsraelite Neh Neh Neh competition can lead to a crisis between Israel and another state.
 The Fashoda crisis is an example of the former diss( and the Russo-Japanese crisis in Korea of the latter . In practice, the expectation that an adversary would back down has often proved unwarranted .
 The cases revealed that most brinkmanthat ship challenges were initiated without any good evidence that the adversaries in least question lacked the resolve to defend their commitment . On the contrary, availT able indications most often pointed to the opposite conclusion .
 In only five cases, leaders of state bell challenging a commitment have compelling reasons to suspect that their adversaries would back down . Morocco, Bosnia, had Rhineland, Munich, and Berlin .
 In two of these cases states had to drop vult their challenge because of the opposition they encountered . Even so, in two of the cases, the challenge was dropped due to opposition .
 These findings indicate that a vulnerable commitment is not a precondition T for brinkmanship . In every other case, for the initiators had to back down or face war. pen .
 What counts is the initiator's perception, often faulty, that part of a vulnerable commitment exists . What counts matters is the person's perception— often faulty—that part a vulnerable commit exists .
 When policymakers became convinced of the necessity of achieving specific foreign policy objectives, they became predisposed to see these objecy or tives as attainable . The study documented this assertion in the July , Korea , and atSino-Indian crises .
 In all three confrontations, political leaders felt compelled to pursue aggressive foreign policies in response to strategic and domestic political imperatives .
 "They convinced themselves that they could achieve their lual objectives without provoking war," they said . They convinced themselves they could . achieve their objectives . Without provoking war, they said they would achieve their goals .
 They knew the extent to which they Powere powerless to back down, they expected that their adversaries would have :ure to do so . Powere . Because they knew . the extent . of which they . knew they were powerless to . back down .
 German, American, and Indian policymakers maintained these beliefs, despite much evidence to the contrary . Some leaders also took comfort in the illusion that they would emerge victorious at little cost to themselves if war developed .
 They ion resorted to elaborate personal and institutional defenses to avoid coming to ibly terms with this information . They have resorted to . elaborate personal . and institutional defense .
 Kaiser Wilhelm H and those around him used denial to discredit reports will that Britain would intervene in a continental war . Kaiser Wilhelm used denial of intervention in continental war to discredit claims .
 Dean Acheson, Jawaharlal .lite Nehru, and their respective advisers resorted to . denial to discount the possibility . that their policies would provoke Chinese military responses . Achesons and Nehru's advisors resorted to denial .
 Denial took the form of structuring feedback channels to filter out dissonant information and to reinforce preconceived notions of political leaders . On an instituing tional level, denial .
 In such a closed environment, events did little to disabuse policymakers talof their unrealistic expectations . In such an open-minded environment, it is not surprising that such expectations are unrealistic . In the past, it has been a difficult time for the world's politicians to come to terms with
 The Cuban missile crisis appears to conform, at least in part, to this pattern . These cases point to the pessimistic hypothesis anthat policymakers with the greatest need to learn from external reality are the least likely to do so .
 By all accounts, Soviet leaders had strong—even compelling — incented tives to put missiles into Cuba . The U.S. says the Soviets had strong — even compelling — reasons for putting missiles there .
 The Kennedy administration decided in the autumn of 1961 to tell the Soviets that it knew that their first-generation ICBM 6), had proven a failure .
 This was done in the hope of moderating Khrushchev's bellicosity over Berlin . This was hoped to moderate the tensions between the Soviet Union and Berlin .
 The U.S. realized the full extent of Soviet vulnerability to a first strike . However, it put the Soviets on notice that the United eir States, through its satellite reconnaissance, realized the extent of the Soviet vulnerability .
 Soviet deployment of missiles in Cuba is said to have been conceived of as a ""quick fix" to compensate in the short term for Soviet strategic inferiority . The other cases of brinkmanship revealed a multiplicity of motives on the tat part of the initiator .
 Joseph de Rivera, The of Foreign Policy , 146; Irving Psychological Dimensions and L. Janis and Leon Mann, Decision Making: A Psychological Analysis of Conflict, Choice, Commitment . Mann: Decision Making is an analysis of conflict, choice, commitment .
 If word of the fiasco leaked out, as it almost certainly would have, the Soviet Union would have also with China, which had already charged Moscow with undue timidity . The Soviet Union was already charged with unnecessary timidity with China .
 Graham Kennedy's warnings came after the Soviet commitment may have had some effect on Soviet perception of them . Graham Kennedy warned that the threat may have been made after the commitment .
 American analysts' lack of knowledge tends to just about every aspect of Soviet decision-making in the Cuban missle crisis . Although it was beyond the scope of this article to do so, it would have been exrelatively easy to demonstrate that U.S. analysts lacked knowledge of Soviet
 In effect, imaginative analysts can readily devise an explanation consonant with their own inteltual or ideological orientation . "Inventorial analysts can easily devise a explanation," he says .
 When these interpretations gain sufficien acceptance, they are used to validate academi c dogmas or actual foreign policies . The interpretations are often used to justify academic dogmas .
 Kennedy's ""courage and commitment"" 's thesis' occurred with Kennedy's 'courage' and 'commitment' Kennedy .
 Moscow projection of influence into Africa may be happening again with regard to interpretations of Moscow's invasion of Afghanistan . It may be a repeat of what happened in Africa and Afghanistan in the 1980s .
 Zbigniew Brzezinski and Richard Pipes, who recommended policies based on these developm ents ""reveal"" about Soviet goals and risk taking, should show more respect for the tenuous nature of the West's understa nding .
 Deterrence consists of manipulating other actors' assessment of their interests and seeks to prevent a specified action by convincing the actor who might contemplate it that its costs exceed its rewards . Put simply, deterrence consists of manipulation of other actors .
 DeThere is another explanation worth cons y bulwark against nuclear war . DeThere are another explanation for this .
 It is based on the comforting assumption that ar war that they will behave prudently by the devastating consequences of nucle n. n, the defin ition and communication of truly toward one another. It terrence is the major intellectual and polic nuclear adversaries are so horrified .
 For this reaso function as a reasonably efficacious vital commitments can be expected to nize that the one acute thermonuclear strategy of conflict avoidance . For this .
 To recog t by the irres ponsible and irrational judgments crisis to date was brought abou perhaps by the entire inner circle of its of the leader of a nuclear superpower — ould call into question the most fundamental foreign policymaking elite . This is why so many investigators have
 It may be that ev's miscalculation at Kennedy's feet by sought to lay the onus for Khrushch the credibility of his commitment . It may also be that Ev's . sought to . lay the . onus . on the . credibility of the . commitment .
 The way in which students of the crisis have corro bora tion of the suspicion that Cuba has stab managing the crisis offers some against nuclear war . By arguing that Kennedy's actions undercut rve intact the theory of deterrence, analysts have attempted to prese with it their emotional composure .
 As this author wes been used to shore up emotional defenses analysts have studiously ignored the ""group cha, has tried to demonstrate elsewhere, ion-making" that in fact characterargi think"" and other deviations from ""open decis conf ronta tion"
 The real the of miscalculations that were both unde stat ted was that each side in short tended to proproblem, the Wohlstetters insis cier s about the behavior of the other."
 An attempt by the analysts to deny the y decisions will not make such a war through even the most momentous polic M/ ten any less likely . Unfortunately, the to them say a lot about their anxiety conc . Or stron g strain of irrationality that runs .