 Cold War was a major world event that took place from approximately 1945 until 1990 . The Cold War took place between 1945 and 1990 .
 The event is regarded as the time that the Cold War became the closest to turning into a nuclear conflict between the Soviet Union and the U.S. The event occurred in the 1950s and '60s .
 Two events occurred which caused the Soviet Union to move missiles into Cuba . The Soviet Union moved missiles into the Cuban territory .
 The U.S. placed nuclear missiles in Turkey and Italy aimed at Moscow and other strategic locations in the former Soviet Union . First, the United States had placed nuclear missile missiles in the countries of Turkey and . Italy .
 The United States conducted a failed attempt to overthrow the Cuban dictatorship government in May of 1962 . The U.S. attempted to overthrow Cuba in May 1962 .
 The Soviet Union leader, Premier Nikita Khrushchev, surfaced the idea of placing nuclear missiles in Cuba . The idea was to deter any future invasion of Cuba and also to send a message that the Soviet Union was not happy with the United States missiles aimed at them from the countries of
 Missile sites in Cuba taken by United States spy planes . U.S. President John F Kennedy visited Cuba in 1961 . Missile sites were captured by Cuban President Kennedy .
 Nikita Khrushchev and Fidel Castro reached a then secret agreement in July of 1962 and construction soon followed on several missile sites in Cuba . The United States intelligence saw these missile construction sites and on October 14, 1962 flew an United States Air Force U-2 aircraft over Cuba .
 The United States government discussed the possibility of attacking Cuba by sea and air . The U.S. government discussed a possible attack by air and sea .
 A second option was to block supplies to Cuba by using the United States’ navy and air force in order to blockade Cuba . The U.S. Navy and Air Force could also block supplies by blocking Cuba’s supplies .
 The U.S. decided to proceed with a naval and air blockade for the purposes of blocking the delivery of any further missiles from the Soviet Union to Cuba . The blockade was intended to block any further missile deliveries to Cuba from Soviet Union .
 The United States demanded that Cuba and the Soviet Union remove any current missiles already in place . The U.S. demanded that all missiles and their support systems be returned to the Soviet Soviet Union .
 The United States government under President John F Kennedy believed that the government of the Soviet Union would not agree to the demands of the United Sates . The U.S. expected a military confrontation over the issue .
 Khrushchev wrote to President Kennedy that the U.S. blockade of navigation in international waters and air space constituted an act of aggression which would go down a path of a nuclear missile war between the United States and Soviet Union .
 President Kennedy and Premier Khrushchev initiated secret communications which were conducted up to the conclusion of the crisis . Unknown to the world, the secret talks were conducted between the two countries .
 The U.S. Navy was given orders to fire warning shots at these ships and, if they did not stop, to then fire directly at them . If they didn't stop, the Navy was then ordered to shoot directly at the ships . The incident was the first time the U
 October 27, 1962 a U.S. U-2 surveillance airplane was shot down by a Soviet missile crew stationed in Cuba . The U.2 surveillance plane was downed by Soviet missile crews in October .
 At this point international tensions were very high on all sides and this could have resulted in immediate retaliation from the United States . This would have further escalated the crisis .
 President Kennedy decided to continue with negotiations in an effort to come to a peaceful conclusion . President Kennedy continued with negotiations with the Soviets .
 Public statements were made that the Soviet Union is returning their missiles in Cuba to the United Nations . This would be verified by the U.N. The United Nations would verify this claim .
 The United States agreed to never invade Cuba as well as to dismantle and remove their nuclear weapons which were deployed in Turkey and Italy . The U.S. also agreed to remove nuclear weapons from Cuba and dismantle them in exchange for an agreement .
 The tense negotiations between the U.S. and the Soviet Union pointed out the necessity of a quick, clear and direct communication link between Washington and Moscow . The tension between the United States and the . Soviet Union .
 Moscow and Washington established a hotline between Russia and Washington . As a result, the hotline was established . Russia and the U.S. are the closest allies in the world .
 Cuba believed that the Soviet Union had betrayed them, especially since Fidel Castro, the Cuban Leader, was not involved in any negotiations and the United States Naval Base in Guantanamo, Cuba was allowed to remain in place .
 The compromise embarrassed Premier Khrushchev and the Soviet Union’s government . It was a compromise that embarrassed the government and embarrassed the country .
 Soviet Union was viewed as retreating from a circumstance that they themselves started . The Soviet Union retreated from a situation that they had started .
 Some in the Soviet Union viewed what happened as a humiliation to their country’s prestige . Some in Russia viewed the incident as a humiliating humiliation to the nation .