 The Missile Crisis and the early Limitations of Satellite Imagery Intelligence . The U.S. intelligence community attempted to image the island with the spy satellite Corona .
 Insufficient resolution and cloud cover prevented this photography from providing solid evidence confirming or denying the presence of offensive missiles . Insufficient image resolution and extensive cloud cover, however, prevented this photo of the missiles .
 This event illustrates both the promise and the limits of early satellite imagery intelligence . This event was previously unaddressed either by Missile Crisis or Corona scholars – .
 It provides insight into the early imagery tasking and coordination process and demonstrates needs that drove further development of national satellite reconnaissance in the years that followed .
 A very secret, very expensive piece of technology lifted off from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, on 29 September 1962 . The Thor Agena-D rocket was launched atop a secret, expensive technology .
 A Corona photographic reconnaissance satellite hurtled beyond the atmosphere and began circling the globe at ground speeds approaching 17,000 mph . Mission 9045 was launched at a time when the satellite was launched from orbit . The Corona satellite is now orbiting the globe around the globe .
 The satellite travelled in a near-polar orbit, maximizing geographic coverage over the rotating planet below . The satellite was launched in 2007 in near polar polar orbit .
 Mission 9045 would acquire images over at least 72 known airfields, missile complexes, nuclear test sites, military garrisons, air defense sites, naval bases, and industrial facilities throughout the Warsaw Pact and the People’s Republic of China .
 No copyright protection is available for such works under United States Law . In accordance with 17 U.S. law, no copyright is available under U.N. law .
 Corona photos of ballistic missile complexes in the USSR helped dispel the IC’s ‘missile gap’ concerns in the fall of 1961 . Corona photos were taken of missile complexes .
 Corona imagery also provided accurate mapping data for nuclear targeting efforts, enhancing the credibility of America’s strategic deterrent . Corona imagery was also used to map targets for the U.S. military .
 Mission 9045 over Cuba captured a little-known ‘first’ in the realm of satellite reconnaissance . The imagery acquired by Mission 90 45 over Cuba marked a little known 'first' in satellite reconnaissance.
 The images were meant to fulfill a time-dominant, crisis-monitoring requirement just off U.S. shores . Rather than gathering encyclopedic information about Soviet and Chinese military and industrial infrastructure .
 The frames were acquired to sharpen IC understanding of a potential threat by confirming or denying human intelligence reports from Cuban sources of a Soviet military buildup on the island, possibly to include nuclear missiles .
 The story of Corona over Cuba, then, is akin to Mark Twain’s ‘The Private History of a Campaign That Failed’ – the story of something that did not happen, an explanation of why it didn't happen, and the processes by which nothing was done .
 Neither the voluminous literature surrounding the Missile Crisis nor the many historical treatments of the Corona program have dealt with this event . The Corona program was a major success in Corona .
 CIA Handling of the Soviet Build-Up in Cuba, 1 July– 16 October 1962 ‘’ accessed 4 June 2014. ’
 Mission 9045 imagery acquired over Cuba in early October 1962 was of insufficient resolution to allow photo interpreters to either confirm or deny the presence of the missiles reported on the island . The images were of good quality by the standards of the KH-4 camera system, though of insufficient .
 The Soviet deployments would not be confirmed by the IC with overhead photography (this time from a U-2 aircraft) for another two weeks . The IC would not confirm the Soviet deployments until October 6 .
 The reporting of these deployments to the Kennedy administration would come perilously close to what might be considered warning failure, as many sites were very nearly operational by the time President Kennedy was briefed of their existence .
 After the Missile Crisis, photo interpreters reexamined the Corona Mission 9045 film to determine . where and when Soviet medium range and intermediate range ballistic missile (MRBM and IRBM) sites had been under construction .
 Strategic Air Command photo interpreters concluded that even with the benefit of hindsight, clear indications of these missile sites still were not discernible on the Corona photos .
 Corona imagery against deployed Soviet missile forces demonstrates some of the early limitations of satellite imagery . This de facto field test of Corona imagery shows some early limitations .
 President's Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board assembled chronology of the Missile Crisis in early 1963 . NRO Director Dr. Dr. John Avlon was a key NRO director in the days leading up to the crisis .
 The incident provides critical insight into the evolution of U.S. national-level imagery intelligence organizations and technology from the 1960s to the present day .
 Aerial intelligence collection dates back to late eighteenth-century French balloon reconnaissance . Aerial surveillance is a form of form of intelligence collection .
 Use of cameras from aircraft from aircraft first became a valued tactical/operational intelligence collection discipline during the First World War .
 ‘Photoreconnaissance’ became a true source of strategic insight for the Allies during the Second World War . Such ‘photorecononnaissance’s became a source of . strategic insight .
 British and American aircraft carried powerful cameras on long-distance missions to photograph Axis heavy industry, lines of communication, major garrisons, aviation facilities, and naval bases . Images returned safely for analysis by national-level intelligence organizations .
 Allied photoreconnaissance provided counts of German transport flotillas in French ports along the Channel during the invasion scare of September 1940 . Photo reconnaissance provided hard evidence of German long-range weapons developments .
 Photoreconnaissance acolytes lobbied for peacetime – or ‘pre-hostilities’ – strategic reconnaissance of the Soviet state . With the end of the war and emergence of the USSR as the most significant threat to U.S. national security .
 Photoreconnaissance platforms of 1945–55 confounded by the vastness of the world . The geographic vastness that seemed ripe for overhead collection also confounded photographers .
 Flights by such aircraft gathered some useful intelligence over Vladivostok and the Kola Peninsula . But nothing over aircraft plants, missile facilities, and nuclear testing grounds thousands of miles into the interior .
 Some peripheral flights were lost to Soviet interceptors . All risked conflict with the USSR, drawing diplomatic objections and threats .
 The U-2 was intended from the start as a specialized reconnaissance platform . Such limitations led to the development of the aircraft .
 The U-2’s operating altitude would be its primary protection from Soviet air defenses rather than armor or armament . Essentially a jet-powered sailplane, the U.2 would be a jet powered sailplane with no armor or armor .
 The IC hoped that the U-2 would, at least for a time, fly undetected by Soviet air defenses . The IC also hoped that it would, by at least, be able to evade Soviet air defense systems .
 Individual aircraft and naval vessels could be distinguished from one another by type and missile airframes . Such resolution meant that, beyond identifying the locations and general layouts of airfields and missile test ranges, individual aircraft, naval vessels were distinguished from each other by type .
 U-2 photos provided the IC with reliable counts of Soviet intercontinental bombers, details on the status of ballistic missile development, and critical mapping of Soviet infrastructure necessary for target development .
 Eisenhower administration approved the development of photoreconnaissance satellites under U.S. Air Force project WS-117L nearly four years earlier . The IC had been working on the project since then .
 Photoreconnaissance satellites offered another major development in Imint collection . Just as the U-2 marked a great leap forward from cameraequipped multipurpose aircraft, photoreconsnaissance satellites .
 Unlike the U-2, satellites operated beyond the range of Soviet air defenses . Satellites were launched in the 1950s and 1960s .
 WS-117L ‘Corona’ was the simplest of several options considered . The satellite program emerged from project WS-116L 'Corona' was the first satellite program .
 The project’s more complicated ‘Samos’ concept included a complex film readout system which would develop and scan photographs in orbit and then transmit the images back to earth via radio signal .
 Corona returned the hardcopy film back to earth via a film pod ejected from the disposable satellite . Corona simply returned the film pod back to the earth via an ejecting film pod from a disposable satellite.
 The pod was de-orbited and drawn down via parachute to a designated drop zone for mid-air recovery by a transport aircraft with a trailing trapeze hook . The pod is then drawn back to a drop zone using a parachute to recover .
 The film return system proved more reliable than Samos and yielded better image resolution . The film-return system proved to be more reliable .
 Mission 9009 orbited the earth 17 times and returned photographs of some 1. million square miles of Soviet territory – more total area coverage than all 24 U-2 flights had acquired over the USSR . The Corona mission took place on 18 August 1960 .
 Only large infrastructure like airfields and port facilities could be seen . With a resolution no better than 35 feet, only large infrastructure was seen .
 Smaller infrastructure with specialized functions like air defense sites could be identified by unique layouts . But only if such layouts first had been developed from earlier analysis of higher resolution imagery .
 Photo interpreters identify ‘hexadic’ or ‘Star of David’ configuration of SA-2 sites created by the cleared cable paths and internal roads linking six missile launch rails sited around a central radar .
 After May 1960, the increasing age of U-2 coverage over the USSR would begin to render some of these signatures obsolete .
 Legacy U-2 photos would not be able to provide insight into site configurations developed after May 1960, of the configurations of new equipment fielded after that time, or of field-deployed equipment not arranged in the doctrinal manner .
 Weather over the ‘Sino-Soviet land mass’ also proved a significant limiting factor for Corona . In addition to lower resolution, lower resolution was also a problem .
 U-2 missions focused on a single, narrow mission track and could be timed to take advantage of clear weather over desired areas .
 Missions could be rerouted in flight by pilots to cover secondary and tertiary objectives if the primary were cloud covered .
 Corona launches could be timed to take advantage of favorable weather predicted over certain sites in the USSR . Early versions of the satellite were preprogrammed and could not use new weather information as it became available .
 Even the best weather conditions over one location would still leave many objectives within the coverage footprint obstructed by clouds during any single pass over an area . Moreover, even the best . weather conditions . over one . location .
 According to one history of the program, roughly 50 – 60 per cent of desired sites photographed by early Corona missions were covered by clouds .
 Corona program made some progress in the realm of resolution in its first two years . Corona program makes progress in these areas, especially in the area of resolution .
 Original camera system, later issued the descriptor ‘Keyhole-1’ or ‘KH-1, yielded only 35-foot resolution . The original camera system was issued with the descriptor 'Keyhole 1' or 'KH 1'
 The KH-2 and KH-3 systems operated through the end of 1961 offered maximum resolutions of 25 and 12 feet . The follow-on KH-1 and KH2 systems operated until end of the 1960s .
 Corona coverage over Soviet missile development sites sufficiently dispelled U.S. Air Force claims of numerical Soviet intercontinental ballistic missile superiority by providing solid evidence that only 10– 25 such systems likely were operational . At this resolution, comprehensive . coverage over . Soviet missile sites dispelled United States Air
 The KH-4 camera system was first successfully orbited in February 1962 . It offered a maximum possible resolution of 10 feet . It was the first camera system to successfully orbit the Earth .
 Corona revealed the limitations of Nikita Khrushchev’s strategic arsenal to U.S. policymakers . The Soviet premier decided to take a different approach to improving his position in the balance between East and West .
 Khrushchev developed and initiated Operation ‘Anadyr’, a covert maritime shipment of Soviet R-12 (SS-4 ‘Sandal’) MRBMs, R-14 IRBMs and associated ground, coastal, and air defense forces to Cuba
 Khrushchev hoped to approach parity with U.S. nuclear capabilities targeting his country . The USSR already ringed the USSR with missiles, aircraft, and radars in Europe, Turkey, Iran, and the Far East .
 The details of Anadyr were tightly controlled and known to only a select few in the Soviet establishment . It was effectively prevented any early discovery by Western intelligence services .
 By August 1962, while the United States had discerned isolated portions of this operation, it did not recognize them as such . The U.S. was not aware of the existence of the operation .
 Imint – as it had since its inception – would play a confirming role in the US intelligence collection posture . Imint will continue to be a confirmed role in U.S. intelligence .
 Maritime patrol aircraft photographed Cubabound Soviet vessels in the Caribbean . They identified deck cargo associated with guided-missile patrol boats and light bombers .
 U-2s photographed MiG-series fighter aircraft and missile sites around the island . The U.S. military aircraft were photographed by U.2s .
 On 29 August, a U-2 flight photographed nine SA-2 SAM sites on the island . The U.S. Navy says it has no plans to use the island in the future .
 Director of Central Intelligence John McCone says advanced air defense systems portended a larger, sensitive deployment of some kind, potentially involving offensive missiles . Director McCone took the stance that such advanced air defenses could signal a larger deployment of the system .
 Others say deployment of short-range air defense systems was consistent with the Soviet characterization of their activities in Cuba – provision of defensive arms and advisors for Cuban security . Others, however, took the view that deployment .
 The Photo Gap and the Missile Crisis, senior administration officials took a cautious approach to this problem and revised U-2 flight paths over Cuba, producing a 39-day ‘photo gap’ in effective coverage .
 In a 10 September meeting with the Committee on Overhead Reconnaissance , Secretary of State Dean Rusk and National Security Advisor McGeorge Bundy increased the number of upcoming U-2 flights over Cuba but moved their paths offshore to avoid SA-2 envelopes and minimize violations of Cuban airspace .
 Rusk and Bundy’s decision was guided, in part, by a 30 August violation of Soviet airspace by an Alaska-based U-2 . The move was guided by a shoot-down of a Taiwan-based SA-2 on 8 September by a Chinese SA-1
 SA-2 had proven its effectiveness against U2s, shooting down two between May 1960 and September 1962 and accounting for a third over Cuba during the Crisis . This shift to peripheral coverage for more than five weeks in September and early October effectively blinded United States aerial reconnaissance .
 General Marshall Carter, Deputy DCI, proposed on 19 September that the U.S. Intelligence Board consider both manned, low-altitude coverage by RF-101 reconnaissance aircraft and ‘Fire Fly’ drones – Ryan 147A small pilotless jets – to collect the imagery that
 DIA attempted to make use of what was at the time a long-term, strategic research capability as a tactical reconnaissance platform . The U-2 was intended to satisfy the collection need in the midst of overflight restrictions .
 Bundy and Rusk’s concerns about vulnerability to air defenses and associated political risks to US-Soviet-Cuban relations . Imaging Cuba with a satellite would mitigate those concerns .
 Despite early Soviet protests regarding overflights in 1960–1, satellite reconnaissance did not carry the same political ramifications as did aircraft overflights .
 This swath size seemed to offer a footprint much better suited to the task of conducting a broad area search for Soviet military deployments than the 'soda straw' view of the U-2 .
 Corona’s lower spatial resolution, however, remained a drawback when compared with U-2 imagery . Some within the IC continued to press for coverage over the USSR rather than Corona as late as 1962 . Corona was the subject of the 1960 Powers shoot-down .
 The board later accepted DCI McCone’s recommendation to seek satellite rather than U-2 coverage of the area . The board agreed to the recommendation . The decision was made after the board accepted the recommendation to look for satellite coverage .
 DIA request for Corona imagery over Cuba was approved and an engineering pass was programmed into Mission 9045 to photograph the island on 1 October . The promise of space-based imagery collection would be balanced against the practical utility of the lower resolution photographs it would acquire .
 Mission 9045 lifted off from Pad 2 at Vandenberg AFB’s 75-1 launch complex . Corona over Cuba over Cuba at 4:35pm32 on 29 September . The mission was the first of its kind to fly over Cuba .
 9045 began its 30th pass around the earth, travelling over the western hemisphere . USIB and COMOR prioritized targets across Eastern Europe, China, and the USSR .
 The relatively crude nature of satellite camera control meant that film was exposed on the command of a preset command tape . Under certain circumstances, the camera could be manually overridden by signals from the ground .
 Only 12 of the 52 frames actually imaged the island; the rest covered the empty Caribbean to the north and south . Only 12 images were taken of the island .
 Frames 11– 22 of the ‘D30’ pass (the 30th pass around the earth with the satellite vehicle travelling north-to-south – ‘down’) covered much of the western half of the island, from La Coloma and Pinar del Rio
 The weather was mostly cloudy over the center of the island, especially over the island .
 Unpaved roads appeared as tiny white lines in the clear patches between the cloud banks . A patchwork of multitonal rectangles marked the presence of agricultural fields in the cloud clouds .
 In clearer areas of the main island, several towns could be seen, including Paso Real De San Diego, Consolación del Sur, Vegas, Palos and the port of La Coloma .
 Both the airport at Nueva Gerona and the famous Presidio Modelo prison – where Fidel Castro and his brother Raul spent time from 1953–5 – could be seen . The prison where the Castro brothers spent time was seen .
 What could not be seen, however, were clear signs of Soviet missile deployment . The Soviet Union did not deploy any Soviet missile systems .
 Corona program was named at a meeting on 10 March 1958, either after a cigar or a nearby typewriter . According to the latter, the Corona program is named after the name of a cigar .
 Corona Satellite Imagery Coverage over Soviet Ballistic Missile Sites in Cuba, 1 October 1962 . Corona satellite Imagery coverage over Soviet missile sites in Cuba .
 Haze heavily masked the area west-southwest of Havana . IRBM sites around Guanajay and four MRBM sites were under construction .
 The original SAC textual interpretation report from the mission, if it survives, could not be located . If it survives it can't be located, it could not find the original report .
 Initial exploitation readouts of the rest of Mission 9045 were performed and published by NPIC analysts in Washington, DC, on these two dates . Initial exploitation readsouts were published on both dates .
 The schedule of satellite missions approved for the remainder of the year will probably provide some intelligence, but it is not timely enough nor of sufficient resolution to meet our needs . The schedule is not enough to provide intelligence for the U.S.
 The next mission will not be till mid-November, some 11 weeks after the last good coverage of some areas . Some areas are still recovering from the last mission .
 FIRE FLY may also prove highly useful in covering specific objectives of limited scope . It may also be highly useful to cover specific objectives in limited scope.
 Small area coverage obtainable by FIRE FLY makes it less desirable than the U-2 . The small area coverage obtainedable by FireFly makes it more desirable .
 Tactical reconnaissance using RF-101/F8U-1P aircraft may also prove feasible . The U.S. Air Force may also be able to conduct reconnaissance missions in the near future .
 COMOR recognizes the increased risk to the aircraft in light of the SA-2 and MIG21 aircraft present there . The COMOR says it recognizes an increased risk .
 Administration officials approved the request for resumed flights over the Cuban interior on 9 October .
 SAC U-2 photographed Soviet MRBM sites near San Cristóbal two weeks after Corona imaged that same area, albeit to insufficient effect .
 Interpreters simply could not make use of Corona imagery to satisfy the question at hand . Corona imagery was not available to use in this case .
 10– 15 foot resolution imagery did not provide any diagnostic information about their presence . It was entirely possible that Soviet missile sites were under construction in the photographed areas .
 At this scale, even with magnification, baseball fields were among some of the smaller objects that could be identified on the ground below by their distinctive layout . Baseball fields are among the objects that can be identified by their unique layout .
 Corona photography was checked against the photography obtained from the SAC-operated U-2s . It was possible to relate some of the earth scratchings appearing in the Corona photography to the construction at some long range missile sites which were detected beginning October 14 .
 Without the U-2 photography however, these scratchings could not possibly be identified as being associated in any way with MRBM or IRBM construction .
 Corona photography might have resulted in the identification of the IRBM sites but not of the MRBM sites . The photographic interpreters at the Strategic Air Command believe that if all nine sites had been completed at the time of the Corona pass, the . pass, might have led to the identification
 The Limits of Early Satellite Imagery Intelligence Resolution and Interpretability . Spatial resolution – relative size of objects that can be discerned on overhead image – is a critical component of the intelligence value of the imagery .
 Lowenthal’s point is a valid one – resolution is merely one measure of the potential intelligence value of a reconnaissance image . Different intelligence questions require different levels of resolution . The critical nature of resolution can be seen clearly in the example of Mission 9045 .
 The layouts in the fields west-southwest of Havana and along the north-central Cuban coast did not necessarily conform to what interpreters had seen on previous imagery coverage over Europe and Eurasia . As such, their layouts in those fields did not .
 All of our experience, up to that point, had been visual imagery of an MRBM site on KH-4, which might cover half an inch to an inch on the film itself . Even after you blew it up a hundred times it was still – basically, all you were seeing
 "We didn't know what we had. So when we got into Cuba, and we saw these areas in the woods . We didn’t know what it was," he says . "We saw these places in the . woods . . .
 NPIC interpreters identified the SS-4 sites around San Cristóbal on the 14 October U-2 coverage . It was the specific vehicles and equipment at the sites rather than any layout pattern that allowed NPIC to identify the sites .
 Small signatures – tents, trailers, erector stands, and support vehicles – were diagnostic details that positively marked the areas as MRBM sites . These small signatures were only visible on higher resolution U-2 imagery .
 The vague ‘scratchings’ seen by SAC interpreters on the 1 October Corona imagery were, out of context, ambiguous . Corona imagery was seen by interpreters as part of the SAC .
 They could not convey any definitive information about the presence of Soviet military deployments . The Soviet Union did not provide definitive information on the Soviet deployments .
 Early photoreconnaissance satellite managers and planners regarded resolution as an essential metric for evaluating the utility of imagery and distinguishing between different reconnaissance functions .
 NPIC Director Arthur Lundahl distinguished between photography of ‘surveillance’ character (which he characterized as ‘satellite photography which can provide general wide-area coverage’ and ‘technical intelligence’ value .
 Footnote 43 continued stereoscopic effect for the viewer which allowed the height and depth of objects to be seen in three dimensions . He also provided thoughts on the practical value of KH-4 imagery and its resolution shortcomings .
 The engineering pass programmed over Cuba collected imagery with the aft camera alone, yielding only monoscopic imagery . It was programmed to collect images of the Cuban island nation .
 The examples are not intended to discredit the MURAL program which has been extremely successful and has brought in a wealth of exploitable photography . Instead, the examples are intended to indicate that there is room for improvement .
 IC members also addressed the potential for further Soviet surface-to-air and surface-tosurface missile deployments outside of the USSR . The use of overhead imagery of varying types to monitor such developments was discussed .
 It is imperative that we employ every intelligence resource to ensure that these military buildups do not include weapons that would extend the Soviet range of striking power to areas of the world which now feel relatively secure .
 At the present time there is insufficient evidence of missile-related activities in the Middle East to justify a request for U-2 coverage, says the U.N. agency .
 COMOR recommends the acquisition and interpretation of satellite photography on these areas as a necessary preliminary to any request for a development of U-2 capability in the Middle East . COMOR: "Satellite photography is necessary preliminary"
 KH-7 ‘Gambit’ and KH-8 'Gambit-3’ provide point-imaging, high-resolution functionality . Resolution limitations of a broad-area system like Corona drove the need for follow-on systems .
 The KH-9 ‘Hexagon’ system was fielded in 1971 . The IC finally possessed complementary film return systems that could perform both surveillance and technical intelligence tasks .
 Photo interpreters could magnify individual areas within a broad area Hexagon image or rely on the Gambit point imaging system for even-higher resolution .
 It would have been much easier to deal effectively with a Soviet missile threat in Cuba . Administration had detailed information on the degree of Soviet preparation for quick use of strategic striking forces .
 Charyk wants to accelerate Gambit progress and to improve the quality of Gambit products . This was a central consideration in the decision to launch Gambit .
 "The prospect of a program delay rather than acceleration, and of photographic degradation rather than improvement, certainly influenced him," he says .
 The haze over San Cristóbal and Guanajay on the afternoon of 1 October significantly reduced the interpretability of those areas and further precluded any chance the SAC interpreters might have had of identifying ballistic missiles there .
 The November 1962 Lehman Report goes so far as to characterize the results of 9045 over Cuba as being unsatisfactory ‘largely because of cloud cover’ The Corona was launched at such a time as to photograph Cuba earlier in the day on 1 October .
 Even on 10 – 15 foot resolution imagery, it is conceivable that unique scarring or vehicle/equipment concentrations, if seen without any haze, might have at least cued photo interpreters to military activity in the area .
 It is tempting to consider what warning of the deployments a day or two earlier might have meant for the Kennedy administration’s response to the development .
 The fallacy of such counterfactual considerations is that they fail to appreciate the Corona 50 Berkowitz, ‘The Soviet Target’,105.105 .
 Corona satellites and their mission parameters were optimized to collect encyclopedopedic information about Soviet strategic infrastructure . Corona satellites were designed to collect information about Russia's strategic infrastructure. Corona satellites launched in the 1980s .
 Any other potential functions would be performed only after that need was satisfied . Any other function would only be performed after the need is satisfied .
 Even once a system was developed to allow for remote changes to the preset program, it remained very difficult to take advantage of changes in meteorological reporting .
 Each mission launch was timed to maximize coverage over an area of high priority when that area was in the daytime portion of earth’s rotation and predicted to have favorable weather . The launch times were timed to coincide with favorable weather conditions for each mission .
 Corona was to photograph the suspected Soviet antiballistic missile site at Sary Shagan . Corona was on the Kamchatka Peninsula, where he photographed the site .
 By designing 9045’s launch time and orbital parameters to pass over Kamchatka during cloud-free daylight hours, subsequent passes over Cuba would occur during a less-than-optimal window . 9045 will launch over Cuba during the next two days .
 The photos taken over Cuba in the late afternoon of 1 October were heavily cloud covered, as one might expect in the early Caribbean fall at that time of day . As a result, the photos were taken over the island .
 Images taken in the early morning hours would have had a better chance of seeing cloud-free areas, but only if coverage of this area were made the central priority of the mission . Images taken by Major Heyser’s U-2 were acquired just after 7:30am
 DIA request initially tacked on in informal manner as part of an engineering pass . Cuba requirement was naturally accorded less priority and would image in a time consistent with the Corona’s ability to image Kamchatka .
 More film could be carried and longer missions could be flown . This meant more imaging opportunities and greater flexibility to reprogram imaging windows .
 DMSP was designed to take wide-area photographs of cloud formations to provide the United States military and IC with accurate weather forecast data in near-real time . DMSP is a family of satellites in polar, sun-synchronous orbits .
 This system began transmitting valuable cloud cover data from orbit to help plan aerial and satellite reconnaissance missions in October 1962 – just too late to help Mission 9045 . Mission was launched in 1962, but it was too late for mission 9045.
 The attempt to use Corona over Cuba illuminates some early satellite imagery tasking and coordination pitfalls .
 Use of Corona to image Cuba came at the request of DIA, not CIA, says DIA . A request for Corona imagery over Cuba appears to initially have been made in a roundabout, ad hoc manner through the CIA's Office of Special Activities .
 We have covered our tracks occasionally by advising Reber of what we have done, but Reber cannot really speak for the Group . Unless we are more attentive to walking the straight and narrow when it comes to targeting, then decay can rapidly set in to our whole system re COMOR activity
 In other words, what we are tacitly advocating, and in fact accomplishing, is that the guy who controls the program controls the targeting . In other . words, the government is trying to control the targeting of people who target them .
 I think the thread of corruption is there and should not be woven to a great pattern by our own indulgence . I have possibly blown this far out of proportion, but I think it is there, and I think I have blown it far out .
 Mission 9043 launched on 17 September, three days after the memo date . Mission data available through CREST references no 9043 coverage over Cuba . Alternatively, this possibly referred to Mission 904 which launched three days later .
 The lack of coordination and use of proper channels appears to have plagued the exploitation of the 9045 film over Cuba . McMahon’s memo also appears to be a problem .
 PFIAB Chronology explicitly references Mission 9045 photos of Cuba being exploited by interpreters at SAC . Most likely the 544th Reconnaissance Technical Group at Offutt AFB in Omaha, Nebraska, not NPIC, despite the latter’s heavy involvement in exploitation of U
 If NPIC interpreters did examine the film, there is no record of it in any of the 9045 initial exploitation reporting from 7–8 October or any other documentation available through National Archives .
 NPIC analysts did not review Cuba coverage on 9045 as a formal requirement as part of initial priority exploitation . No such notations are made for any targets in Cuba .
 Committee on Imagery Requirements and Exploitation replaced COMOR in June 1967 . Committee was more focused on rationalizing competing national requirements for satellite and other specialized sources of overhead imagery .
 Ernest May, for example, states that ‘ . . . related intelligence enabled the president and his associates to judge not only . whether missile sites in the Soviet Union were making launch preparations, but also . other types of Soviet forces were moving into position for offensive operations .
 Whatever the source of that information on 25 October – Humint, Sigint, or otherwise – it was not Corona . Corona .
 Mission 9046A, carrying a low-resolution KH-5 mapping camera system, was launched on 9 October and recovered on 13 October . The mission was launched in October carrying a small-scale mapping system .
 Any Corona-derived information on military sites inside the USSR available on 25 October would have been derived from Mission 9045 coverage .
 Limitations on image resolution, weather, and community tasking and exploitation coordination led to development of U.S. satellite reconnaissance capabilities over the next several decades .
 Corona program was the early promise of the Corona program and the challenges it faced in providing comprehensive answers to diverse intelligence questions . Gambit, Gambit-3, Hexagon, and the eventual near-real time, digital systems that provided the next great leaps forward can only fully be understood
 This discussion of Corona over Cuba reminds students of intelligence history that such forward leaps only came in response to earlier shortcomings and unsatisfied needs .