 During the Kennedy and part of the Johnson administrations, he was the member of the Policy Planning Council responsible for North Africa, the Middle East and Central Asia . He was also a member of North Africa and the Mideast .
 President Barack Obama talks with Ukraine's Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk at the conclusion of their bilateral meeting in the Oval Office . President Obama met with the Ukrainian Prime Minister in the White House on Monday .
 A 19th century experiment by Heinzmann found that if he placed a frog in boiling water, the frog immediately leapt out of the water . If he placed the frog in tepid water and then gradually heated it, it stayed put until he was scalded to death .
 I see disturbing elements of that process today as we watch events unfold in the Ukraine confrontation, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 "They profoundly frighten me and I believe they should frighten everyone," he says . "I believe they are profoundly frightening," he adds .
 "We do not see a specific moment in which we must jump or perish," he says . "But they are so gradual that we do see a gradual decline in our humanity," he adds .
 I was one of three members of the ""Crisis Management Committee" that oversaw the unfolding events . I was a member of the committee that oversaw events in Haiti .
 Secretary of State Dean Rusk, Under Secretary George Ball, Counselor and Chairman of the Policy Planning Council Walt Rostow and Under Secretary for Political Affairs U Alexis Johnson listened to President Kennedy's speech .
 The account Kennedy laid out was literally terrifying to those who understood what a nuclear confrontation meant . Kennedy's account is literally terrifying for those who knew what it meant .
 We each knew what our government was seeking -getting the Russian missiles out of Cuba . And we knew what we were seeking - getting the Russian missile out of the country .
 "We were poised to do that by force if the Russians did not remove them. Finally, we were poised ... by force," he said .
 Previous to that day, I had urged that we remove our ""Jupiter"" missiles from Turkey . Previous to this day I had called for the removal of the missiles from the country .
 This was important, I argued, because they were ""offensive"" rather than ""defensive"" weapons . This is important, he argued, as they were offensive rather than defensive weapons .
 Liquid-fired rockets required a relatively long time to fire; thus, they could only be used for a first strike . The reason for this distinction was that they were obsolescent, liquid-firing rockets that required a long-time to fire .
 Getting them out enabled Chairman Nikita Khrushchev to remove the Russian missiles without suffering an unacceptable degree of humiliation and risking a coup d’état . Getting them from the Soviets was a way to avoid a humiliating coup d'état, says historian .
 Following the end of the crisis, I wrote the ""talking paper" for a review of crisis, held at the Council on Foreign Relations, with all the involved senior U.S. officials in which we carefully reviewed the ""lessons"" of the incident .
 "What I write below in part derives from our consideration in that meeting. What I write is based on that meeting," he writes .
 It is essentially the consensus of those who were most deeply involved in the crisis . That is, essentially, the consensus from those who have been involved .
 A Top Secret Department of Defense war game was designed by Thomas Schelling of MIT . Schelling set out a scenario of a sequence of events -ironically placed near the Ukraine - to show that the USSR would accept an American nuclear attack .
 It was, as he said, in our ""post mortem"" discussion of the game, a vindication of an extension of the theory of deterrence . The game was, for example, an extension to the 'deterrence' theory .
 It was to prove that we need not fear a reaction to a limited nuclear attack, says David Cameron . It was meant to show that we can react to a nuclear strike, he says .
 Henry Kissinger popularized the idea in his 1957 book Nuclear Weapons and Foreign Policy . Henry Kissinger had popularized this idea in a 1957 book about nuclear weapons .
 In the post mortem discussion of the Game I argued, and my military, intelligence and diplomatic colleagues on our war game team agreed with me, that the idea of limited nuclear war was nonsense .
 If it did not retaliate with a ""victory-denying response,"" it would be overthrown and executed by its own military and security forces . If the U.S. did not respond, it would have been overthrown, executed by the country's own forces .
 The original attacker would in turn have to avenge the retaliation or it would face a similar fate . The attacker would then have to be avenge himself or face the same fate .
 Since both major nuclear powers had targeted cities, casualties could reasonably be estimated at between ""several hundred million to 1. billion people"" with an additional 1 billion people seriously injured . Sagan: Casualties could be estimated as between 100 million and 1. billion people .
 Massive fires set off by the bombs would carry soot into the atmosphere, causing temperatures to fall to a level that would freeze ground to a depth of about 3 feet . Massive fires would carry the soot to the atmosphere .
 Planting crops would be impossible and such food as was stored would probably be contaminated . The few survivors would starve so the few survivors of the disaster would starve . The only survivors would survive would be the survivors .
 The hundreds of millions of bodies of the dead could not be buried and would spread contagion . The bodies would not have to be buried, would spread the spread of contagion.
 The destruction of the ozone layer would remove the protection from ultraviolet rays and so promote the mutation of pyrotoxins . As the soot settled and the sun again became again visible, the sun was again visible .
 Expert panel of 40 distinguished biologists warns of 'species extinction' among plants and animals . Panel of experts says 'human survivors' would be overwhelmed by the 'overwhelming' effects .
 These dangers, even if today they seem remote, clearly demand that we do every thing we possibly can to avoid the fate of the frog . The dangers of this type of frog are very real, and we need to be aware of them .
 History does not exactly repeat itself, but, as Mark Twain has pithily said, subsequent events sometimes ""rhyme"" with those that went before . Mark Twain said, "History does not repeat itself"
 "Playing with fire is literally playing with fire. So pressing the leadership of the opponent in this direction is literally ... playing ... with fire," he said .
 President Kennedy and the rest of us understood in the 1962 crisis . Even if leaders want to avoid conflict, events replace policy and leaders become bystanders . Events replace policy at a certain point in their mutual threats .
 Among the Russians, as their history illustrates, a similar code of action prevails . Among the Russian population, Russia has a history of fighting in Russia's history .
 The Russians can be expected to block, by any means and up to any cost, intrusions into their zone . Having suffered, as fortunately we have not, horrifying costs of invasion throughout history but particularly in the 20th century, the Russians can expect to block .
 Those who advocate what the British once called a ""Forward Policy,"" now see the necessary first steps to be the arming of the Ukraine . The UK once called it a "Forward Policy"
 There is no way in which we or the European Union could arm the Ukraine to a level that it could balance Russia . And finally, 8) There is also no way to arm Ukraine to balance Russia, writes Andrew Hammond .
 What we are now doing and what we contemplate doing is not in our interest or in the interests of the Ukrainians and is perceived as a threat by the Russians . What we now do and . what we are . contemplating doing is . not in . our interest, it's not in the
 "We cannot deliver on the policy we would encourage the Ukrainians to adopt by arming them without a war," says President Vladimir Putin . Putin: "We are not going to be able to do this without war"
 Economic sanctions are a form of that war, but they are unlikely to accomplish what we have been proclaiming . The U.S. has been waging a war against Russia in Syria . Russia has been accused of using economic sanctions against Syria .
 The logic of events could force the Russians and us to the next step, says Vladimir Putin . Russia and the West could be forced to take further steps, says Putin . Putin: "Russia and us are not going away, but we are going to go further"
 "We should stop doing what does not work and not in our interests nor in the interests of either the Ukrainians or the Russians," says President Vladimir Putin .
 Think how we would have reacted if Mexico tried to join the Warsaw Pact . Think how it would have been if Mexico joined the Soviet Union . Think what would have happened if Mexico had joined the Warsaw pact .
 Even before the issue of nuclear weapons arose, the U.S. tried to overthrow the pro-Russian Cuban government in the Bay of Pigs invasion . We tried on several occasions to murder Fidel Castro, President Obama says .
 For two generations we have sought to isolate, impoverish and weaken that regime, we failed . We failed, so for two generations, we have tried to isolate and weaken the regime, he says . We fail, he writes .
 We would be foolish to expect that the Russians will not react similarly when challenged by an anti-Russian Ukrainian government . We would also expect that Russia will react similarly if challenged by Ukraine's government .
 To press for inclusion of the Ukraine into NATO is not only self-defeating, it risks overturning a generation of cautious moves to improve our security and increase our well-being . It is pointing us toward at least a cold -if not a hot -war -war .
 Russia will likely back down in response to U.S. actions on Ukraine, says Peter Bergen . Russia realized that Cuba was part of our sphere of dominance and so backed down in the Missile Crisis, he says .
 The danger is that for domestic political reasons -and particularly because of the urging of the neoconservatives and other hawks - we may not accept this geostrategic fact . The danger, of course, is that, for domestic . political reasons .
 Then, conflict, with all the horror that could mean, would become virtually inevitable . Conflict would be virtually inevitable. Then, it would be almost inevitable .
 Russia and Ukraine share an objective which the United States also emotionally shares . This is because the Russians and Ukrainians share a goal which the U.S. also shares .
 The shared objective is that the Ukraine become a secure, prosperous and constructive member of the world community . The Ukraine is a secure and prosperous member of a world community, says President Vladimir Putin .
 Ukrainians can only become a member of the Ukrainian parliament in Ukraine . Ukraine is the only nation in the world to have such a large number of Ukrainians .
 Ukrainian society and political organization have far to go to reach their joint objective . But as all qualified observers have seen, Ukrainian society must still go far to reach our joint objective, says President Vladimir Putin .
 The best we can do is to remove outside deterrents to the growth of a healthy, secure and free society . We need to remove these deterrents from our society, says Simon Tisdall .
 A first step in this direction could be for the Ukraine to join the European Union . The Ukraine is already in the process of joining the EU, according to the Russian president .
 This, in general terms, should be and for our own sakes must be, our strategy . This, for example, is our strategy. This, as well as our strategy, we need to be our own .
 Kissinger realized his mistake and partially repudiated what he had argued in a later, 1961, book, The Necessity for Choice . Kissinger later repudiated the idea in his 1961 book, "The Necessary for Choice" Kissinger's book was published in 1961 .
 Jimmy Carter's Presidential Directive 59. This was apparently embodied in President Carter's directive 59. Jimmy Carter was president of the Carter administration .
 It was carried forward in President Reagan's Fiscal Year 1984-1988 Defense Guidance . The decision was part of the Reagan administration's defense policy .