 This All About History Annual is a collection of the very best content from the magazine's last 12 months . It contains some of the most interesting people and stories from throughout history .
 You'll find tales that are known and loved, like the legend of Robin Hood, alongside lesser-known but equally incredible stories, including the Night Witches of the Second World War . You'll also find tales from the World War Two World War One .
 We have delved right back into Ancient times to get to know Cleopatra and the Aztecs . We have explored the most amazing discoveries that helped form the modern world .
 We have included a broad selection of subjects from the ubiquitous to the unknown, to educate and excite as you expand your knowledge of the past .
 We hope that the subjects inside will help you discover historical eras, icons and moments that you had never imagined, while learning about the stories you thought you knew in a new light . The subjects inside include historical eras and icons that you never imagined .
 Nothing in this bookazine may be reproduced in whole or part without the written permission of the publisher .
 All copyrights are recognised and used specifically for the purpose of criticism and review . All of the content on this article is published under the use of this copyright .
 The bookazine has endeavoured to ensure all information is correct at time of print . Prices and availability may change at the time of publication .
 This bookazine is fully independent and not affiliated with any way with the companies mentioned herein . It is solely independent of any companies mentioned here .
 Using Saturn rockets and veterans of Projects Mercury and Gemini, the process of developing a safe rocket that could make the journey and a safe return began . The rocket was developed by the team of engineers and scientists .
 In 1967 the test launch of Apollo 1 ended catastrophically on the launch pad . Electrical fire in the cabin caused the death of all three from asphyxiation before help could get to them .
 Each successive mission flight brought them closer to their goal of the Moon, testing everything from navigation systems, docking procedures and lunar suits . The Apollo missions were the first manned missions to the moon .
 On 16 July 1969 within John F Kennedy's anticipated time frame the Apollo 11 mission launched on board a Saturn V rocket, containing astronauts Neil Armstrong, Buzz Aldrin and Michael Collins . The mission was the first of its kind to carry out on a mission to earth .
 It entered lunar orbit on 19 July, as Collins remained in the craft and Armstrong and Aldrin descended in the Lunar module Eagle . The mission to the moon was the first time the two men entered the lunar surface .
 After fears that they had overshot their landing target, they set down on the Sea of Tranquillity . The landing was the first time they had set down in space .
 Aldrin took communion while Armstrong prepared to activate the shuttle's camera and step outside . Aldrin and Armstrong were on board the shuttle at the time of the ceremony .
 He descended the nine rungs to the Moon's surface and broadcast to a captivated world . The words that would echo throughout history would echo in history .
 President Nixon would make a phone call to the astronauts on the Moon . It was a demonstration of how far the entire human race had come .
 Athens was one of the most prosperous of some 1,500 city-states in 6th-century-BCE Greece . Athens was initially governed by an elite ruling minority . The city-state was ruled by a ruling minority of the elite .
 Internal unrest and costly conflict with its neighbours brought the city to its knees . Internal unrest led to the collapse of the city's economy .
 Democracy was seen as an experiment that could unify society . Taking inspiration from rival Sparta, with its unusual egalitarian ethos, democracy was seen to be seen as a unifying society .
 Every Athenian citizen was expected to get involved in the ancient city of Athens . A randomly drawn, rotating council took care of day-to-day government .
 Democracy was a totally different beast then with women, foreigners and many others not represented . Forward thinking as it was, democracy was a very different beast .
 It laid the foundations for what is now a cornerstone of the modern world . Nevertheless, it laid the foundation for what it is now an important part of the world .
 Firefighter Mickey Kross was inside the World Trade Center's North Tower when it collapsed . His words resonate even for those who witnessed that indelible news footage .
 Five terrorists had taken over and flown the plane into the iconic building that would later tumble down around Kross . Just 46 minutes after American Airlines Flight 11 took off in Boston, five terrorists had hijacked the plane .
 United Flight 93's passengers reclaimed the plane and ensured it crashed out of harm's way in a Pennsylvanian field . The plane crashed in a Pennsylvania field .
 Everyone has an opinion about what caused 9/11, but more clear-cut are the effects of the attacks . The effects are clear and clear of what caused the attacks, according to CNN iReport .
 In the immediate sense, it resulted in the deaths of 2,996 people the most ever in a single foreign attack on U.S. soil . The most ever attack on American soil was the 9/11 attack in 2001 .
 The first production line was probably the greatest gift Henry Ford gave to the manufacturing industry . This production process brought the car to the engineers, rather than the other way around .
 It halved the time it took to create the Model T Ford and dramatically cut costs . Ford's Model T was created in the 1930s and was the first car to be built in New York .
 Franz Ferdinand and his wife fell to the gunshots fired by 19-year-old Serbian nationalist Gavrilo Princip, as they drove through the city .
 Austria's retaliation was backed by Germany, and Europe exploded into conflict . Austria's retaliatory action was supported by Germany and Austria's government backed by Austria .
 The first vaccine for smallpox came courtesy of a microbiologist . Vaccine was created in 1796 . The vaccine was first available in England in 1797 .
 Edward Jenner took pus from Sarah Nelmes 1 cowpox blisters and successfully inoculated an eight year-old boy . Jenner tested the rumour that milkmaids were immune from cowpox .
 Up to 80,000 of the population of 350,000 were killed immediately in Hiroshima . The United States dropped an atomic bomb on Hiroshima in 1945 .
 The effects would be felt for decades as illness caused by the radiation brought the death toll to 140,000 . The effects of the radiation would have been felt for years . The death toll from the radiation was the highest in the world's history .
 Second attack on Nagasaki three days later ended the war at a terrible cost . Nagasaki was the first atomic bomb to land on Japan's island .
 Berlin Wall became a symbol of the oppression of the Iron Curtain . Built by East Germany in 1961 to keep the ‘fascist’ elements of the West out of the country .
 With the decline of communist Russia, the wall could no longer be defended and was torn down by the people amid much celebration . In May 1926, Detroit, Henry Ford instigated a second American revolution .
 Ford Motor Company workers reduced their working week from six to five days and their working day from nine to eight hours . Ford's working week was cut from six days to five and their day was reduced from nine hours to eight .
 Productivity at Ford soared as a result of the new, two-day weekend . The practice was so successful it was adopted worldwide and is standard today .
 The Vandals had already sacked and pillaged Rome once and, seeing Rome's weakness, others were rallying against their ruler . Vandals (an East German tribe) had already sacked Rome once .
 Germanic general Odoacer finally entered the capital and forced the last emperor of Rome, Romulus Augustus, into exile . He forced the Roman empire into exile after the death of Romulus August .
 When the outnumbered Athenians attacked first at Marathon, the Persians struck for the weak middle of their line . The Persian attack was the first Persian attack on the outnumbered Athens .
 The strongest troops were on the Athenian flanks, which decimated the invaders . The strongest forces on the flanks of the Greek city decimated them .
 The forces of democratic Greece had not only stood up to the forces of Persia, they crushed them, they did so . The Greek government had stood up and defeated the Persian forces . It was the first time a Greek democracy had taken over Iran .
 The American colonists' patience with the British parliament was at an end . The British Parliament was at the end of the 17th century .
 The Sons of Liberty in Boston threw three ship loads of tea into the harbour . The shocked British were set on a path for war after the tea was thrown in Boston .
 Napoleon Bonaparte requested protection from the British, who allowed him on board the British ship Bellerophon . He was held in custody for three weeks before exile to the island of St Helena in the South Atlantic .
 Three years after the Emancipation Proclamation, Abraham Lincoln pushed for the 13th Amendment to be approved by Congress . The amendment was passed in 1865 .
 Even without the Southern representatives the vote barely made it through, but its success marked the start of a long fight for equality . The vote was the first in a long struggle for equality in America .
 Constantine’s new faith began the Christianisation of the Roman Empire . Constantine converted by his vision and his victory, Constantine began to Christianise the Empire .
 Suffrage groups across the Western world began to make their voice heard in the mid-to-late 19th century . By the beginning of the 20th century, women were still not counted among the number of those eligible to vote .
 It took over 50 years, World War I, and the tenacity of leading suffragette societies to get women the vote for the first time on both sides of the Atlantic . It took more than 50 years for women to have the right to vote .
 D-Day and the first step towards ending the Second World War . Allied Troops under the direction of General Dwight D Eisenhower and Bernard Montgomery . The assault on the French coast was the largest amphibious attack in history .
 The Allies had mounted a decoy operation, Operation Fortitude, in an attempt to convince the Axis forces that they would attempt to cross at Pas de Calais, where the English Channel is narrowest . In the preceding months the Allies had . mounted a . attempt to . convince the .
 Operation Overlord had been poised since 1 May but favourable weather conditions were vital to the plan's success . The operation was launched on 1 May and has been taking place since then .
 Operation Overlord finally went into effect at 6:30am . Allied forces set foot on Normandy beaches at 6.30am on June 4, 1944 . Operation overlord was postponed several times .
 The troops taking part in the amphibious assault comprised 72,215 British and Canadian soldiers, and 57,500 Americans . The troops took part in an amphibious invasion of the U.S.
 They were divided to attack five targets, designated Utah , Omaha , Gold , Juno , and Sword . Over 80 kilometres of coastline, they were attacked .
 Omaha was the most heavily defended, with its cliff-top bunkers having not suffered much damage from the previous aerial bombardment . The attacking U.S. forces took heavy casualties before taking the beach .
 The German military was not alerted that an invasion was occurring until 4am . The invasion occurred at 4am. It was the first time the German military had been alerted to the invasion .
 After midnight on 6 June, American, British and Canadian paratroopers were dropped into Normandy to facilitate the attack at Utah beach . Utah beach would give the Allies access to Cherbourg harbour, which would be used in the attack .
 Due to the adverse weather conditions, many of the paratroopers missed their targets . But vital locations like Pegasus Bridge and the town of Sainte-Mere-Eglise would be captured .
 At 6.00pm, Prime Minister Winston Churchill announced the invasion in the House of Commons . Winston Churchill made the announcement at 6:00pm GMT .
 By midnight, each of the five beaches had been taken and the liberation of Europe from Nazi Germany was well underway . By midnight the liberation had been complete, with the liberation taking place in Germany .
 First crusade to retake the holy lands of Israel was originally to help the Byzantines repel the warring Turks, but soon evolved into a holy war to take back Jerusalem . The first crusade was launched by the Catholic church by Pope Urban II in 1095 .
 The successful campaign was the first of many 'holy crusades' that transformed the Middle East . The first 'holy' crusade was the success of the 'holy war' in the region .
 Columbus's journey across the Atlantic brought him to the Bahamas and on to Cuba . Despite attempting to find an alternate route to the lucrative Indies, Columbus found the Bahamas . Columbus's first voyage to the Americas ended in 1492 .
 Word spread about his discovery of a new continent across the ocean . Although he wasn't the first European to set foot on the Americas, word spread .
 The first magnetic compasses were thought to have appeared in China during the Qin Dynasty . They were not used for exploration, but rather for geomantic divination and feng shui .
 Magnetic compass continued to develop in China until its first recorded use for navigation in 1117 . It was used by European sailors soon after, revolutionising navigation and opening the oceans .
 The hunt for oil in Saudi Arabia began in 1922 but it wasn't until 1938 that eager American Max Steineke finally discovered a reserve of black gold in 1938 .
 The discovery changed the world's energy practices and its relationship with the Arab world . The discovery of the discovery of an oil-rich Arab state changed the way the world looked at energy production .
 Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels' Communist Manifesto is one of the most influential political manuscripts . Marx and Engels' Manifesto was published in the early 1900s . It was published by Engels and Marx and Marx Marx .
 The ethos of power to the working class has been the mandate of many coups since it was first published by German political refugees in London . It has been a mandate for many of the most successful coups .
 The Spanish discovered a wealthy native people known as the Aztecs in the Yucatan Peninsula in Mexico in 1519 . The Spanish expanded their control of the region beyond Mexico in the 1521 .
 The Aztec population was devastated by new diseases like smallpox and were overthrown by the better armed invaders . British physicist Tim BernersLee wanted to take it to another level with hypertext and the internet for sharing information .
 Prototype software for the basic web system was demonstrated in 1990 on a NeXT computer . It rapidly spread to other research labs and universities around the globe .
 With the development of versions for more ubiquitous Mac and PC environments, the World Wide Web was ready to make the leap from academia to mainstream . The Web is now available for Mac and Mac users and Mac owners .
 On 30 April 1993, CERN posted the source code for anyone to use, totally free of charge . The source code is now available for download at CERN's request .
 This rich nation used its pure gold currency as a statement of wealth and power . It was used to be a symbol of wealth, power and wealth .
 James Watt invented the steam engine in 1796 . The steam engine was used to drive steam trains across the country . Watt's invention was the first steam engine to be patented .
 Steam-driven machines could do the job of dozens of workers in a fraction of the time . It kick-started the Industrial Revolution so factories could be built anywhere, not just near rivers .
 JFK is assassinated in Dallas, Texas, 22 November 1963 . JFK was being driven through Dealey Plaza in Dallas with his wife Jackie . He was shot and killed .
 His death has fanned the flames of growing mistrust and fear of their government . His death sent shockwaves through the American people and fanned .
 There are those who still claim it wasn’t Lee Harvey Oswald who pulled the trigger . There are still some who still say it was Oswald who shot the gun .
 Bolshevik forces laid siege to Winter Palace in Petrograd on 25 October 1917 . Bolshevik forces finally gained entrance in the early morning and placed the members of the unpopular provisional government under arrest .
 The Russian people rallied behind the party of Lenin and Trotsky, who promised an exit from the First World War, food and equality . The party promised to end the war, escape from hunger and leave Russia .
 The National Assembly of nobles, clergy and common people gathered at the Palace of Versailles, Paris, on 20 June . Political tensions were high when the National Assembly was held at the palace in June 18th .
 King Louis XVI excluded them and convened in the tennis court where they swore to create a new French constitution . The French Revolution was sowing the seeds of the French Revolution to come . They found Louis XVI had excluded them .
 Charles Darwin's discoveries on his voyage to South America on HMS Beagle would forever change our understanding of the world around us . Darwin's discovery of the continent in South America would change our world's understanding .
 He published On The Origin Of The Species on November 24, 1859 . His theory of natural selection was based on the idea that one species could change into another .
 Apartheid was legislated in 1948 in South Africa, with four racial groups classified and forced into segregation . Apartheid ends in 1994, with apartheid ending in 1994 .
 After trade embargoes in the Eighties and growing civil unrest, the gradual breakdown culminated in Nelson Mandela's victorious abolition of the internationally hated regime .
 Lenin was bedridden and mute following three strokes by the time of his death . Lenin died at the age of 21 in 1924 .
 Trotsky seemed to be the natural successor to Stalin, but he was efficiently sidelined and expelled by Stalin . Stalin paved the way for one of history's most appalling dictators, Stalin .
 Writing sprung out of a need to keep records in court when memory proved insufficient . Writing was invented in 3200 BCE .
 True writing is distinct from early bronze age symbols and the use of digits to keep records . True writing has been distinct from the early use of numbers and symbols to mark records .
 It must be a strange thing, to invent something years before anyone could even conceive of needing it . The TURING MACHINE was invented in 1930 .
 Alan Turing invented the first computer in Turing's work . Turing created the first machine in 1916 . Turing's creation of the Turing machine was his invention of the computer .
 Turing's invention was an intangible mathematical theory for a computer, rather than a working machine . Turing's Bletchley Park machine wasn't used until Turing's tenure at the park . Turing was the only person to invent a machine that could actually work .
 Rosa Parks was arrested for refusing to give up her seat in the 'coloured' section of the bus for a white passenger in Montgomery, Alabama, in 1955 . She became the rallying point for a nation that would no longer accept the injustice of racial segregation .
 John Logie Baird contributed two major improvements to the television . Baird was the first to transmit an image a flickering greyscale photograph reproduced just a few feet away from the source of the image . Baird also contributed to the creation of the first television television .
 The exact site, and the exact reason, of the invention of agriculture has yet to be pinpointed . The exact date of the discovery of agriculture is still not known .
 Various theories have been put forth as to why, when and how men and women began to tend to and rear their own crops and livestock, with many variations on similar themes . Men and women tend to tend and rear livestock and livestock .
 The site of the invention of agriculture was in what is now the known as the Fertile Crescent, in the Middle East . However, it is generally agreed that the innovation occurred shortly after 9000 BCE .
 Climate change meant that the Levant area (in the Eastern Mediterranean) became the ideal site for settlers . The Levant area is in the eastern Mediterranean region .
 As the region became temperate and annual, plants like wild wheat and barley began to grow that produced large seeds rather than thick wooden stems or casings to protect them from the elements .
 Natufian tribes of that region were traditionally hunter-gatherers . But the everincreasing proliferation of this vegetation made settlement an attractive proposition .
 Steps would have to be taken to ensure they did not drain the area of resources . However, steps would be needed to ensure the area was not drained of resources.
 Opinion differs as to whether the decision to try rearing crops was pre-meditated . Many believe that it was a one-off experimentation rather than a strategy designed to provide them with a regular form of sustenance .
 Climate change and increasingly settled populations meant dabbling with crop-development was inevitable . However, the combination of climate change and climate change meant that this dabbling was inevitable, say experts .
 The technology began to improve and these tribes began to rear livestock, which thrived in the Levant region, and tended to renewable crops . The technology was improved and the tribes thrived .
 The nomadic culture by which which the human race lived would forever be altered . The nomads would have changed the way they lived in their nomadic lifestyle .
 The first step towards human society as we know it today, with its vast towns and cities, all started with agriculture . Agriculture is the first step to human society, and agriculture is agriculture .
 In early 1776 a political pamphlet titled 'Common Sense’ was circulating the colonies . The pamphlet was circulated by the colonies and was circulating in 1776 .
 Thomas Jefferson penned a more formal statement calling for a split from Britain . A few months later, Thomas Jefferson called for a break from Britain in a formal statement .
 The final engrossed declaration wasn't signed till 2 August, but America continues to celebrate the day it first voted for 'Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness' at the Second Continental Congress .
 There are thought to be 26 surviving copies of the original Declaration in existence today, 21 owned by various U.S. institutions .
 Galileo was tried by the Inquisition for heresy in 1663 after agreeing to his theory . His theory that the Earth revolves around the Sun, took more than a century to be accepted, and Galileo was found guilty .
 Newton’s interest in the mechanics of gravity was piqued by observing an apple dropping from a tree during a garden stroll may have been exaggerated . Newton's story about how he observed an apple drop from a . tree may not be exaggerated .
 His interest in Universal Gravitation led to his work Principia, published in 1687 . However, that interest led to him defining the term universal Gravitation in his work .
 The telephone is one of the most important inventions of the modern era . The telephone was invented in 1876 and has been controversial since then .
 Bell was officially credited as the inventor because he got his patent filed hours before a strikingly similar patent by Elisha Gray . But some believe he stole a critical line from Gray's patent to get his approved first .
 Only Greek men could enter, there were far fewer events than there are today, and many participated completely naked . Many of the events were held naked .
 20 years of Chinese civil war were ended by Chairman Mao’s defeat of Chiane Kai-shek . The ____ country then established itself as a communist nation .
 American fears grew, strengthened by the knowledge that they had tried to intervene and failed . The U.S. government failed to intervene .
 Diplomatic relations between the two nations would only be resumed with Richard Nixon's visit to China in 1972 . Diplomatic ties were only resumed in 1972 after Nixon's trip to China .
 The Puritan Pilgrim Fathers believed Satan’s grip on England was strengthening .
 The Mayflower settlers set sail on the Mayflower for Virginia to create a new community . So they set sail for Virginia, creating a new town .
 Plymouth Colony was founded in 17th century after being blown off course after 65 days at sea . They landed near Cape Cod on site of a deserted Native American settlement . They founded the historic Plymouth Colony on the site of the deserted settlement .
 The tide of the war in Vietnam was irreversibly turned when the Tet offensive began in 1968 . North Vietnamese forces mounted the multi-pronged, well-planned Tet offensive .
 Despite its straightforward appearance, it deals with the complex and interchangeable relationship between mass and energy . Despite its simple appearance, this is not the first time we have seen this type of image .
 The equation was born from a discrepancy between the work of earlier physicists like Isaac Newton, Galileo and James Clerk Maxwell . It unravels why the speed of light is constant, as well as the concept of space-time . The equation is a result of a disagreement between Newton and Maxwell .
 Karl Benz is credited as the creator of the first petrol-powered automobile . Karl Benz invented the car in 1885 .
 The Benz Patent Motorwagen was more of a tricycle with the vital part of his invention his patented two-stroke petrol engine attached to it .
 Emperor Pu Yi succeeded to the throne at two years old in 1908 at age of two . Pu Yi was the last Chinese emperor to die in 1812 . He was the first Chinese Emperor to die of natural causes .
 Aged five, he was forced to abdicate by the Xinhai Revolution that turned China into a republic . He was forced abdicated by the revolution that turned the country into a democracy .
 Strangely, he was allowed to keep his title and many of his privileges . Strangely he was permitted to keep many of those privileges .
 He fled after World War II and, when recaptured by China, became gardener at Beijing gardens . When recaptured, he worked as a gardener in China .
 Nelson Mandela was tried by the South African government for sabotage, treason and violent conspiracy in 1964 and sentenced to life imprisonment . Mandela is freed 1990 after serving life in prison .
 He served over 25 years of his sentence and was released in 1990 . He served in a dramatically different political environment in 1990 in a dramatic political environment .
 He then went on to become leader of the ANC and abolished apartheid in 1994 . He was leader of South Africa's first black South African government . He abolished apartheid and became South African president in 1994.
 A blood-curdling countdown of history's deadliest monarchs . Murderous Kings is a list of the most powerful monarchs in the world .
 In many ways these monarchs were more similar to modern dictators than the rulers that we know today . The monarchs of this era were more like modern dictators .
 Murder was often a means to a political end, while crimes of passion would rarely be met with any immediate consequences . Murder was also a means of political ends, and was often met with no real consequences .
 The kings were forced to fight for their ultimate power, often using fear, war and murder to stay at the top . They often used fear and murder, among other methods, to stay in power .
 The position of king was a precarious one and, driven by this fact and an unhealthy dose of paranoia, certain monarchs left a bloody trail through history . Some monarchs were driven to war by paranoia and paranoia, and some left a trail of bloodshed .
 Several of these kings earned their place on this list with their military campaigns . Several of the kings were involved in the creation of this list .
 With an almostconstant state of conflict, territories were lost and won with great frequency, which, of course, meant that they had to be reclaimed .
 The glory of a kingdom was not just determined by its size necessarily, but by a king’s unwavering belief that the lands at stake belonged by right to the throne . The glory was determined by the belief that a king had the right to claim the land .
 Edward I’s brutal campaigns in Wales and Scotland feature in this roundup of deadly royals . Charles II of Navarre's ludicrous notions of what belonged to him feature in the list .
 Murder was often the simplest way to ensure that anyone plotting against the king was removed . Murder is often the easiest way to remove anyone from the king's domain .
 The monarch's essentially free rein to end the lives of their subjects remained . Even with the introduction of the Magna Carta in England in 1215 and the emergence of Parliament, the monarch's power remained .
 Flimsy evidence could be put forward to prove a case for treason and conspiring against the monarch . Henry VIII demonstrated on several occasions during his reign as Henry VIII .
 Any hint of rebellion would have to be squashed quickly and brutally, as Louis I of Aquitaine did to great effect . Meanwhile, with the whole country watching, any hint of revolt would have had to be quashed quickly .
 The reason behind a king's bloodthirsty nature would now be attributed to some form of mental illness . In other cases, the reason behind the king's bloody nature would have been attributed to mental illness, according to the king .
 Purity of the bloodline comes with a price, as lineages would abruptly end with deformities, congenital illnesses and insanity . Lineages would end with offspring suffering from deformities and insanity, as well .
 The counsel Aethelred received was little and poor . However, a better translation of the moniker would be 'ill-advised' However, it is generally agreed that the counsel he received was poor .
 He was too young to have been complicit in the murder of his older brother . The crime was carried out by those loyal to him in order that the younger sibling would take his place .
 The reputation of the murdered boy grew after his death . It would become increasingly difficult for Aethelred to unite his subjects . This meant there was a lot of mistrust surrounding the young monarch .
 The necessity for a united British army was urgent with a renewed threat from the north . And the necessity for united British Army was urgent, he said .
 The Danes had recommenced raids along England's coast, breaking the treaty they had made with Aethelred's father, Edgar . The treaty was made with Edgar, the son of the Danes, who died in 12th century .
 After a serious defeat at the Battle of Maldon in 991, Aethelred began paying tribute to the Danes in return for peace . The English suffered a serious defeat at the Battle of Maldon, in return to peace .
 The Danes were hard to appease and had restarted hostilities by 997 . However, the Danes had resumed hostilities by the end of 997.
 In 1002, Aethelred reached breaking point and took drastic action . The king took action in 1002 . He took action against the king's actions .
 Danish leader Sweyn's sister, Gunhilde, was killed by Aethelred's attempt to invade Denmark . Sweyn invaded in retaliation, leading to the downfall of the king . Gunilde's death was the result of a Danish invasion of Denmark .
 Louis I Louis the Pious was, in many ways, as sensible a leader as his nickname would suggest . He was as sensible as he was, as well as the title-winning monarch . Murderous Kings is the 10th anniversary of his death .
 His father, Charlemagne, appointed him King of Aquitaine at the tender age of three . His father was appointed him at the age of 3 .
 When Louis nearly died in an accident in 817, he decided to ensure that, if he suddenly died, there would be a neat plan of succession to set out who ruled what in the Frankish empire . Louis wanted to ensure there was a neat succession plan for his successor .
 The will described his son Lothair's position as ‘overlord', implying that Italy would be submissive to him . He confirmed that his nephew Bernard would remain the king of Italy, but the will described him as 'overlord'
 The wording of this document did not please Bernard and, spurred on rumours that Lothair was to invade, he set about preparing a rebellion . The document was published in the 18th century .
 Louis I immediately took an army to confront his errant nephew . However, word quickly reached Louis I of Bernard's plan and the king immediately took the king to confront him .
 Bernard was shocked by the speed of the king's reaction and went to try and negotiate, before being forced into surrender . Bernard was forced to surrender by the king after being forced to leave .
 He sentenced his nephew to death, before deciding that he should be blinded instead of death . The punishment was apparently merciful, according to his uncle .
 Bernard spent two days in unbearable pain before dying anyway . As a result, Bernard was indeed blinded, while Bernard was actually blinded, he spent unbearable pain . Bernard died anyway .
 The legacy of this killing would haunt the deeply religious ruler for the rest of his life . Three civil wars would follow but the legacy would haunt him for the next few years .
 Charles II's reputation as a bloodthirsty king is very much rooted in his heritage . The reason for Charles' reputation is that he is descended from his family . The king's reputation is rooted in the fact that he was born in England .
 Charles was the last of the Habsburg line a lineage that was so devoted to preserving the purity of its bloodline through inbreeding that it eventually led to a man like Charles . Charles was a member of a family that was devoted to inbreeding to preserve its purity .
 The king was cursed to spend his life suffering from various illnesses . He was in a similar amount of mental anguish as the king . The king spent his life in mental anguish .
 He was just three years old when the throne became his mother, Mariana, became queen regent . He was designating much of the work of governing the country to advisors .
 His mother remained regent long after Charles could have taken kingship himself, but it was decided that such a move would be unwise . Charles' mother remained in power long after he became king .
 A struggle for power began when Mariana was exiled, and Don Juan Jose took responsibility for the country and the king . Mariana had been exiled when she was exiled from the country .
 Charles's illness was grotesquely misunderstood at the time interpreted as a sign that the king was probably bewitched; he would even undergo an exorcism in the final years of his life . Charles's illness was interpreted as an attempt to convince him that he was possessed .
 His worst crime was the 1680 auto-de-fe (display of public penance and executions) in Madrid, during which many heretics were burned . Many heretics are burned .
 Charles II attended the trial and burnings, though the executions were probably ordered by someone else . Charles II was likely to have ordered the executions, though someone else ordered them .
 He ordered the assassination of the Constable of France in 1354 and made a deal with the English, forcing the French King John II to make peace . He made the assassination and made peace with John II's French king John II .
 John grew tired of his treachery and finally arrested him in 1356, only for Charles to be broken out in 1357 . Charles was finally broken out of captivity by John's son Charles .
 When John II agreed to a peace treaty with the English, Charles II freed all the prisoners in Paris . Charles II also freed the prisoners during the war .
 Charles U-turned and took the opportunity to lead the aristocracy at the Battle of Mello and the subsequent massacre of the rebels . With the city on the verge of revolution, Charles led the aristocracy to the victory .
 He blindly swore patriotism and honour while consistently reaching out to the opposition in the hope of a better deal . He swore allegiance to the country and the people of India .
 His meddling in the war between Castile and Aragon proved disastrous . He staged being captured to avoid having to participate in it . His meddling with the war proved disastrous for him .
 Towards the end of his life he tried to convince English king Edward III to invade and overthrow Charles V . As well as being involved in two attempts on Charles's life, he also attempted to kill him .
 When his scheming with Gascony against Castile went wrong, Navarre was invaded in 1378 and he was forced to agree to an alliance with Castile and France . Navarre had been invaded by the French and Castile .
 He burned to death in 1387 allegedly when the sackcloth filled with brandy he was bathing in caught fire . It is said to have been caused by a fire caused by the brandy filled sackcloth .
 King Herod ordered that his wife be executed if he didn't return from an expedition . Many would claim that King Herod committed his most heinous deed with the Massacre of the Innocents . King Herod I ordered his wife to be executed .
 The story of the slaughter of all boys in Bethlehem under the age of two is only found in the Bible . However, there are no historical records from the time detailing such an atrocity . The slaughter is believed to have taken place in Bethlehem .
 He was prone to fits of mental instability, which made his fierce love for his wife all the more dangerous . The king's love of his wife was so fierce that he was frequently unstable .
 At one point, before leaving for a political expedition, he ordered that Mariamne should be executed if he didn't return from this expedition because he couldn't face the idea of her being with another man . He ordered that she be executed before he left for this expedition .
 Herod's jealousy was exploited by his sister Salome who despised Mariamne . Salome convinced Herod that his wife was plotting against him . Herod's sister, Salome, convinced him that she was plotting to kill her .
 Antipater Herod’s only son by his first wife was also executed for the same reason . Two years later, Herod's son by first wife also was executed for same reasons . Antipaters Herod was the only son of Herod's first wife .
 The man dubbed 'Lionheart' spent most of his life fighting for his country . He was found guilty of murdering 26 people . His crimes include murder, rape and murder .
 Richard first took up arms against his father, Henry II, in 1173 . He continued to aggressively pursue the throne until Henry's death in 1189, when some quite reasonably suggested that Richard had driven the king to his grave .
 Blood was spilled on the same day that Richard took the crown, when the barring of Jewish figures was made . Richard set off for the Holy Lands in 1190 to raise a new army .
 He blazed a bloody trail through Sicily, Cyprus and Cyprus before arriving at Acre, Israel, in 1191 .
 Following the successful siege of the city, he ordered the execution of 2,700 Muslim prisoners . Following the siege, he also executed 2, 700 Muslim prisoners, including 2,000 Muslims .
 Richard was forced to retreat in 1192, only to be from the coronation was misinterpreted as an captured in Vienna by Leopold V . Once ransomed, order to instigate violence against all of London's Jews . The crusade eventually ground to a halt .
 Richard ordered the executions of those who took part, but the instances of copycat 'Christian' violence would set the tone for the king who was desperate to join the Crusades . Richard ordered those who had taken part in the 'copycat' violence to be executed . Richard was desperate
 England joined the Third Crusade with Phillip II of France, who had assisted Richard in his fight for the throne . England and Phillip II helped Richard win the throne in the 13th century .
 He discovered that his brother, John, had given Normandy back to King Phillip in his absence . Spending the he discovered that he had . discovered that . John, King Phillip, had . given Normandy . back to Normandy .
 He continued his war against Phillip until 1199, when he was struck by an arrow from an undefended Chalus-Chabrol chateau .
 The wound turned fatally gangrenous an undignified end for the warrior king . The wound was fatal gangrene and the king died of his wounds .
 Edward returned to England from the Crusades and started planning a military campaign in Wales . Upon Henry Ill's death, Edward started planning to take on the Welsh .
 Welsh leader Llewelyn and brother David executed in response to rebellions in 1277 and 1282 . The Welsh leader was executed in 1282 and his brother, David, a year later in 1283 .
 Edward responded violently to French King Philip reclaiming the territory of Gascony by sailing to attack in 1297 . He later returned to quell the Scottish rebellion by returning to England . Edward's response to French king Philip's invasion of the region was compounded by his response to the French
 Edward intervened to such an extent that the Scots allied with the French and attacked Carlisle . Edward intervened so much that the French were able to defeat the Scots . Carlisle was attacked by the French in the 17th century .
 Edward invaded in retaliation, beginning a brutal and lengthy conflict that earned him his nickname, Hammer of the Scots . Edward invaded the Scottish capital in retaliation for the invasion .
 While many kings can lay claim to ordering the deaths of hundreds even thousands during the course of their reign, not many can say they committed murder with their own hands . Erik XIV .
 Erik XIV suffered from mental instability, but not to an extent that made him incapable of ruling . Erik XIV was king of Sweden, but was not mentally ill enough to be able to be ruled .
 He strengthened Sweden's position in northern Europe by claiming territory in Estonia . This led to the Seven Years' War of the North between 1563 and 1570 . The war was the result of claims to Estonia by the Swedish king .
 Erik's mental state was rapidly deteriorating and evidence points towards schizophrenia . Evidence points to schizophrenia . Erik's military campaigns were successful .
 Erik believed that the noble family would make a play for the throne . Erik began persecuting the Stures specifically Nils Sture .
 In 1567, one of Sture's pages was tortured until he told Erik what he wanted to hear . Erik Sture tortured one of his pages until he had to say what he really wanted to say . Erik was tortured by Sture in 1567 .
 Following a trial, death sentences began to be issued but the king remained indecisive . The king was indecisive about whether to issue death sentences . The death sentences were eventually issued following a trial .
 Finally, he visited the Stures at the castle in Uppsala where they were imprisoned, to tell them that they were forgiven . The Stures were forgiven by the king .
 When Erilc left he discovered that a rebellion was underway, led by his brother, John . Erilk discovered that the rebellion was being carried out by John .
 Erik returned and stabbed Nils Sture before ordering the execution of the others . Erik returned hours later to stab Sture and ordered the execution . Erik was the last man to be executed in Sweden . Erik's death was the worst murder in the country .
 He is renowned for being a man of ferocious appetites in all aspects of life . He was prepared to use any means necessary to quell his opposition .
 Henry VII married Catherine of Aragon as his father wanted to secure an alliance with Spain . Shortly after ascending to the throne, Henry married Catherine . Henry VII had wanted an alliance between Spain and Spain .
 At the time he executed Edmund Dudley and Richard Empson two of his father's advisors on the grounds of treason . The execution took place in 17th century . Edmund Dudley was executed by his son on grounds of murder .
 Anyone who Henry perceived as either a threat to the throne or to his secession from the Catholic church was liable to find themselves with their head on the block . From Thomas More to Thomas Cromwell, anyone who Henry saw as a potential threat to his throne was likely to find himself with their
 He's most notorious for his list of spouses, driven by his desperation for a male heir and straightforward lust . However, he is most notorious .
 The annulment of his marriage to Catherine of Aragon was prompted by a combination of the two as Anne Boleyn had already caught his eye . Anne had already been caught up with the queen of England .
 Anne Boleyn was accused of infidelity, treachery, incest and incest . She faced the executioner’s axe after being accused of adultery and treachery .
 Anne was followed by Jane Seymour, who died in childbirth; Anne of Cleves, who Henry soon separated from; and then Catherine Howard . Catherine Howard was Catherine Howard's third wife .
 Henry accused Catherine of being unfaithful with her secretary, Francis Dereham, while she claimed he had raped her . Henry accused her of having an affair with his secretary . Catherine claimed that he raped her, but Henry said she was not raped .
 His last wife, Catherine Parr, died before she too could fall out of his favour . Fortunately for his last wife he was able to live with her .
 The exact number of executions ordered by Henry VIII has not been conclusively agreed upon . It is generally believed to be between 57,000 and 72,000 executions . Henry VIII's execution orders are thought to be at least 57,00 executions .
 As a gruesome aside, he also made ‘death by boiling' a legitimate form of execution . ‘Death by boiling’ was also a form of death .
 Anne Boleyn in the Tower of London portrayed just before her execution under the orders of Henry VIII . Henry VIII was one of the most brutal kings of the 16th century to be executed .
 To circumvent his own parliament, he created a dummy organisation called the International African Association . He claimed it would act in the interests of philanthropy and scientific research with a view to convert citizens to Christianity .
 It was all completely legal and it gave the monarch the freedom to act however he wanted in the land under his control . The monarch was given the right to control the land in which he lived .
 What attracted Leopold to the Congo was the tremendous supply of rubber in the area . What attracted him to the area was the enormous supply of the rubber .
 Leopold promised that he would protect the people of the Congo from slavers . He promptly turned the country into a slave state . Despite promising to protect his people, he brutally turned the Congo into a slavery state .
 Leopold allowed some missionaries into the Congo in order to allay the fears of foreign powers . Reports began to reach Europe about the maiming and executions of the men and women working on the plantations .
 It is impossible to know exactly how many people died during Leopold's rule of the Congo . The estimated figure is in the millions .
 The atrocities led to the establishment of the first human rights movement . Leopold was finally compelled to give up the Congo to the Belgian parliament in 1908 .
 Medieval rogue-type chap with green tights, good with arrows lives in a hideout in Sherwood Forest with a band of jolly outlaws who fleece greedy travelling rich folic .
 The legend of Robin Hood has been passed along the popular media of the times with a bit of embellishment added here and there . Something considered dark, unflattering or politically unsavoury removed there . Like a giant, generational game of Chinese whispers, Robin Hood is passed along with a
 The 20th century’s communication revolution, it has boomed into world fame . And so, via the 20th . century's communication revolution .
 Russell Crowe's disaffected soldier, Kevin Costner's noble Prince of Thieves and Errol Flynn's swashbuckling rogue . In the last few decades we’ve been adding our own tint to this rose-hued tale of the arrow-slinging rebel .
 We have to unravel the Hollywood-spun Batman of the Middle Ages back to where it began, sometime in the 12th century . If we're going to sort some fact from fiction here, we have to look at the direct origin of today's tale .
 King John of England was born in 1166 and reigned from 1199 until his death in 1216 . King John reigned between 1199 and 1216, when he was king of England .
 Ballads and stories were born and cultivated out of an era of social upheaval . These ballads and tales were born out of a social upheaval in the 1930s .
 The end of King John's reign saw the end of the English barony revolt and the signing of the Magna Carta . It was the first step along a long road to the breakdown of the ancient feudal system of government .
 Some of Robin's band of 'Merry Men' can be clearly identified at this time . But things get a lot murkier when it comes to the titular hero .
 Robin Hood's real identity was that of a 13th-century farmer called Robert Godberd, whose escapades were far from the sugar-coated tales we see today . According to one of the more recent theories backed by, among others, historian David Baldwin, Robin Hood
 When did she first enter Maid Marian is more a complete fabrication than an embellished character? Maid Marian's character is more of a fabrication than a full fabrication .
 Robin Hood and the Sheriff and the Friar are Robin Hoods and the Potter . Robin Hood is Robin Hood, the Sheriff, Robin Hood and the Sheriff . The Potter series is based on Robin Hood's adventures in Robin Hood .
 He's one of the first men to be recruited into Robin Hood's band in modern stories . He was one the first mentioned in ballads of yore, too, too .
 Little John was a loyal, intelligent and, of course, strong man in poet Andrew of Wyntoun's lore . Little John is a loyal and intelligent man in the poet's lore.
 He was the only one of the Merry Men supposed to be present when Robin died . He's thought to be buried in Derbyshire and is thought to have been buried there .
 One bard even included both a Scarlock and a Scarlet character in his work . There's been much confusion over William Scarlet's character .
 Much, or Midge as he's also known, appears in the oldest of the known Robin Hood ballads . Character has fallen into obscurity in modern adaptations of Robin Hood .
 A poacher caught killing a deer on the Sheriff's land, he escaped punishment and became an outlaw in his gang . The poacher was a member of his gang, but escaped punishment .
 Friar Tuck is a boozy and wily character who still has his heart in the right place . The legend as it appears today is to be taken at face value, but it's not a bad joke .
 Robin Hood's character is thought to derive from a certain 15th-century Robert Stafford from Sussex . He entered the story at the same time as Maid Marian did, during the May Day festivities in the 15th and 16th centuries .
 The nature of their law-breaking has slowly been eroded throughout history to suit an increasingly gentile audience, compared with a medieval population accustomed to violence . Medieval people found Godberg’s activities entirely palatable .
 Godberg and his fellow brigands were in defiance of a tyrant who had an iron grip on the extensive forested regions of Nottinghamshire . Godberg was one of a group of brigands who fought back against the tyrant .
 King John enforced the enormously unpopular Forest Law, which allowed the royal court exclusive access to vast swathes of hunting grounds, with utter ruthlessness . King John was known for his ruthlessly ruthless tactics .
 Godberg’s actions were justified by the common man as necessary for the greater good of the people . Thus, morally speaking, Godberg's actions were morally speaking .
 The earliest is Robert Hod of Cirencester, a serf who lived in the household of an abbot in Gloucestershire . He was the first serf to be recorded in the early 12th century .
 He murdered a visiting dignitary early in the 13th century, fled with his accomplices . He was subsequently outlawed by King John’s reviled minister Gerard of Athee . King John was King John's reviled prime minister Gerard .
 Four other Robert Hods existed in 1265, at the Battle of Evesham during King Henry's time . Four of them were killed in the battle of 1265 . Four others were killed during the battle .
 Each became fugitives and outlaws for various reasons, including robbing travellers and raiding an abbey in Yorkshire, which could explain how Friar Tuck eventually made his appearance in later tales .
 Later versions of Robyn Hods appeared as an archer in a garrison on the Isle of Wight and a man jailed for trespassing in the King's Forest and poaching deer in 1354 . Later versions appeared as a man who was jailed for poaching deer and archery .
 The name Robert was a common one around this time, while the surname Hod or Hode likely came from the old English word for a head covering . Hod or Hod was likely to come from the word for head covering in the early 1800s .
 Historians have trouble pinning the character's origin on any one man . With the array of similar characters and names of people who existed at this time it's not surprising that historians can't pin it down to a man .
 There are numerous accounts of outlaws in the 13th and 14th centuries adopting the name of Robin Hood and Little John . Adopting a name of a famous outlaw fictional or otherwise was common among criminals at this time .
 This Robin Hood had no spouse or family, no land and certainly no title . He had no wife or family and no title. He was Robin Hood, not Robin Hood .
 No reason is given for his criminality and his characteristics are likely drawn from some real-life outlaws of the time .
 By the 14th and 15th centuries, the tales of Robin Hood had gained some fame as they were used in May Day festivities . Robin Hood's story had begun to be written into plays and ballads .
 There's no mention of the folk hero living at the time of King John . Robin Hood can be found in the 15th-century stories of Robin Hood and the Monk .
 The plays Robin Hood and the Friar and the Potter were written specifically for the May Day Games in 1560 . They were based on earlier ballads of the same name . The plays were made up of the ballads from the same title .
 During this period, his Merry Men began to accrete together from various sources as 33 angry that his would-be bride has been stolen from him by an outlaw, pursues her in the second play and poisons her at Dunmow Priory .
 The idea that Robin was a fallen noble and some kind of love triangle existed between King John, Maid Marian and Robin still endures in some stories today . The idea of a love triangle between Maid Marian, Robin and King John still lives in some of the world .
 Robin Hood of the 16th century makes the transition from a brutal outlaw in defiance of the monarchy to a more domesticated hero . The ruling classes could admire and relate to someone with just cause against an evil ruler .
 His status as an outlaw had been relegated to a trait that added an element of drama to the story, rather than one that defined it . His status was relegated to being an outlaw, not a character that defined the story .
 From the 16th century onward, with the advent of the printing press, the story of Robin Hood becomes more refined and much more familiar . Robin Hood's story of the Robin Hood is more refined than ever before . The story becomes more familiar with Robin Hood with the printing process .
 Word of the character had began to spread beyond the counties of the midlands . In the late 15th century, he is referred to in plays written as far afield as Somerset and Reading .
 He was well known even to the famous womanizing, warmongering king of England, Henry VIII, and his royal court .
 The young monarch's idea of celebrating May Day involved walking into Queen Catherine of Aragon's chambers with his nobles, according to a 16th-century scholar .
 By the late-16th century, the Merry Men had acquired a friar, Robin had a love interest and he'd also gained nobility . The Merry Men acquired a Friar and Robin's love interest .
 Playwright Anthony Munday wrote two plays on the outlaw, The Downfall of Robert Earl of Huntington . Robin has clearly been lofted into high society, in which Robin is clearly lofted .
 Fleeing into the Greenwood, he is followed by the daughter of Robert Fitzwaiter, one of the leading barons who rallied against the king, where they fall in love and she changes her name to Maid Marian . The film is set to be released in 2015 .
 King John, King John was a real person who raised taxes for Richard's foreign wars . King John raised taxes to fund Richard's wars in order to fund the wars .
 King John was indeed a real person who lived at the same time Robin Hood was purported to be in and around Nottinghamshire, shaking up the status quo . King John lived in Nottinghamshire at the time of Robin Hood's death .
 By today’s standards, he was a decadent, warmongering, self-serving tyrant . He ruled over a turbulent period in British history . He was a warmonger and a tyrant .
 He is commonly regarded as a cruel king but the truth of it is that he was a leader of his generation . The King of Wales was known as a harsh king but was a great leader of the era .
 King John was a mercurial chap with a penchant for electing men outside the ranks of his barons to the royal court . He favoured lesser nobles from the continent and spurning his own, powerful English nobles closer to home .
 Magna Carta was the seminal charter that led to constitutional law in England . It was this, in part, that led the signing of the Magna Chartera .
 As a part of the Magna Carta, no free man could be punished by any other law than the law of the land . His barons were sick of his arbitrary rule and insisted that, as part of his law, no other law could be enforced .
 The Magna Carta remains the single most significant act of King John's reign . King John only signed it to mollify his barons, but it remains the most important act of his reign . It never limited the king's powers in practice .
 Robin Hood would have feared the king and hated likes of his Forest Law, which would have been enforced . Robin Hood, the common serfs and farmers of these feudal times, would have also feared the likes of the law .
 Robin Hood stole from the rich and lent to the poor, as a kind of medieval loan shark . Historian John Paul Davis goes further as to suggest that Robin Hood was a loan shark who lent the poor to Robin Hood .
 If Robin Hood and his Merry Men did exist in the time of King John, it's highly unlikely they would have embarked on the scale of philanthropy portrayed in the modern tale . Robin Hood's Merry Men are unlikely to have been as charitable as they are today .
 This idea likely came from an early medieval ballad involving Richard at the Lee, a knight who had fallen upon hard times . The idea was likely from a ballad about Richard at Lee, who was a fallen knight .
 Richard's lands were to be forfeited to a sum of £400, before stealing it back off the abbot once Richard has paid the abbey back . Richard was to forfeit the lands to £400 before stealing them back from abbot .
 Victorian-era author Howard Pyle and 20th-century films undoubtedly had a big hand in transforming Hood m ^ from a devious bandit to a philanthropist .
 “16th-century Robin Hood makes the transition from a brutal and murderous outlaw in defiance of the monarchy"" and themes that generations to come would adopt when turning to their own adaptations . That’s as clear as the legend itself. “
 Ballads of the time talk of a series of tradesmen and professionals getting the upper hand with the hapless outlaws . While the Sheriff of Nottingham is the only one to be bested by Robin Robin .
 Robin Hood dresses up as a friar in Robin Hood's Golden Prize . Robin cheats two priests out of five hundred pounds nearly $16,000 in today’s money before he's caught and summons the Merry Men with his horn . Robin dresses as a priest and cheats
 Victorians were notorious for enamelling history with their own style and values . The Victorians weren't shy about leaving their mark on Robin Hood .
 By the mid-19th century, printing books had become available to the masses . The cost and efficiency of printing books was such that they became available for the masses.
 U.S. writer and illustrator Howard Pyle adapted the traditional folk tale of Robin Hood to his own children's version . Pyle serialised it into short stories called The Merry Adventures of Robin Robin Hood . The story became enormously popular .
 His green-tights vagabond was a moral philanthropist who would go on to spawn a whole century of the people's hero that took from the rich and gave to the poor .
 The story of Robin Hood was among the world's most well known . By the time author TH White came along, the story of the Robin Hood story was already well-known .
 The Sword In The Stone was made into an anthropomorphic Disney film a quarter of a century later . White took it further and brought Robin Hood and his Merry Men into his novel The Sword in The Stone .
 The late-20th century and the booming phenomenon that was cinema brought with it numerous adaptations, most of which aren't remotely faithful to the 16th-century versions of the film .
 The Sean Connery and Audrey Hepburn film Robin and Marian made much of the romance but for the first time, cast King Richard as a lessthan-benevolent character . King Richard is the first person to play the King Richard in a movie .
 The Robin of Sherwood television series added a Muslim character in the form of Nasir the Saracen . The famous Kevin Costner film followed through Morgan Freeman's Azeem in the same way .
 Ukranian rebel Ustym Karmaliuk made his name in the 19th century for robbing the rich and distributing the proceeds of his crimes to the poor . Boudicca, queen of the Iceni, defied the Romans when they forcibly took control of her lands and
 She led a revolt that destroyed a Roman legion and the Roman capital before it was put down . Her revolt destroyed a legion and a Roman capital in Rome before being put down by the Romans .
 Robin Hood illustrates the very human desire and need to have a figure who stands for right against wrong, light against dark . Robin Hood is Robin Hood, a hero who stood for right and dark against wrongs .
 Nearly a millennium has passed since the first tale of Robin Hood was told . It's unlikely any historian will be able to settle on who Robin Hood and his Merry Men were exactly, or what little truth there is to their deeds .
 Robin Hood legend has become a victim of its own popularity, obscured by generations of storytelling taking it firmly into the realms of fantasy . As far as history is concerned, Robin Hood has been a victim to his own popularity .
 Giacomo 'Big Jim' Colosimo had recently left his wife, filing for divorce and skipping town to marry a 19-year-old cabaret singer .
 Police knew enough to visit two of Colosimo’s associates the genial Johnny Torrio and Alfonse Capone . His ex-wife, Victoria Moresco, or one of her brothers, was the prime suspect in this crime of passion .
 Colosimo's murder on 11 May 1920 is still regarded as unsolved, but perhaps it’s a crime that Chicago Police Department chose to leave that way . The murder is still a mystery .
 Windy City was a Wild West frontier town with chimney stacks instead of cacti and bulletriddled Model-T Fords in lieu of horses . Heavy industry and cheap labour were booming in the early 1920s thanks to heavy industry .
 Capone worked as a debt collector for Colosimo's operation . He was more than happy to break a few legs and mess up a card table with a swing from his baseball bat .
 Johnny Torrio was a rising star in the early years of his career . He was one of the stars of the day, but his career would be overshadowed by his rise in Hollywood . He died at the hands of a young rising star called Johnny .
 Capone soon found work with Frankie Yale , a vicious thug with links to Torrio . Capone later found work as a gangster with ties to the crime scene .
 The furious Frank Galluccio called Capone out and slashed him three times across his cheek with a knife . Capone was stabbed to death by a mobster in the early 1930s .
 Galluccio needed 30 stitches, but he was lucky the hoodlum had been drinking . He was aiming for his jugular, but Gallucio had been aiming for the jugular instead .
 In the bar he also picked up syphilis, which eventually caused his death, but may have affected him even earlier . In the same bar he may have picked up the disease .
 Torrio and Capone found Chicago fertile for expansion, as the only thing stood in their way was their own boss .
 In January 1920 the rules of the game changed again as the 18th Amendment to the U.S. Constitution came into effect . The game was changed in January 1920 .
 Prohibition meant a huge swathe of the population were suddenly transformed into potential customers . Also known as the Volstead Act, it prohibited the production, transportation and sale of alcohol .
 Torrio and Capone saw that this was a revenue stream with the potential to dwarf even prostitution and racketeering . But to their dismay, Colosimo was having none of it .
 John 'The Fox’ Torrio became the boss of the Chicago Outfit, and by his side stood Al Capone . When Colosimo was conveniently removed from the picture, John ' The Fox' Torrio took over the role of the organization .
 Capone set about covertly reopening breweries and distilleries that had been closed by the Volstead Act . He set up an ambitious distribution network to the city's mean speakeasies with the help of his older brothers Ralph and Frank .
 Ralph was put in charge of one of the Chicago Outfit's legal enterprises, a soft-drink bottling plant which earned him the nickname 'Bottles' Frank honed a reputation for savagery that overshadowed even Al's .
 1923 saw the downfall of Chicago's sticky fingered mayor, ‘Big Bill' Thompson . Capone was soon to pay for it in blood as he soon paid for his crimes .
 Democrat William Emmett Dever was voted in on a pledge to sweep the gangs . Dever: "I want to sweep up the gangs. I want to clean up the crime scene"
 Ships laden down with whisky from Canada would anchor off the coast of New Jersey . U.S. Coast Guard patrols the maritime limit of the United States .
 New Jersey's vast coastline became something of a free-for-all, with rival gangs hijacking each other's shipments . Smugglers would sail out to pick up the crates of booze and New Jersey became a free for-all .
 With Prohibition, Cuba emerged as a hedonistic getaway from the newly 'dry' United States to the Bacardi-soaked Caribbean . Cuba is now a destination for the likes of Bacardi fans .
 'rum runners' smuggled from Cuba, Jamaica and the Bahamas into South Florida, Texas and Louisiana . Traffic flowed both ways, however, with traffic flowing both ways from Cuba and Jamaica .
 Galveston became the major entry point, supplying the rest of Texas and much of the Midwest . In Texas, the city became the main entry point to much of Texas, much of Midwest .
 Ontario had its own temperance laws but they didn’t ban distilling alcohol . It led to a flow of hooch across Lake Michigan and up the Detroit River from Windsor to Detroit .
 With illegally obtained papers saying their final destination was Venezuela, they would quietly off-load their cargo in Motor City instead . The illegal cargo would be delivered to the city instead of Venezuela .
 Detroit had been 'dry' well before Prohibition . The Purple Gang tightly controlled the rumrunning trade and were major suppliers to Capone’s Chicago Outfit .
 Prohibition turned smuggling of U.S. goods into Mexico on the head thanks to Prohibition . Mass smuggling of United States goods was turned completely on its head in Mexico . Prohibition was the first time the country was able to smuggle goods into the country .
 Home-made tequila and mescal was smuggled in the opposite direction by mule in groups of three or four . The smugglers crossed rivers at night, or by truck and car along dusty and isolated roads .
 Texas’s 1,300km Mexican border was simply too wide be to adequately policed, and cat-and-mouse chases between the smugglers and Texas Rangers became the stuff of legend .
 While champagne, gin, rum and whisky were available to those with the cash to cover distribution . But the poorer had to be taken care of too and moonshine cut the costs significantly .
 Rural communities in the Appalachian Mountains and the Midwest had a tradition of home brew . Now a market has opened up for their moonshine .
 Capone set about rigging the mayoral election for the mob’s pet politician, Joseph Z Klenha . Torrio and Capone had ruled their criminal empire largely as Colosimo had with money in the right pockets .
 Frank Capone burst into the office of the Democrat candidate for Cicero with some of his thugs . The thugs beat the hopeful to a pulp with their pistol butts, trashing his office and firing their revolvers into the ceiling . Capone was a member of the gangster mob
 A Democrat campaign worker was shot in the legs and dumped in a cellar, two other men were shot in a street and another had his throat cut . Election officials with the stones to intervene were dealt with, including election officials .
 70 Chicago police officers deputised on the spot into the Cicero Police Department . Eventually, a desperate judge bussed in 70 police officers to restore order in Cicero .
 As the rain started to fall, Frank Capone found himself in a firefight outside a polling station . Capone was a member of the gangster gangster mobster Mob Mobster Gang .
 Opening fire on an approaching police car, he was gunned down by the startled cops . The town belonged to the Chicago Outfit, but it was too late .
 Despite appalling bloodshed in the takeover of Cicero, A1 Capone had been something of an enigma to the press . Despite the appalling bloodshed, Capone was something of a mystery to the public .
 McGurn stations lookouts the brothers Harry and Phil Keywell in an apartment opposite Moran's headquarters . The apartment is located in a nondescript garage behind the offices of SMC Cartage Company .
 Four gunmen in a stolen police car two of them wearing police uniforms burst in . Two of the gunmen were in police uniforms when they burst into the house .
 Six members of the North Side Gang and two of their associates surrender and allow the 'policemen' to remove their weapons . Believing this to be a routine raid, the gang members believe it is a police raid .
 On 13 February 1929, McGurn has a booze hijacker approach Moran about selling him some top-end whisky for the bargain price of $57 a case . They arrange to meet in the morning to sell the whisky .
 He adds the whisky is stolen from Detroit's Purple Gang suppliers to Capone's mob . He adds that it's stolen from suppliers to the mob's mob.
 The North Side Gang gather at their garage HQ, expecting a shipment of Old Log Cabin Whiskey . On 14 February at 10.30am, the gang will open the trap door .
 McGurn's scouts think they spot Moran arriving it's Albert Weinshank, wearing the samecoloured coat and hat as his boss .
 Moran and Ted Newberry arrive late through a side street in time to see the police car pull up and wait it out in a cafe . Moran and Newberry wait for police car to arrive and wait for it to pull up in cafe .
 A fourth survivor also arrives late to warn off another mobster, Henry Gusenberg, while a fourth survivor arrives late . Spotting a mobster they warn him off, while another survivor also appears late .
 The gun was sold for $200 at a time when a car cost $400 . It could be easily broken down for transport and reassembled in under a minute . It used ubiquitous .45 ammunition .
 The Tommy gun was perfect for close-range firefights across streets and the marble counter of the speakeasy . Effective at a range up to 45 metres, the Tommy gun could be used in close firefights .
 It quickly became a cultural symbol of gangsters in the 1920s . The police made sure to equip their 'G-men' with Tommy guns of their own .
 Not a member of the North Side Gang, John May was a mechanic who worked on their cars and occasionally as muscle . May was not a gang member .
 May was trying to stay out of trouble, but the demands of seven children left him with no other option but to take work from the mob . May was forced to take the job of cleaning up his children .
 Peter Gusenberg and Frank Gusenberg Hitmen for the North Side Gang . The Gusenberg brothers entered the criminal underworld in their teens . The hitmen were known for their involvement in the crime scene .
 They took part in a drive-by shooting of Capone's HQ in 1926 and killed two of his allies in 1928 . The gangsters also killed two allies of the Italian mobster in 1928 and shot two of them in 1926 .
 Adam Heyer Moran was Moran's business manager and North Side Gang accountant . Moran owned the lease on the gang's headquarters . Moran was Heyer's business partner and accountant for the North Side gang . Moran is Moran's former business manager .
 Heyer had been in prison twice once for robbery and once for running a confidence game . Described as a snappy dresser, Heyer has been in jail twice for robbery . Heyer was in prison for robbery, once for a confidence-game .
 Frank Gusenberg lived on for hours despite being riddled with wounds . He refused to admit he'd even been shot, let alone who’d done it, before he died . Gusenberg refused to say he'd been shot or who'd done it .
 The Chicago Police Department announced that they believed Capone associates John Scalise, Alberto Anselmi, Jack McGurn and Frank Rio were responsible . But the case floundered due to lack of evidence and McGurn skipped town with his moll .
 Moran's gang had recently been hijacking their liquor shipments, police say . Police began its retaliation efforts by shaking down Detroit's Purple Gang on the basis that Moran's mob had recently hijacked liquor shipments .
 On 22 February, the burnt remains of the police Cadillac were found, but it was impossible to pin it on either Capone or the Purple Gang . The two murder weapons later turned up in a police raid on the Michigan home of bank robber and hitman Fred 'Killer' Burke
 Capone led a gang that Capone called his ""American boys" Burke was finally arrested in March 1931, attempting to rob a bank in Kirksville, Missouri, and died in prison in 1940 from diabetes .
 Chicago police were unable to extradite him to Illinois and his role in the St Valentine's Day Massacre went unexamined . Having killed a Michigan police officer, he was unable to be extradited to Illinois .
 One of their members Byron 'Monty' Bolton confessed to the St Valentine's Day Massacre and implicated himself . Meanwhile in a completely unrelated case, the FBI had finally pinned down the Barker-Karpis gang of bank robbers and kidnappers .
 Having no jurisdiction over the case, the FBI suppressed the information but it leaked to the press, adding to the already considerable confusion and the mystery of the entire case .
 At Capone's revolver levelled at Torrio's skull the gun clicked on empty . The two fake cops line the men up against a wall .
 Two plain-clothes assassins open fire with Tommy guns while the others join in with sawn-off shotgun and .45 handgun spraying each man with at least ten bullets across their head and torso .
 The men in uniform lead the two plain-clothes assassins back to the police car with their hands raised, as if they'd been arrested . STEP 7 STEP THE COVER-UP: The two assassins are led back to a police car . Step 7 Step The Cover-up: The
 Neighbours peering out of the windows, alerted by the rattle of gunfire, assume the villains have been apprehended . Neighbourhoods are alerted to the gunfire by neighbours who assume they have been captured .
 Capone's most feared hitmen, the Sicilian-born 'murder twins' were believed responsible for the death of North Side Gang boss Dean O’Banion in 1924 . Scalise and Anselmi were believed to have killed Moran's predecessor Dean O'Banion
 Frank Rio was one of Capone's most loyal and dependable bodyguards . Italian-born Rio had been arrested twice, once for handling stolen furs and once for daylight robbery of a mail train .
 Witnesses recall him saying 'Hello Al' before he was shot point blank four rounds into his cheek and two into his shoulder . Witnesses recalled him say a friendly ""Hello Al” before being shot .
 For the first time, Capone's mugshot appeared on the front page . Nobody saw anything, nobody recognised the man, but the police knew who was responsible and so did the press .
 Guzik was Capone's trusted money man, responsible for regular payoffs to cops and judges . Guzik worked for the mobster in the early 1950s and early '50s .
 Capone never allowed the left side of his face to be photographed and he began to lash out at the flickering flash bulbs of the photographers . Soon the name ‘Scarface’ began to stick, needling away at Capone’s vanity .
 The predominantly Irish-American North Side Gang run by Dean O'Banion controlled the breweries and bootlegging in Chicago's North Side . Torrio had resisted all of Torrio's efforts to bring them to heel .
 O'Banion relinquished his share of the Sieben Brewery to Torrio in May 1924 . Torrio was the last straw in the feuding relationship between the two brewers .
 Torrio and his boys joined by their allies in Little Sicily's 'Terrible Gennas' showed up . A conveniently timed police raid swept in and the boss was left with a $5,000 fine and nine-month jail sentence .
 O’Banion was working in his flower shop at the time . O'Banion and his colleagues were there to cut chrysanthemums in his shop .
 O'Banion and Yale shook hands, Scalise and Anselmi fired two bullets into his chest and two into his throat . Scalise was shot in the chest and throat as he shook hands with Yale . Yale was shot by Scalise in the throat .
 As he lay on the floor in a pool of blood and petals, he was shot in the back of the head for good measure . The victim was shot by police officers in the head in the early hours of the day .
 St Valentine's Day Massacre was the culmination of a brutal and bloody five-year gang war between the Chicago Outfit and the North Side Gang . George Clarence 'Bugs' Moran took over the gang and nursed their grudge, moving the headquarters from Schofields to the
 Upon his release Torrio kept a low profile safe in the knowledge that with Capone in the hot seat, he’d be less of a target .
 For all of the Fox's wiles, he just hadn't reckoned on how personal this war had become . The Fox had come to terms with how personal it had become.
 Gunfire lit up the street from a blue Cadillac lurking on the curb, shredding shopping bags to confetti . Gunfire ripped shopping bags from the curb of the street . The incident happened on 24 January 1925 .
 Johnny Torrio stared at the sky, the shrieking of Anna Torrio strangely distant . Blood mingled with the groceries from a litany of wounds as Johnny looked down .
 Bugs Moran stood over him, blocking the crisp winter sun, his revolver levelled at Torrio's skull . The gun clicked on empty and the would-be assassins fled . Bugs Moran was standing over Torrio when the gun clicked empty .
 Capone's ascendancy was immediate as Torrio underwent emergency surgery . Capone was the only man in the gangster world to take over from Torrio . Torrio had emergency surgery to save his life .
 Capone slept by his mentor's bedside, eying each disinterested nurse and flower-clutching day visitor suspiciously . Capone's men of the Chicago Outfit stood guard around the clock, easing the disinterested nurses and visitors to his bedside .
 Capone's specially-outfitted, bulletproof Cadillac was seized by the United States Treasury Department in 1932 . Capone moved his headquarters into Chicago's luxurious Lexington Hotel, taking over the 41 Heroes <fc Villains .
 It was later used by the government as President Franklin Roosevelt's limousine . The government used it as a limo to transport the president .
 Even though he is synonymous with Chicago, he only lived in the city for 12 years of his life . He only lived there for 12 .
 Allegedly he had never heard of Eliot Ness, the government agent sent to bring him to justice . Allegedly, he had been sent to Ness to bring Ness to justice, but never heard .
 Templeton Rye whisky was the drink of America's favourite drink during Prohibition . Templeton rye whisky was a favourite of the Prohibition era .
 Capone is still thought to have killed more than a dozen men personally . Capone held court like an emperor, surrounded by mobsters and prostitutes .
 A concrete vault was installed in the basement and a secret staircase hidden behind a mirror in one of his bathrooms, just one part of a web of tunnels that would allow him a quick escape . A secret staircase was also installed in his basement .
 Rising late most days, he took his time pouring over the morning papers like a statesman, before dressing himself in expensive finely tailored suits . He took time to pour over the papers and pore over his fine suits .
 Capone moved into his study in another suite where petitioners waited anxiously for favours and his patronage . Capone's study was a favourite of the mobster's .
 Capone took hold of the notion and twisted it into the spectre of Robin Hood . Capone portrayed himself as heroic outlaw giving the people what they wanted . The public had some sympathy for the bootleggers .
 The bigger Capone's business became, the more intricate and vulnerable the network of mobsters, bribes and alliances required to sustain it . The bigger and more intricate the network, bribes, alliances needed to sustain the mobster's business .
 It got to a point where the endemic corruption of Chicago’s law and government simply couldn't be ignored . Chicago's corruption of the law, government, was so bad that it couldn’t be ignored, the mayor says .
 Herbert Hoover was elected U.S. president on an anti-corruption platform . He was elected in the wake of the St Valentine's Day Massacre .
 Prohibition agent Eliot Ness and a handpicked team of 'Untouchables' to clean up Chicago’s streets by raiding Capone's speakeasies and stills . IRS agents headed by accountant-turned-lawman Frank J Wilson with a mandate to turn over Capone
 Capone was sentenced to 11 years for three counts of tax evasion and two counts of failing to provide tax returns . further counts were dropped out of fear the prosecution would be unable to get a conviction . Capone's lavish lifestyle and lack of legitimate income was used against him .
 Capone's legal team originally struck a deal with the prosecution to admit to the lighter charges and serve between two and five years . Capone was originally set to serve between 2 and 5 years in prison .
 The deal was immediately canned when details leaked to the press . The outrage was so great that the judge threw the book at him .
 The jury was exchanged for another in the court by Judge Wilkerson when the police learnt of a plot from Capone's mob to bribe them . The police learned of the plot to bribe the jury in a bid to get them on trial .
 The jury, all from rural Illinois, were sequestered overnight to keep them out of the Chicago Outfit’s reach . The new jury was sequestered in rural Illinois .
 Capone sentenced to 11 years, $50,000 in fines, court costs of another $30,000 and no bail . Wilkerson sentenced Capone to 11 . Capone was convicted of 11 years .
 Capone was released into the care of his family on 16 November 1939 due to brain damage caused by neurosyphilis . Capone died of brain damage due to the disease .
 By 1946, he was deemed to have the intelligence of a 12-year-old, suffering from delusional fits, raving about communists and plots to kill him . By 1946 he had intelligence of 12-years-old . He was diagnosed with delusional fits and raved about communists .
 One of the men tasked with bringing him to justice was having second thoughts . The gangster was having a tantrum, one of his men had second thoughts.
 Capone wallowed in fine silks and syphilitic megalomania in his penthouse . Ness and his Untouchables began nipping at his heels shutting down 18 stills and arresting 52 bootleggers in a single night .
 Ness' daring raids had cost the Chicago Outfit an estimated $1,000,000 . Some loyal lieutenants now languish in jail for violations of the Volstead Act . Ness' raids cost the Outfit $1.1 million in six months alone .
 He shrugged off Capone's clumsy attempts to bribe him, as well as two assassination attempts . The former mobster shrugged off the attempts to kill him .
 It was only ever an irritant, taking chunks out of his income and his pride . But to a mobster as egotistical as Capone, such defiance drove him into a rage . Capone was egotistic as he was always driven into rage .
 Ness gleefully exploited parading captured vehicles outside his hotel and taunting him on the phone . Ness paraded captured vehicles and taunted him on his phone outside hotel . Ness was taunted by Ness on his way to his hotel room .
 Ness may have damaged his ego, but the real danger was from fraud investigator Frank J Wilson . Ness was the man who made the streets of Chicago swim in booze and blood . He was the subject of numerous grisly murders in the 1970s .
 In 1927, the United States Supreme Court's ‘Sullivan decision’ had reversed a bizarre legal loophole that meant gangsters were legally exempt from having to register illegal income on their tax returns . Gangsters were able to claim that it would violate their Fifth Amendment rights . In May 1927
 Manly Sullivan, a Chicago bootlegger whose trial lent the decision its name, received a landmark conviction for tax evasion . Sullivan was convicted of tax evasion in a landmark case in Chicago .
 The Chicago Outfit's income was an estimated $108 million in 2012 . That same year, the Chicago Outfits' income was estimated to be $107 million .
 Wilson facing 34-year jail term from tax case and Ness's Prohibition case . Ness facing up to 34 years in prison . Wilson facing a possible 34 year jail term .
 It was the end of Capone's empire of crime, brought down not by gunfire, violence and police raids, but by the simple, dry truth of the balance sheet . The end of the Capone empire was brought down by a balance sheet, not gunfire or violence .
 Capone served his sentence in Atlanta, Georgia, continuing to rule his crime empire by proxy, bribing guards with thousands of dollars hidden in the hollow handle of a tennis racket . Capone was able to communicate with the outside world by using a hollow handle on a tennis racquetquet
 He was then sent to the newly opened Alcatraz, where his link to the outside world was finally severed . He was finally sent to a new prison where he was finally released .
 In Alcatraz, Capone's letters were censored, prohibited subjects and current events were removed, newspapers banned and newspapers banned . All magazines had to be at least seven months old .
 He was only allowed visits from immediate family, who would be separated from him by a sheet of glass . He was separated from the one-time king of crime by glass .
 Cicero's dramatic career coincided with the fall of a republic and the rise of an empire . Cicero peeked out of Ms covered litter to check if he was being followed .
 The Roman Republic he had dedicated Ms whole life to protect had betrayed him once again and this time there would be no reprieve . He had dedicated his life to protecting the Roman Republic once again .
 Out of the comer of Ms eye, he saw two armed soldiers strolling towards the slaves carrying the litter . Two armed soldiers were seen approaching the slaves with a litter .
 Cicero knew he had oMy moments to live. They called him by name and told the slaves to stop . Cicero was called by the slaves and told them to stop; Cicero known he had to .
 Cicero's family languished in obscurity before he came of age . Cicero had no influence in the senate, fomm or connections to the Patrician .
 Cicero attended schools to improve his education . His father insisted he should make something of himself within Roman politics . Cicero lived in the town of Arpinum in the Roman capital .
 In Roman culture this knowledge was required to be considered capable of leading Rome's political and military elite . He learned Greek and studied the philosopMes and teachings of Plato and Archimedes .
 He was a diligent student, even visiting Greece to discover the secrets of their pMlosopMcal ideals .
 Cicero was more than aware of his enemies . As he gained a reputation in the provinces as uiuieis a gieeuy nr he and ii Cicero were enemies .
 At the consular elections in 63 BCE he wore armour underneath his toga a skilled litigator . He wooed crowds gathered at public court hearings with Ms oratory skills .
 Cicero represented landowners and provincial merchants . Cicero had a firm understanding of the law but wasn’t enough for her burgeoning ego .
 When asked to prosecute a case involving Gaius Verres, a greedy Roman governor who had oppressed and intimidated the people of Sicily, he saw an opportumty to ascent to the place he had always wanted to go; Rome .
 Venes had hired Rome's foremost lawyer, Quintus Hortalus, to defend him . Venes hired the most famous Roman lawyer in Rome .
 If Cicero lost against him he would be finished, Cicero would have been finished . Cicero was the young and inexperienced Cicero . If he lost against Cicero, he was finished .
 He diligently prepared his case, spending hours working on every inflection of Ms voice and action of Ms body to make sure he came across as the best orator ever heard . He spent hours preparing his case for the Senate .
 The case was going to the Fomm in Rome, the centre of imperial Roman justice . He knew oMy the best would do, as the case would do .
 Not only did he win the case, he was guaranteed a place as a magistrate in the Roman cursus honorum, one of the most respected levels of government .
 He continued tMough the raMcs of public office, tMiving on the adventure that encompassed life while working high-profile cases .
 He fell in love with the glamour of addressing the people from the plinths of the Roman Fomm . He fell into love of the glamor of addressing people .
 Public speaking was one of the finest skills a Roman citizen could have . Cicero was considered its greatest orator . Rome was still a dominant force in the Italian peninsula and beyond .
 Its influence stretched from the muddy fields of Gaul, modern-day France to the grain-rich plains of the Egyptian Nile .
 Roman society was based around the distinction between slaves and free Romans . Romans had the right to own property and influence the political system . Slaves had no rights at all .
 Slaves used in every part of Roman life, from domestic servants to labourers in mines . Slaves were used in all parts of Roman society, including domestic servants .
 Cicero owned a number of slaves, including slaves . Cicero himself owned slaves . He owned slaves as well .
 The Roman Republic was a political system dominated by the senate and its consul leaders . Before the great emperors of Rome stood the Roman Republic, the senate was dominated by its senate . The Republic was the birthplace of the Roman Empire .
 The Republic looked democratic and free on the surface, in reality only the elite were allowed to serve . The whole political process was shamelessly corrupt, says David Cameron . The Republic was supposed to be a model of democracy, says Cameron .
 Class division was split between the Patrician, the ruling elite, and the Plebeian, all other Romans . All other Romans were ruled by the Patriceian, a ruling elite .
 The ruling families maintained control over the senate throughout this period . They lived in constant fear of the ferrocity and fickleness of the plebeian 'mob', which had to be appeased regularly .
 The gods and man Religion played an important part in the daily lives of Romans . Their pantheon of gods and goddesses were seen to have a direct influence on the lives of Rome .
 Strange cults and colourful religious ceremonies were a constant feature of the bustling city streets . The city was known for its religious rituals and rituals .
 The senate was becoming unable to curtail the ambitions of powerful Roman leaders who commanded vast armies . The senate became unable to stop the ambitions .
 Julius Caesar ruled Rome as joint consul with Pompey Magnus . Pompey feared a plot concocted by Pompey to overthrow his authority within the senate . Gaius Julius Caesar had been ruling Rome as consul . Julius Caesar feared Pompey would overthrow him .
 In short order, their conflict threw the whole of Rome and its dependencies into a disruptive conflict that pitted Romans against Romans . The conflict was in short order . The Romans and their dependencies were pitted against each other .
 The senate struggled to maintain a role for itself within the city and was constantly being overruled by men like Caesar . Caesar was holding a lethal trump card an army capable of sacking the city . The senate was constantly overruled .
 When Caesar was assassinated, Mark Antony became the dominant force within the city . Antony was a dominant force in the city after Caesar's assassination .
 Antony fled when Caesar's adopted son Octavian, who also called himself Caesar, took over the city . Antony's supporters found themselves on shifting sand in the shifting sand .
 Cicero: Picking the wrong side during these insurrections could spell doom if the opposing side regained power . Cicero was a member of the Senate during the Roman Senate during his time in Rome .
 There was also the constant threat of political assassination, a method not uncommon in Roman society for removing political enemies . Roman society was also rife with political assassination .
 Cicero reached the peak of any Roman's career when he was elected consul, the highest office attainable . Cicero's career peaked at the highest level attainable in Roman history .
 As consul he utilised his oratory skills to put down a conspiracy of rebellion against him . He convinced the mob to condemn the men involved as traitors .
 He condemned them to death, reasoning that the situation was dangerous enough . The tide of public opinion swelling around him would be protection against not affording the accused a trial, he said .
 The mob had turned against him, the new consul wasn't sympathetic and he was exiled . He was exiled from the country . The mob turned against the consul, he was forced to flee .
 In 57 BCE, when Roman leadership changed once again and Cicero was given a reprieve it was as Defining moment Gaius Veires' case . One of the most celebrated cases of Cicero's career is his prosecution of the corrupt Sicilian governor . In 75 BCE,
 Sicilians petition Cicero to prosecute Verres on behalf of Verres . Cicero's reputation as an excellent orator, Cicero was renowned for his orator work .
 Cicero takes the case to Rome and promptly wins against Verres's expensive lawyer through his superb oratory skills . After some debate, Cicero wins the case in Rome .
 With the gathered crowd cheering whenever Cicero speaks his relationship with the people is sealed . Cicero's relationship with his people was sealed when he spoke to the people .
 This early success is the foundation upon which his political career is built, if his prayers had been answered, it would have been a huge success .
 He boarded a ship from his Greek residence and prepared to re-enter the cut-throat world of Roman politics . He boarded ship from Greek residence .
 Pompey Magnus and Julius Caesar were friends turned rivals and rivals . Political upheaval was creating dangerous divisions within the already fractious Roman political system .
 Caesar courted Cicero's favour, looking for a respectable man to back his grievousness against Pompey . Cicero decided to play safe and left Pompey in the middle of the battle .
 If he'd learned anything during his years in exile it was to back a winner when he saw one . He'd learned from his exile he was to support a winner, and that he did it .
 Pompey had more men, more support in the senate and seemed to hold the support of Rome's mob . Pompey seemed to have more men than the mob. Pompey was more popular with the mob .
 He threw in his lot with Pompey as the man I who would see the Republic restored and reward Cicero with power after Caesar was defeated . Pompey was Pompey's successor to the Roman Republic .
 Caesar defeated Pompey in open battle . Cicero was exiled from Rome, along with Pompey's dilapidated forces . Pompey died in battle .
 Cicero was on the mn from his homeland and his future looked bleak . For the second time Cicero had to leave his homeland . Cicero's future was uncertain .
 His return to Rome came after Caesar, looking to shore up a very unsettled senate, decided to pardon him . Caesar's return came after he was pardoned by the senate in a bid to quell unrest .
 Cicero became fascinated by Greek philosophy and returned to Rome affronted by Caesar . But flattery did not sway Cicero over to Caesar's side and what he found when he returned .
 Roman society dictates that knowledge of Greek is mandatory for those in power . Those in power are required to learn Greek .
 Praetor is also a military position but he shows very limited interest in the military . Praetors are also military positions but they are also very interested in the role of the president .
 The decision to condemn the traitors to death without a trial will come back to haunt him, he says . The decision was made to condemn them without trial will haunt him. He says .
 Cicero's family is not considered part of the ruling elite . While his father is a man of means, Cicero is considered a relative of the elite . Cicero was born in Rome in 18th century .
 He serves during the War of Allies between the Republic and several Italian cities . He is killed in Italy during the war of Italy .
 Caesar tried to bring Cicero into his inner circle while he was working within the political system . 'He had made another critical error by trusting the young man who was now calling himself Augustus Caesar'
 Cicero made a judgement call and assessed that Antony was finished . Antony's flight from Rome was retribution for his brash behaviour, Cicero said .
 Octavian made peace with Antony in order to steal power away from the hostile senate . He and Marcus Lepidus declared a Triumvirate a type of military Junta .
 Cicero did his best to swallow his resentment at the destmction of the Republic and ingratiate himself with Octavian, but it was too little, too late . Cicero tried to swallow the burning resentment but was unable to do so .
 He had made another critical enor in judgement by trusting the young man who was now calling himself Augustus Caesar . Augustus Caesar had made a critical error in judgement .
 Cicero faced two options: stay and face a show trial or run . Cicero was designated a public enemy and faced a run trial or face a run .
 The man who was later described by Quintilian as 'eloquence himself, bolted into the night, with nothing but the toga on his back, hunted by the people he helped bring to power .
 One of his brother's slaves betrayed him to Mark Antony's spy . He was apprehended within striking distance of the coast of Greece . The spy was captured within striking minutes of his escape .
 In the great marketplace of Rome two armed soldiers strolled up to the front doors of the Fomm canying a large, heavy sack . Two armed soldiers can be seen canying the heavy sack in the marketplace .
 Caesar was ruling the Republic like a tyrant, changing tradition to fit his own political needs . Caesar was ruled by a tyrant who changed tradition to suit his political needs, he says . Caesar ruled the Republic as a tyrant .
 Caesar was murdered on the senate floor during the religious festival of the Ides of March . Caesar made many enemies and, in yet another explosion of ruthless violence, he was murdered . Caesar was assassinated in a fit fit for the religious holiday of Ides .
 Cicero decided to play this latest development more subtly than the Pompey fiasco . Cicero played a subtle role in the way he played Pompey .
 He neither supported nor condemned the opportunist, profiting on the death of his master . The opportunist was neither a supporter nor condemned, he said .
 He publicly denounced him, writing orations against him and making scandalous remarks about his sexuality to friends to friends . He also wrote orated against him .
 Antony held an army at his command, which outweighed the mere words of a skilled orator . Antony's army outweighed his orator's words, he said . But Antony was able to command an army, he added .
 Antony was set to stay in Rome until Octavian, Julius's adopted son and heir, returned to the capital . It appeared as if Antony would remain in Rome for the next few days .
 Cicero supported him as a liberator from the pulled out its contents, a dismembered head and two hands covered in congealed blood . Cicero was supported by Cicero as a free agent from the Roman Empire .
 One of the men began attaching the head to the door, forcing the rotting jaw open and pulling out the tongue, pinning it across the putrid sldn to make the mouth look like it was speaking .
 With Caesar dispatched and Bmtus's conspirators looking for a man to rally around, Cicero once again became a man of power and influence . Cicero was perhaps only bested in this respect by Mark Antony .
 Antony's affiliation with Caesar was well known, and a source of intense jealously for less-connected men like Cicero . Antony was known for his loyalty to Caesar, but Cicero was not .
 Cicero makes overtures of friendship to the young man now calling himself Caesar . Cicero made overtures to Cicero in a bid to become a friend of Caesar .
 This is a short-lived victory for Cicero and the Republic, as Octavian is unwilling to share power with the 'fools' in the senate . This is the first time the senate has been in power since Cicero's victory .
 Cicero finds himself out of favour with Octavian and Antony now working together . Cicero is now isolated and isolated in Rome .
 He is forced to flee from the city with Pompey’s soldiers . He is subsequently forced to . flee from . Pompey's soldiers .
 Cicero was not present at the assassination of Brutus . He privately supports Brutus's actions . Cicero is not present during the assassination .
 Cicero and Mark Antony become Rome's dominant figures in the following power vacuum . Cicero becomes Rome's most powerful figure .
 There are little love lost between the two and they frequently clash . Unfortunately, there is little love for the pair .
 Cicero flees Rome but is caught and summarily executed in 43 BCE . Cicero is executed after seeing that Octavian Caesar and Mark Antony have betrayed him .
 50 years after his death, John F Kennedy still inspires and fascinates the world . E lection night, Tuesday 8 November 1960. December 43 BCE 47 .
 John 'Jack' Fitzgerald Kennedy waited for the voting results to come through on the television . His family sat around him in the living room of his brother's home in Hyannis Port, Massachusetts .
 The endless television interviews, broadcast debates, rallies and rallies had taken their toll on his health . He hadn't had a proper meal or a good night's sleep in two weeks . Now he was beyond exhausted .
 The endless lectures from his father, Joe, about image and how it didn't matter who you are, only what people thought you were, had started to grate on him . He had become tired of lectures from Joe, who said it wasn't important who you were .
 After the ""longest night in history,"" as Jackie would later describe it, the call came in the following morning . The call came the next morning .
 Nixon admitted defeat and sent a congratulatory telegram to Kennedy . Nixon had admitted defeat . Kennedy had won .
 The bare facts say it was hardly a ringing endorsement of Kennedy, but given the experience and relative popularity of Nixon, it was a spectacular victory . Kennedy's victory over Nixon was hardly ringing endorsement, but it was remarkable .
 Kennedy visited Nixon in Florida on 14 November . Nixon was the president of the United States in 1968 .
 He silently listened to Nixon dominate what was meant to be a friendly conversation about the last few months, and wondered how a man like this had nearly won the presidency . He silently watched Nixon dominate .
 Kennedy's presidency would go down in history as the dawn of a new era . Kennedy’s presidency would be remembered as dawn of new era. Kennedy's administration would be the first of its kind .
 He changed the face of politics by courting the media and creating his very own cult of celebrity . He inspired hope through his charm and freedom through his liberal policies . He was a liberal icon who changed the world by embracing the media .
 He gave the United States a renewed self-confidence through his tough reputation abroad . After his brutal assassination in Dallas, his legacy would live on .
 John 'Jack' F Kennedy was born into a rich Irish-American Catholic family from Brookline, Massachusetts . Others were less American .
 He served in the Navy during World War II . He commanded a patrol boat in the Pacific that was destroyed by enemy fire .
 He married Jackie Bouvier, a rich and well-established Catholic socialite, in 1953 . He ascended to the presidency in 1961 . He was married to a wealthy socialite .
 He would only serve two years of his term before he was assassinated in 1963 .
 It was true that Kennedy had his critics, but it was his deep connection with the media, getting his name in the public domain and making sure that through his family connections it stayed out there in the best possible light .
 The media was enamoured with his good looks, beautiful wife and young family . The media has been fascinated with his looks, good looks and family .
 He represented the American dream, descended from Irish immigrants and doing well through America's bounty to become a senator in the most powerful country .
 This wasn't to say that he was a shallow man who simply enjoyed the press for his own vanity . The press shots of him and Jackie with their children in Hyannis Port may have been doctored to fit the idyll of the perfect American family, but they do portray a genuine
 One of the most compelling stories that illustrates his character was not caught on camera, however, however .
 During his tenure in office, an aide was showing a group of disabled children around the White House when their wheelchairs prevented them from joining the rest of the tour group .
 Kennedy, late for a meeting, spotted the children and came over to them . Kennedy was late for the meeting and spotted them and came to the children .
 Kennedy’s natural charm was rooted in compassion something that the press could not project, but not create . Kennedy was a natural charm that was not created by the press, but by the media, it was created .
 This was put to the test when he was nominated as the Democratic candidate for the presidency . He was nominated for president in 2008, but has been criticised for his lack of political experience .
 He knew he would need something more than his easy smile, good looks and friends in the print media, as these alone would not be enough against a seasoned politician like Nixon . He needed something that would allow him to reach millions and captivate them .
 Kennedy's time would come during the first live television debates in September 1960 . The contest was watched by over 60 million people across the world .
 Both candidates were offered the services of a CBS make-up artist not that Kennedy needed it, as his skin looked tanned .
 Nixon, on the other hand, looked pasty and sweaty, having only just recovered from a knee injury, but declined the make-up services . Nixon, who is recovering from an injury, declined to use make-ups .
 He got one of his aides to apply some make-up on minutes before the broadcast to cover up his stubble . But coupled with his pale complexion, it only made him look ill and dirty . Ultimately, he got some make up on minutes prior to broadcast .
 Kennedy received coaching from consultants to allow him to practice rebuking Nixon's comment ONE OF MY SONS WILL BE President .
 He was a man who expected a lot from his family after all, they were Kennedys, and thus destined for greatness . He was expected to be a great father, but his family was destined to greatness .
 Bom Bom in 1888, Joe grew up in a well-established Catholic family from Boston . Bom was born in 1888 . Bom in 1883 . Bom grew up with a Catholic family in Boston . He was born to a Catholic Catholic family .
 He worked in Hollywood as a film producer and then entered politics as part of the Franklin Roosevelt administration . He was a member of the Roosevelt administration in the early 1940s .
 He later became ambassador to Britain, famously saying the country was ""finished"" in 1940 . He famously said Britain was "finished" in 1940.
 He was renowned for his political connections, using them to see his children established among the elite of American society after the war . He used his connections to secure his children's status as well as their success .
 He was a domineering and harsh father, especially when his family didn't meet his high standards . Infamously had his daughter Rosemary lobotomised because of her violent personality .
 He also 'vetted' husbands for his daughters, ensuring they all married into families that would benefit the family . He also ensured that they all marry into families they would benefit .
 His affairs with other women were legendary, estranging him from his wife, Rose . He had affairs with women all over the world, including his wife .
 He was a pessimist and isolationist, weighed down with old prejudices of the Protestant-dominated middle class . He was also weighed down by old prejudices .
 Kennedy chose a suit that contrasted well with the background of the set . Nixon’s suit blended horribly into the backdrop .
 The result was a popular victory for Kennedy, with one newspaper editor commenting, ""The medium is good to Kennedy and most unkind to Nixon"
 Most of those who heard the radio debate thought Nixon had won, while those who watched on television were inclined in favour of Kennedy .
 Kennedy was the first presidential candidate to properly utilise the power of the media and the idea of looking 'right' to connect with audiences through the medium of television . It paid out in dividends for Kennedy's ability to use the media to reach audiences .
 PR consultants spend hours coaching and teaching respective nominees when to smile, when to laugh and how to look . Even down to the shoes and ties they're wearing .
 It was Kennedy's stunning victory and associations with the press before and after the 1960 election that subsequent presidential campaigns modelled themselves on . Kennedy's campaign modelled itself on the success of his 1960 election .
 The image of the man who would lead the U.S. people was now just as important as the man's politics, the president's image was also important . The man's image now matters more than his politics .
 Presidential nominees Kennedy and Nixon smiling for the cameras prior to their first televised debate . The presidential election of 1960 was one of the closest in American history .
 Richard Nixon was able to gain significant control over the American Midwest, a traditional Republican stronghold, and in California and Florida, which carried with it a large number of votes in the electoral college . Richard Nixon, Kennedy's opponent, gained significant control of the Midwest .
 Kennedy seized control of Texas, a state with a large number of voters, through his running mate Lyndon B Johnson and the industrial heartland of America in the Northeast with the help of his father .
 One of the major battlegrounds was Chicago, Illinois, which held a large amount of supporters for both Kennedy and Nixon . Chicago was a major battleground for both Nixon and Kennedy .
 Controversies would emerge later about Democratic mayor of Chicago, Richard Daley, rigging the Illinois vote for Kennedy after a conversation he had with Joe Kennedy and, apparently, Chicago outfit .
 By 1960, the civil rights movement under Martin Luther King Jr was worrying the southern states . The southern states were holding firm on segregation and humiliating the political community .
 It was a question that was becoming urgent, with the broadcast media reporting all the sit-ins and protests of black citizens in the deep south to an anxious American public . Kennedy would have to get on his side if he was to take the presidency and keep hold of it .
 As the election loomed in the autumn of 1960, Kennedy was still looking weak on the civil rights issue . Kennedy still looked weak on civil rights issues in 1960s .
 He was certainly more liberal than his opponent, but he didn't have anything of substance to beat him with . "He was certainly liberal but he was not a candidate for president," he said .
 King was arrested on 19 October a month before the election while taking part in a sit-in protest . By coincidence, he was arrested in October before the November election .
 He phoned the shaken Mrs King, saying: "I want to express my concern about your husband" Mr King phoned her to express his concern about her husband .
 King's father said: "He can be my President, Catholic or whatever he is. He can be a Catholic or whoever he is" King's election victory galvanised black voters .
 Despite these words, he was still not pushing civil rights; he was playing the political game, he said . "He was playing a political game," he added .
 It was just words words enough to capture the presidency, but words nonetheless . The president's words captured the world's first lady .
 King would call Kennedy's bluff in August 1963 after Kennedy's inaction, marching on Washington with thousands of supporters . King would march on D.C. in 1963 .
 Kennedy looked on open-mouthed; the rapture of the crowd hanging on King's every word was beyond impressive . Kennedy was on open mouthed as King spoke .
 Kennedy's moral scruples and King's loud insistence that finally got civil rights on the right path, but inaction would still dog Kennedy's record .
 To say that Kennedy was a mere political opportunist would be grossly unfair, however, however . Kennedy was not a mere opportunist, however. He was a well-known figure in the world of politics, but a strong leader .
 He was a man of principles, and the treatment of black communities in the deep South sickened him, he said . He said he was sickened by the South's treatment of blacks .
 It is a myth that he was a radical activist of the civil rights movement . He was far too pragmatic for that. However, he was far more pragmatic than that .
 Actively supporting the civil rights movement more than he did would have destroyed his support in the South . Nixon would later call the 'silent majority’ everywhere else uneasy .
 His presidency did not bring solid change, but it was a rallying cry for a new beginning . His successor Lyndon B Johnson would do far more, but his presidency would do more .
 By meeting King and publicly endorsing the ideal of civil rights for all, even if he did not actively support the campaign in practice, it would give civil rights the national platform it needed . Kennedy's own celebrity endorsement to bring civil rights to the top of the national agenda would help bring civil
 Kennedy would not go eyeball-to-eyeball with civil rights, but he would with Communism . Kennedy would go with Communism, but would with the Democratic Party, he said .
 It was the realm of foreign affairs where he would make his stand, where there could be no comprise . Kennedy's confrontation with the Soviets would change the world forever . The legend of Kennedy's confrontations with the Soviet Union is still alive .
 Communism was not only objectionable as far as Kennedy was concerned, but a moral evil, he said . Communism was objectionable as well as objectionable as . Kennedy was . Kennedy said it was a moral . evil .
 It stood against everything he believed about human rights and human dignity, he said . He said: "It was a violation of everything he had to do to human dignity"
 The Communist leadership were godless, their state control oppressed its own people and their vast armies oppressed the people of the globe; it was to be despised . The Communist Party was to have a godless state of its people and its vast armies were to be oppressed .
 When he made his inaugural address he spoke of not daring to "tempt them with weakness" He spoke of "not daring to tempt them with weakness," he said .
 This was the hard line of the Cold War warrior create the biggest conventional and nuclear arsenal available to scare the Communists into never attacking the free world . Kennedy believed in it completely, and Kennedy believed it completely .
 It was the first major military undertaking of his presidency, but the plan was illconceived and flawed from the beginning . It was ill-conceived, deeply flawed, he says, but it was a flawed plan .
 Even Kennedy talked about plausible deniability of the whole affair by its end . Even Kennedy had plausible deniable deniability by his end .
 The plan was for the CIA to land thousands of military-trained Cuban exiles onto the Cuban mainland and, by proxy, try to enact a coup . By proxy, the plan was to try to oust the government from Cuba .
 It relied on Castro not being in full control of Cuba, although unfortunately for Kennedy he was . Kennedy was in control of the Cuban government at the time of the attack .
 As the invasion party landed, Cubans loyal to Castro bombed and machine-gunned the exiles into the sea, causing horrendous casualties . The deaths of the Cuban exiles were among the worst of the worst casualties .
 It was seen as a betrayal by the CIA and the Cuban exiles, who were left without adequate air cover and died in their hundreds on Cuban beaches . The deaths were seen as the result of the lack of air cover .
 She was born into one of the wealthiest Catholic families in America . Her father, John Vernou ‘Black Jack’ Bouvier, owned land and capital throughout the Northeast .
 She met Jack through her work as a photographer in Washington DC . She married him on 12 September 1953 after a whirlwind romance . She died at the age of 92 .
 Like her husband she courted the media, making sure she always dressed immaculately and remained on message for press interviews .
 She was a force for change in the White House, seeing to it that the unique furniture, ornaments and pictures within its rooms were preserved and catalogued .
 She established the post of White House Curator, and created the White House Fine Arts Committee to protect the treasures inside its walls . She established a post of Curator .
 She could also speak several foreign languages, which she would use on goodwill missions abroad .
 Her charm and grace enamoured foreign dignitaries, and after one trip to Paris, Vienna and Greece, Clark Clifford, advisor to the president sent her a congratulatory note saying, "Once in a great while, an individual will capture the imagination of people all over the world
 As her celebrity status spread, she received so much fan mail that it required 13 people to process it .
 Often they were deeply personal, with a girl from Indonesia writing, “I've seen pictures of you.” Sometimes the messages were personal . Sometimes they were from people from around the world .
 She became so popular that her husband often joked that it was Jackie people wanted to see . Jackie's husband joked that she was Jackie the most popular person in the world .
 The failure of the Bay of Pigs invasion did not temper the attitudes of the president or his closest advisors; quite the contrary . Kennedy was in a state of crisis that could have escalated to nuclear war . The Cuban crisis was one of the worst moments in American history .
 The disaster convinced the Kennedy administration that the Communists needed to be taken seriously, as anymore failures would risk goading aggressive Communist intentions . The Kennedy administration decided to take seriously .
 In the highly pressurised environment of the White House, straight-talking, hard-ball attitudes and the concoction of the 'red menace' frequently turned strategy into personal vendettas .
 Bobby Kennedy, Jack's younger brother and Attorney-General for the U.S. government, would take the Bay of Pigs disaster as a personal slight against him . Bobby Kennedy was the Attorney General for the American government .
 Castro had made the Kennedy family look weak, and now he was going to ""get him"" by any means necessary, even commissioning a plan for an exploding seashell to be planted at Castro's favourite diving spot to take his head off .
 Jack didn't order a full invasion of Cuba, nor any provocative move in that region until it was absolutely necessary . Conversely, Jack did not order any provocative moves .
 In a famous comment made to an aide about the prospect of an American invasion of Cuba, he said; ""The minute I land one marine we’re in this thing up to our necks. We’ve been in Cuba up to their necks"
 "I can't get the United States into a war and then lose it, no matter what it takes," says President Obama . "I don't want to get the U.S. into war and lose it," he says .
 Kennedy's caution was still infused with the influence of manful bravado inherited from his patriarchal family and the hawks in his own government . Kennedy was ever-ready to go toe-to-toe with the Communists .
 Kennedy felt deceived by the Soviets, who were talking to him about nuclear disarmament, while installing medium-range missiles on the Cuban mainland . Kennedy felt that the Soviets were trying to disarmament while installing missiles in Cuba .
 He called the Soviets ""barefaced liars"" and hurled expletives whenever he heard the names of Castro or Khrushchev during meetings in the run up to the blockade .
 The blockade represented the most he could do to confront them without tipping the world into a nuclear holocaust . They had made him look foolish and soft on the Communist problem, and the blockade was the most .
 To Kennedy, however, ever-ready to fight the good fight, the threat was still real and it was engulfing south-east Asia . Kennedy: "The threat is still real. It is engulfing South East Asia"
 He publicly endorsed the Diem regime in South Vietnam led by Ngo Dinh Diem . Despite private reservations about their effectiveness and cmelty to their own people, he publicly endorsed them .
 As the war intensified, Diem, a stanch Catholic, was drawing ever more criticism from his own people, the majority of who were Buddhist . The majority of the country was Buddhist .
 Buddhist monks set themselves on fire in the middle of a busy street in Saigon in protest . After brutal crackdowns on the Buddhist community at the beginning of 1963, brutal clashes broke out .
 The response by one of Diem's closet advisors, his sister-in-law Madame Ngo Dinh Nhu, was heartless . The response to the death of the Vietnamese leader was a heartless gesture .
 She told a CBS film crew that the Buddhists had just ""barbecued"" themselves, and next time she would provide the mustard . She said she would do the same next time .
 For Kennedy, a man who lived shoulder to shoulder with the media, this was a disaster . Kennedy was known for his work in the media and for his relationship with the public .
 The regime that America was supposed to be protecting was in fact a cruel dictatorship . The regime was a brutal dictatorship, the U.S. government says .
 Kennedy's troops remained in Vietnam even after the brutal events of 1963 . Diem's regime may have been harsh, but as far as Kennedy’s administration was concerned, at least it wasn't Communist . Kennedy's forces remained in the country even after Vietnam's brutal events .
 Kennedy's legendary standoff with Communism would linger in the halls of the White House after his death . The memory of Kennedy's battle with Communism lingered in halls of halls of White House .
 No future president would dare look weak in front of the Communist lest they appeared weaker than Kennedy, prompting a military invasion of Vietnam by Johnson . Any failure to contain Communism throughout the globe was a de-facto failure of the current U.S. administration .
 Debates about whether the Vietnam War would have been conducted differently if Kennedy had been at the helm continue to endure . Debates continue to be about whether Vietnam War was conducted differently .
 Kennedy balked at appearing weak in front of the Communists, but he was a far more able negotiator than his successors . Some say he would have brought Vietnam to a peaceful conclusion far quicker and with less casualties .
 Part of Kennedy’s success was due to his international grandstanding . But part of his success was because of his grandstanding, he says . Kennedy's success was partly due to international grandstands .
 His image as young, energetic and tough chimed well with the mood of the U.S. that wanted a nation that was assertive and cut away from the stagnation of the Eisenhower years and the defeats under Truman .
 It is unlikely that he would have ordered a full withdrawal at Vietnam, but part of his enduring persona has, like the issues surrounding civil rights, has created a myth that things would have been very different .
 Kennedy's funeral took place on 25 November, three days after his assassination . His funeral was held in New York City, New York .
 As his funeral procession made its long march up to St Matthew's Cathedral, it was accompanied by Black Jack, a riderless horse symbolising the loss of a great leader . Black Jack symbolises the death of the great leader.
 When his casket was brought out after the service, foreign dignitaries including Charles de Gaulle of France and thousands of American citizens watched in silence .
 Kennedy's final resting place was the Arlington National Cemetery as befitting an American hero . Kennedy was a hero of American life . Kennedy's last resting place is Arlington National Cemeterial .
 Barack Obama's 'Hope' campaign for a new beginning in the United States was influenced by Kennedy’s own in 1960 . Kennedy's influence continues to be felt; his influence continues .
 His boundless potential and hope for a better and more peaceful world was lost forever, along with the man that he might have become . His death shocked everyone .
 The Marilyn Monroe affair was probably the most infamous of Kennedy's relationships during his time in government . Kennedy's relationship with Marilyn Monroe was one of the most famous of his relationships .
 The two met through Peter Lawford on four separate occasions, one of which, it is claimed, resulted in sexual relations . It is claimed that one of the four times they had sexual relations resulted in a sexual encounter .
 Raunchy rendition of Happy Birthday during Kennedy's 45th birthday celebrations . The dress she was wearing at the time was described as ""flesh with sequins sewed onto it"
 Kennedy had an on-off affair with Campbell, who was also linked with Mob bosses Sam Giancana and John Roselli . The affair was the subject of repeated denials and cover-ups for decades .
 He was aware of the risks to his political career of sleeping with a woman with connections to the Mafia, but carried on . It was one of the most enduring affairs Kennedy had had, and he was aware .
 Von Post met Kennedy on the French Riviera after her aristocratic family sent her there to brush up on her French . Von Post was a Swedish socialite, meeting Kennedy at the Riviera .
 A passionate affair ensued, with graphic love letters and lustful liaisons occurring throughout the Fifties . A graphic love letter and lusty liaisons occurred throughout the 1950s .
 The tryst was so serious that Kennedy reportedly considered leaving Jackie for her, but feared his father's reaction . Kennedy considered leaving his wife for her but feared the reaction of his father .
 Sophia Loren told Kennedy to leave her alone during a dinner at the Italian Embassy in Washington in the late Fifties .
 This was despite Kennedy's gallant offer to include her female interpreter in a night of passion so that she didn't feel left out . Kennedy offered to include the woman's interpreter in the night so she felt left out.
 It was an image she cultivated and encouraged and one that would ultimately lead to her death . It was one of many things that led to her suicide .
 Flames secured Joan's martyrdom, just as they provoked her fierce patriotism . Joan was killed by a firework attack on her homeland .
 Jehanne DArc, or la Pucelle as she came to be known, was bom in 1412 in the village of Domremy, located across the river from Burgundy .
 The Burgundians, allies of the English, regularly attacked French territory . Burgundian forces were allied with the English and attacked French territories .
 Joan's family fled a raid and returned to find the enemy had burned their town, fields and church . Joan's town was burned in July 1428, 1428 . Joan and her family survived the raid .
 Joan had heard angelic voices since the age of 12 or 13, urging her to remain pious, but now they gave her a specific mission . Joan was given a mission by the angels to find out what to do to help her .
 The voices of Archangel Michael, St Catherine and St Margaret directed her to go into France and find her king, the Dauphin Charles . St Catherine, St Margaret and St Catherine told her to do the same .
 The alliance between England and Burgundy had kept Charles from claiming the French crown . The alliance kept Charles out of the French throne .
 His enemies held the city of Reims, where coronations took place, in France . His enemies occupied Paris, but also held Reims .
 The crown would have to wait, however, as the French city of Orleans was currently in the grip of a protracted siege . The French city was in the midst of a siege .
 On 13 May 1428, the 16-year-old arrived in Vaucouleurs and begged Robert de Baudricourt to give her a military escort to Charles’ court at Chinon .
 Joan would not be detentened and returned in January the next year . Joan would return in January next year but would be forced to give up her job .
 Baudricourt turned her down again, but her efforts were gaining traction . She was turned down again by the court .
 She gained favour with local nobility, particularly the Duke of Lonaine . She gained popularity with the local nobility .
 Joan refused to attempt to cure her husband's gout, but Duke agreed to give her a small escort . She travelled in men's clothes to Chinon in February, where she was presented to the court .
 Taking advice from a mad heretic could be devastating to his campaign . But her story appealed to his love of astrology and fortune-telling and besides, he desperately needed any help he could get .
 He was impressed, but ordered she be tested before giving any official credence to her claims . He ordered her to be tested and said she should be tested .
 Yolande of Aragon was one of the hue powers behind Charles and an intelligent strategist . Charles was a key figure in the trial of his son-in-law .
 Joan faced questions from clergy and theologians and passed with flying colours . Joan's maidenhood was proved after she was proved to be a woman .
 From 1348 to 1350, the Black Death ravaged England, claiming the lives of some 1.1 million people . Charles now had a messenger of God, and Yolande raised a convoy for this messenger to lead .
 The bubonic plague spread through overpopulated towns and cities . Carried by fleas, in turn carried by the rats infesting London, the plague spread across the world .
 England's economy and resources would feel its effects for decades to come, say experts . England would feel the effects of the war in the coming years, they say .
 Joan of Arc was not the first woman to claim the heavenly host had spoken to her . Emissaries from God were sent to Joan's home in 17th century .
 St Clare of Assisi claimed to be able to hear and see Mass on the wall of her room when she was too ill to move . Catherine of Siena travelled Italy urging states to make peace with Rome . Hildegard of Bingen railed against corruption in the clergy
 From bows to cannons, the technology of warfare began to change in the Hundred Years' War . The technology of war technology began to be changed through the decades .
 Longbows at Agincourt in 1415 were the difference between victory and defeat . As open battles often replaced by lengthy sieges, cannon fire became a deciding factor .
 The definition of heresy covers a great deal of sins, but the term boils down to denying any established Christian dogma . Heresy trials are held in the United States and Europe .
 In the Middle Ages, heresy trials became more common and the Catholic Church aggressively pursued any enemies . In the 16th century, the Church was aggressively pursuing any enemies.
 Copernican scholars were accused of heresy in the early 16th century . This continued into the 16th and 17th century, with Copernicans accused of being 'heist' Copernic .
 Czech religious reformer Jan Huss was burned at the stake in 1415 for heresy . The Bavarian Hussites were religious reformers of the 14th century . Hussites are the descendants of the Bohemians .
 After his death, the Hussite movement was born, separating itself from Rome . The Hussite was born in Rome, separating it from the Roman Empire .
 Hussites declared that communion should be given with bread and wine . The Hussites believed in poverty of the priesthood, punishment of sinners and freedom of preaching .
 Edward III, one of the instigators of The Hundred Years' War, crossed the Somme . Edward III was one of many instigator of the war . He was killed in the Battle of Somme in 1916 .
 By the reign of Edward III in 1327, only Gascony and Pontieu remained in France .
 Edward believed his mother and Charles' sister Isabella was the next in line, meaning the crown should be his . When the French King Charles IV died heirless, Edward believed that his mother was heir to the throne .
 A furious Edward refused to pay homage and when Philip confiscated his lands in Aquitaine in retaliation, Edward declared war . Philip confiscated Edward's lands in retaliation for his refusal to pay tribute .
 Edward agreed to abandon his claim in exchange for Aquitaine and Calais . The Treaty of Bretigny was the result of a compromise .
 War resumed in 1369 when Charles V of France responded to Edward the Black Prince refusing his summons by declaring war . Charles V declared war after Edward refused to comply with his summons .
 Charles successfully reclaimed many of the territories his predecessor lost . The Black Prince's son Richard II would make peace with Charles VI in 1389 . Richard II made peace between Charles VI and Charles VI .
 War resumed in 1415 when Henry V invaded, leading to decades of conflict during which the English would take Paris and claim kingship . After the truce had been repeatedly extended, war resumed in 1515 .
 They would not be driven out until the Battle of Castillon in 1453, the official end of the Hundred Years' War . They would never return to England again until 1453 .
 Joan rode out in April 1429, holding her white standard and wearing a suit of armour commissioned by Charles . Joan was married to Charles in 1429 .
 She announced that her sword would be found in the church of Sainte-Catherine-de-Fierbois, hidden behind the altar .
 It was an old gift to the church from the crusades, and the discovery was treated as a miracle . The discovery was a gift from the Crusades and treated as 'a miracle'
 Her pious conduct became renowned . She forced her soldiers to stop talcing the Lord's name in vain . She expelled prostitutes from their camps .
 She dictated letters to the English, instructing them to leave France or face the wrath of God . She dictated the letters to her husband, who died in 1777 .
 A canny propagandist, the Dauphin ensured these letters were copied and widely distributed .
 She arrived at Orleans eager for battle but had not understood that her forces were there as support, nothing more . Her forces were only there for support, not support, she said .
 She managed to get her men into the city, past the English troops and was rewarded with the adulation of the citizens . Although frustrated, she managed to . get her troops into the . city .
 Her impatience to attack was at odds with her fellow commanders' strategy . They may have been pleased to see her but she was impatient to attack . They were pleased with her arrival, but her impatience was not the best strategy for her troops .
 In her frustration she hurled insults at the English from the battlements . Her frustration was her frustration at the lack of respect for the English .
 Joan sent many letters to English and Burgundian troops but she was illiterate and had to dictate them 1 up as the fight was in progress . Joan had to write them up as she had no idea how much of the battle was taking place . Joan sent her letters to the English
 She dictated a fearsome final letter to the English, ordering them to leave, and on 6 May another attack was mounted . On 6 May she wrote a final letter ordering the English to leave .
 She claims to be the first to storm the ramparts at Les Tourelles, where she took an arrow to the shoulder but stayed in the fight . She advanced again the next day, claiming to have taken an arrow in the shoulder . The next day she claimed to have been the
 French commanders credited her for inspiring the troops to victory in the First World War .
 With Orleans free, Joan wanted Charles to proceed immediately to Reims but the Dauphin was more cautious . Charles was able to reach Reims, France, in 18 months .
 He wanted to clear the Loire valley and began raising money r for the campaign . He began raising funds r for a campaign .
 The Duke of Alengon was a firm believer in the young female warrior and frequently deferred to her . He was a strong believer in female warriors and often deferred to them .
 They swept quickly through the English resistance and laid siege to Beaugency . Beaugency was the French capital of France in 17th century .
 The English surrendered without realising a relief force was on its way, the French promptly set off after . The English surrender was the first time the French had arrived in France .
 She dictated a fearsome final letter to the English, ordering them to leave, and on 6 May another attack was mounted . They met at Patay on 18 June, where the ill-prepared English were decimated, with over 2,000 rattle .
 Joan led the attack herself, routing the enemy"" Defining moment First vision 1424 . At just 12 or 13 years old, she first claims to hear the voices of angels speaking to her . Joan claims to have heard angels speak to her at the age of 12 .
 If she feels she had not behaved properly, the voices would admonish her . The voices would tell her if she had behaved properly .
 They also tell her to reject the marriage her family had arranged for her . They also say she should reject her family's arranged marriage .
 As Joan grows older, Michael's messages continue to advise her toward piety, but gradually grow more political . Michael's message to Joan gradually grows more political as Joan grows up .
 Michael and the other voices, those of St Catherine and St Margaret, tell her to travel to France and begin her mission . Finally, Michael and St Catherine tell her that she must go to France .
 She never receives formal education or learns to read or write, instead learning about religion from her mother Isabelle . She never learns to write or learn to read and write .
 Her family flees to Neufchateau and returns to find the enemy having burnt their town . Her family is forced to flee the enemy's camp and return to their home .
 She travels to Vaucouleurs to demand an escort, beginning a series of attempts ending in success after convincing nobles that she is the fulfilment of a prophecy . She is the main character of the novel .
 Joan is granted a meeting with the Dauphin Charles, who sees value in her for his military campaign to free Orleans . Joan was granted an audience with the king in 1428 .
 Joan identifies him in a room full of people and impresses him with her fervour . Joan immediately identifies him as a man in the audience . Joan's fervour is her passion for love .
 She announces that her sword can be found in the church of Saint Catherinede-Fierbois . The sword is now in the hands of French authorities .
 Joan played little part in it but by this point it mattered not, as her legend only grew stronger . Joan played a little part but by the time she died Joan played her part in her own life, her legend grew stronger.
 He led a grand procession, entered the city on 16 July and was crowned the next day . He was led by grand procession and entered city the following day .
 She was desperate for the long to attack Paris but he chose to leave Reims instead, only to be barred from crossing the Seine by English troops . He chose to stay in Reims rather than attack Paris, but was barred from the city .
 Joan finally led the Paris attack she had been itching for . After skirmishes throughout August and a tmce with Burgundy, on 8 September Joan led the attack . Joan was the first French woman to lead a Paris attack .
 She stood on the moat, demanding sunender, but the only reply she received was an English anow through her leg . She stood in front of her own moat and demanded a sunender .
 After hours of bombardment, her men reached her under the cover of darkness, but she was determined to continue the fight the next day . Her men were able to reach her in the night .
 Charles ordered her to return to his side when he saw the number of French casualties . Charles saw the French casualties and ordered her back to the side of his side .
 In November 1429 she failed to take the castle of La Charite after a long siege . She needed a victory to restore her reputation .
 When she returned to court, Charles gave her hereditary nobility but made sure she stayed with him, frustrating Joan . Joan was frustrated by Charles' insistence that she stay with him .
 It was her duty to be on the battlefield expelling the enemy from her home soil, not rotting in court, she said . It was the duty of her duty, not to be rotting in prison, she added .
 By 1430, the English were preparing a full-scale invasion of France to reclaim their recently lost territory . The English were planning to invade France with the help of the French .
 When the city of Compiegne refused to surrender, Joan rode to support them without Charles' authorisation . Joan rode in support of the city, which refused to be surrendered .
 English reinforcements cut her off at the rear and she could not retreat . On 23 May she led an attack from the city, but was cut off by English reinforcements .
 She was pulled from her horse and forced to surrender to the Burgundians . The Burgundian army captured her and forced her to surrender .
 Joan dressed in men's clothes claiming the spirits told her to do so . She leonly anexampk and Joan dressed only an exampk . Joan dressed up in men clothes claiming she was told to .
 She testified that constant sexual harassment was the reason she remained in men's clothing, while the voices in her head told her not to escape . She also wore her hair short, but this is often not depicted in portraits .
 Joan was accused of heresy, idolatry and witchcraft by Parisian theologians . The English needed to make an example of Joan and the Parisians wanted to try her for heresy . Joan's trial was held in France in 16th century .
 She needed to answer for the way in ^ which she had circumvented the church by claiming to receive her instructions from her Voices' while her ability to inspire followers had to be stopped . She had claimed to receive instructions from 'her Voices'
 If she were convicted by a foreign power the damage to Charles' reputation would be severe . So the French court paid the Duke of Burgundy £10,000 for her . The Duke was forced to sell her to a French court in France .
 Six rounds of questioning took place between 21 February and 3 March 1431, with nine more between 10 and 17 March, conducted in her cell .
 On 24 May, she was taken to the scaffold and told that if she did not abjure, she would be given to secular authorities that would carry out her death sentence . She was then taken to a scaffold where she was told that she would die .
 In front of the crowd, she recanted and was sentenced to life imprisonment and to wear women's clothes . She recanted after being convicted and sentenced to wear a women's dress .
 Joan was found in men’s clothes, claiming voices told her that her abjuration was treason . Demanding she be allowed to attend mass, Joan claimed she had been told by voices telling her to do it .
 On 30 May she was allowed to make her confession and take communion before being tied to the stake . She was taken to the Old Market in Rouen and tied to stake .
 She was given a small crucifix and a priest held a parish cross high so she could see it even as the flames began to lick around her . A Dominican priest held the cross high to protect her from the flames .
 The king she had helped crown, Charles VII, not once tried to help Joan . Joan helped crown Charles VII . Charles VII was the king she helped crown . Joan's husband was King Charles VIII .
 Joan arrives at Orleans amid great fanfare from the citizens of the city but is met with indifference by her fellow commanders . Defining moment Siege of Orleans 29 April-8 May 1429 . Joan arrived at Orleans in 1429 and was greeted with fanfare .
 She is determined to mount an attack as soon as possible but is told they would wait for a relief effort . She is hoping to mount the attack within hours .
 She is so poorly regarded by the other generals that when a sortie takes place, she’s not told beforehand . She is not told when the sortie will take place .
 She races out and joins the attack just in time to rally the flagging troops, ultimately claiming a fortress . Instead of joining the attack, she joins in and claims a fortress in the battle .
 This will be the first in a series of victories that would liberate Orleans and confirm her status for many as a heaven-sent hero .
 1,500 men fall to the English bombardment, with Joan herself wounded, having to be pulled from the battlefield under nightfall . Joan's siege fails, with the English having to pull her out of the battlefield .
 She is cut off by the English and pulled from her horse while trying to escape . She was pulled from the horse by her horse as she tried to escape the English .
 She retracts her statement, only to change her mind days later, stating she'd rather die than deny what she knows to be true . She later changed her mind and said she'd 'rather die' than deny it .
 A Dominican priest holds a cross up high enough for her to see from the flames . The Dominican priest held a cross high enough to keep her from burning . She was burned to death in the Dominican Republic .
 In 1456, the original verdict is annulled, deciding the process had been unjust . The original verdict in 1456 was overturned, but the process was never found to be unjust . Eventually, the verdict was overturned and the case was settled .
 He moved to London in the late 1580s to pursue an acting career . He became a prominent and prolific playwright and poet . He produced an average of two plays a year until 1611 .
 T wo guards grabbed him tightly and dragged him down a stone corridor . His shackled legs meant he couldn't keep up the frantic pace they had set .
 He was determined to show no sign of weakness and tried to concentrate on the senses around him, such as the rats scurrying by his feet and insects crawling on the walls and the warmth on his face .
 Robert Southwell was born into a good family and devoted his life to God . He was ordained a priest in 1584 in Rome and was born in 1583 .
 Later that year, the ‘Jesuits, etc Act 1 had ordered all Roman Catholic priests to leave England . Later that same year, all Roman Catholics had been ordered to leave the country .
 Many of his friends had hurriedly scrambled their belongings together and fled the island nation for friendlier shores . They were given 40 days' grace to do so and many of them were given a 40-day grace period .
 The guards swung him around a comer and flung open a new cell door for him . Pain ripped through his body as the guards swirled him around .
 His lust for Anne Boleyn had seen him turn his back on the Catholic faith he had been brought up in . Damn him and his desire for a male heir and his lust for the queen .
 Martin Luther's actions had led the Protestant Reformation that had swept through Europe and ultimately adopted throughout England . And damn that German monk Martin Luther .
 Limbo was Limbo, the most feared cell in Newgate Prison, inside a gate in the Roman London Wall . He recognised it from the descriptions of others whose fate had brought them here .
 Jesuit missionary left Rome in 1586 to work as a Jesuit missionary, staying with numerous Catholic families, thus becoming a wanted man . His heart beating wildly with fear, he reflected on his decision to leave Rome .
 Eventually, the door swung open and he was dragged out of his cramped cell . Eventually, he was pulled out of the cramped cell by police .
 He was hauled before Lord Chief Justice John Popham and indicted as a traitor . He could barely stand as he was taken to trial, hauled before the Chief Justice .
 He defiantly laid out his position, admitted to being a priest and his sentence was passed . The priest was sentenced to life in prison on Friday .
 After being beaten on the journey through London's streets he was forced to stand . He was beaten on his journey through the streets of London and forced to leave .
 His bowels were removed before his beating heart was dragged out of his body and he was cut into four pieces . He was cut down while still alive, his bowels and his heart were removed .
 This was England in the late-16th century Queen Elizabeth's religious compromise . Her religious compromise wasn't without its share of pain and suffering . The Queen's religious compromises were often painful and painful .
 He had moved to London from Stratford-upon-Avon in 1587 to pursue a career as an actor . He had left behind his young family to pursue career as a playwright .
 He had married Anne Hathaway in 1582, when he was 18 and she was 26 . Together they had three children, Susanna, Hamnet and Judith . He had also three children with Hathaway .
 Robert Greene was arguably the first professional author in England . Greene was a 19-year-old author in the early 1900s . Greene is one of the most prolific writers in the country .
 By 1594, he had written more plays and seen both Venus and Adonis and The Rape ofLucrese published .
 He dedicated them to his patron Henry Wriothesley, the Earl of Southampton . He dedicated the paintings to his friend Henry Wryothesley .
 Southampton was from a long Catholic dynasty and he appreciated poetry and theatre . Southampton was a long . Catholic dynasty . He appreciated poetry .
 When the theatres re-opened in 1594 following an outbreak of bubonic plague, he was keen to invite the Earl along .
 Shakespeare's new troupe, Lord Chamberlain's Men, was becoming popular, with them even invited to perform in the royal court of Queen Elizabeth I Shakespeare . Shakespeare had also bought shares in the company and was becoming a powerful and influential figure .
 The Reformation had changed England's approach to religion, moving the country away from its Catholic roots and into the arms of Protestantism .
 Protest leaders encouraged more than 30,000 priests, gentry and commoners to demand a return to Catholicism in 1536 had been executed . Protest leaders were encouraged to return Catholicism to England .
 Two years later, reformers had banished the cult of saints, destroying shrines and banning the population of England from making pilgrimages .
 Riots in 1549 were repressed in the most vicious ways the reformers would hang priests from church towers and lop off the heads of laymen who refused to obey the new order .
 All this affected the Bard; he wasn't writing in a bubble and nor were the actors who performed his work . The Bard's work was affected by the Bard's writing, and the Bard wasn't living in such a bubble .
 Speaking out against the establishment was hard not least for those who wanted to keep their heads . Speaking out was hard for many, including those who were trying to keep heads .
 Asquith believes Queen Elizabeth's religious compromise wasn't without its share of pain . The poet rebelled and devised a secret code, inserting messages and double meaning into his writing .
 Cryptology had been used since ancient times and there were examples of secret codes being used in this time period . It isn't as outlandish as it may sound; cryptology was used in ancient times .
 For example, Mary, Queen of Scots used a cipher secretary called Gilbert Curie to handle her secret conespondence .
 Catholic double agent Gilbert Gifford intercepted letters that had been smuggled out in casks of ale . Sir Francis Walsingham had created a school for espionage for spies .
 'tempest' or 'storm' were used to signify England's troubles, according to Asquith . 'Storm' was used to mean 'storm', according to the Prime Minister .
 Shakespeare may have been convinced he could change people's view of the world by writing on a level of entertainment and political and religious level . Shakespeare may well have thought he could do so much to change the world with his work .
 Philip II of Spain, who had married Mary I, felt England's Catholics had been abandoned . There had long been a promise that, if the Catholics bided their time, help would come .
 Such an assessment revises the prevailing thinking that Shakespeare wrote universal plays and avoided any topicality . Shakespeare's plays are not universal plays, it is thought that he avoided topicality.
 It's plausible that he wanted to do more than merely shake the literary world . He wanted to influence politics and religion, to affect his society, he says .
 Shakespeare may have been looking out at a more enlightened nation than ever before, but is was still a city and country where the screams of religious and political prisoners filled the corridors of cramped jail cells as torturers extracted forced confessions . Shakespeare sat at his desk overlooking the squalid, filthy conditions
 Shakespeare's play is a stark reminder of the perils of religious divisions that continued throughout Shakespeare's life . This sobering reality was a sobering reminder of Shakespeare's religious divisions .
 "The final and definitive answer to that, like some of the great man's work, is unfortunately lost to the ages," says the late actor .
 The authorship of Shakespeare's work has been the subject of debate for decades . He didn't really write the works, according to some of the theories .
 Many believe that Edward de Vere, the 17th Earl of Oxford was the writer rather than the small-town boy from Stratford . With no original manuscripts, no mention of him even being a writer in his will, many believe that he wrote .
 If not him, then one of 80 other historical figures that have been mentioned over the years, such as Marlowe . And if not him then he could be a member of the Royal Family .
 Some scholars believe that Shakespeare revered today as a playwright was actually a fictional character . He didn't even exist, according to some scholars .
 William Shaxper or Shakspere was born in 1564, married and had children but became an actor and remained in such a role until his retirement . They believe that the few documents relating to him were actually for a man known as William .
 Had Shakespeare been such a prominent playwright, there would surely have been many documents mourning his passing, critics say . Critics say he would have been a better known playwright . Shakespeare's death would have led to a flurry of papers mourning his death .
 Those who argue Shakespeare was not quite who he claims he was are called anti-Stratfordians . He was an Italian . Those who say he was not who he claimed to be Shakespeare are called 'anti-Statfordians'
 Shakespeare or Michaelangelo Florio Crollalanza had moved from Sicily to London fearing the Holy Inquisition . One theory is that Shakespeare or Florio had moved to London from Sicily .
 Professor Martini luvara claims to have proof and mentions the Sicilian play Tanto Traffico Per Niente written by Crollalanza .
 Mary I set about calling a halt to the Reformation after the death of King Edward VI in 1553 . She was struck with fever and cough that gradually worsened . Mary I ascended to the throne and called for the end of the Reform .
 She swung England firmly back towards Catholicism, causing reformers to run scared and flee . Reformers ran scared and fled. She swung the country firmly back .
 Terror had brought on the Protestants but Cecil had the ear of Elizabeth, who he had known for years . Terror had been brought on by the Protestants . Elizabeth had known Cecil, who had known him for years.
 She had embraced the Church of England, so much that she had been imprisoned in the Tower of London by her half-sister Mary . Mary feared she was part of a plot to depose her, and imprisoned her for two months .
 Cecil wanted to return to a Protestant England after Mary died in 1558 . Cecil wanted a return to the Protestant state of England .
 Queen Elizabeth succeeded the throne since Mary had born no child and Cecil became her advisor . Cecil became Queen Elizabeth's advisor and she succeeded her in the throne .
 Crucifixes and candlesticks were to be allowed, although new bishops protested . New bishops protested, but new bishops were not allowed .
 Protestants who fled returned and wanted their religion to be supreme . Protestants who had fled returned to their religion . But Protestants who returned returned wanted their religious freedom .
 Cecil ensured Catholics would be excluded from public life . He allowed them to worship as long as they did not threaten the queen and did so discreetly .
 The Armada was defeated but it had succeeded in creating further religious and political divisions, so the authorities were on even greater alert . Authorities were on greater alert after the Armada's success .
 Shakespeare got to work and, at first, kept things simple . Shakespeare kept it simple in this world . The play is set in the Middle Ages .
 Their plots related to divided families, parallels for an England cut in two . The plot is based on a plot plot in the heart of London, England .
 Asquith believes the Bard placed certain markers in his texts that signalled a second, hidden meaning . The Bard placed these markers in the Bard's texts to indicate a hidden meaning, he says .
 Asquith takes this as reference to the black clothes worn by Puritans and to the 'high' church services that would include mass as opposed to 'low' services that didn't .
 Shakespeare used characters to signify the two sides and by using words associated with Catholic codes . If this theory is tme a matter of some debate then it enabled Shakespeare to get specific messages across . Shakespeare used Catholic codes to communicate with the audience .
 'Love' is divided into human and spiritual and 'tempest' refers to turbulence of the Reformation . Bard used his own terms to disguise a message that was pro-Catholic .
 Shakespeare's patron, the Earl of Southampton, rebelled against Elizabeth I . He became Robert, Earl of Essex's lieutenant in an attempt to raise the people of London against the government . The Earl became Robert's lieutenant and became the Earl's lieutenant .
 Shakespeare's company had their work cut out afterward denying complicity . The Essex faction had ordered a performance of the 'deposition' play Richard II just before the rebellion . Shakespeare had to deny complicity .
 Shakespeare wrote Hamlet, encouraging action against unjust mle . The plan ended in failure in 1601, but in that same year, Hamlet encouraged action . Hamlet was inspired by the plan .
 If this is tme, Shakespeare really was one of the defining rebels of the period . Shakespeare was a rebel of his time, according to the historian .
 Critics have said for decades that the writer was against populist rebellions and supported authority and the rule of law . But with the recent reassessment of the extent of dissidence at the end of Elizabeth's reign, Shakespeare's Elizabethan work begins to seem more oppositional”, As
 Leontes accuses his wife of infidelity and having an illegitimate child . Suspicious that his childhood friend is his pregnant wife’s lover, he accuses her of cheating and infidelity .
 Having ordered the newborn baby to be abandoned, he is later reunited with her, much to his delight . The film is based on the story of a man who abandoned a newborn baby .
 As with The Tempest, Pericles and Cymbeline, The Winter's Tale started with suffering and ended with happiness . As with the Tempest and Pericles, it was the beginning of the story .
 It showed a transition that could put past remorse to bed, highlighting the possibility that evils can be defeated and overcome . It also showed that a true home can be found for spiritualism if it is wanted .
 It would have encouraged the audience to keep the faith and not give up hope . It would also encourage the audience not to give up on hope .
 Written between 1588 and 1593, the play is set in the latter days of the Roman Empire . Written in the Roman empire, it was set during the reign of the 16th century .
 The play explores the life of a fictional Roman general, Titus, caught in a vicious circle of revenge with the queen of the Goths, Tamora . The play is Bloody in the extreme, the play explores life of Titus, a Roman general .
 Shakespeare appears to be pleading for calm among England's dissidents . The play highlights suffering and repression while arguing the case against a violent rebellion . Shakespeare's play is set in the backdrop of a violent uprising .
 The message, claims Asquith, is very much about biding time, waiting for help in the guise of a promised invasion . It mirrored the rhetoric of Catholic leaders who stressed England would be saved via diplomacy or invasion rather than an internal uprising .
 Written between 1590 and 1592, the courtship of Petruchio is at the heart of the play . The play is set in the early 15th century .
 It shows his attempts to tame the wild Katherina, a girl he loves but is rebuffed by until he manages to win her over . The film is set to be released on Blu-Ray in September 2015 .
 Her sister is called Bianca, meaning 'white' and she is the respectable one of the two . She is the sister of her 'respectable' sister, Bianca .
 This paints Katherina to be like a reformer and need to be brought into line . This paints her as a reformed reformer .
 For those accustomed to finding deeper meanings, the message would have been obvious, she says . The message would be obvious, according to her .
 He wants to pass the monarchy to his three daughters and asks them to prove they love him the best but one cannot . One cannot so he splits it between two before falling into madness . He then falls into madness and decides to kill himself .
 Lear's actions caused a tumbling effect as various people were banished, reunited, imprisoned and heartbroken . Lear was banished, imprisoned, imprisoned or heartbroken by his actions . Lear is believed to be the most famous person in the world to have been banished .
 Asquith notes that some of Shakespeare's characters came to be increasingly dramatic and allegorical . The more elaborate plays retained the puns, wordplay and double meanings so beloved of audiences in Elizabethan times .
 When King James assumed the throne in 1603, Catholics assumed that he would lend them greater support than Elizabeth, given that his mother was a staunch Catholic . Catholics assumed they would have greater support given that James' mother was .
 Shakespeare must have been well aware of a growing political and religious resentment against the monarchy, with a feeling of rebellion growing . Shakespeare was not to be able to escape from the monarchy . But that was not the case .
 His plays in this period became more cynical, which some have speculated was a consequence of the world he was living in . Some have speculated that some of his plays became cynical .
 Guy Fawkes, Thomas Wintour, Everard Digby and Thomas Percy hired a cellar beneath the Houses of Parliament for a few weeks . They gathered gunpowder and stored it in their newly acquired space .
 Their plan was to blow the building sky high, taking parliamentarians and King James I with it . Their plan to blow it sky high was to take the King and Parliamentarians with it with it.
 Guy Fawkes was taken away to be tortured into confession . The deadly rack was the instrument said to have broken him . But their cover was blown and he was taken from the scene .
 Shakespeare wrote King Lear, Othello and Macbeth, all plays warning against unjust rule . Many Catholics felt James I was guilty of unjust rule, which many felt was wrong .
 Such an assessment revises thinking that Shakespeare wrote universal plays and avoided any topicality . Shakespeare avoided topicality in his plays, he says .
 It's plausible that he wanted to do more than merely shake the literary world . He wanted to influence politics and religion, he says .
 Shakespeare may have been looking at a more enlightened nation than ever before, but is was still a place where the screams of religious and political prisoners filled the corridors of cramped jail cells as torturers extracted confessions . Shakespeare sat at his desk overlooking the squalid conditions of London .
 "The definitive answer to that, like some of the great man's work, is unfortunately lost to the ages," he says . The definitive answer is still not clear .
 Julius Caesar fought alongside Julius Caesar on the battlefield . He quickly established his military prowess . Julius Caesar died in the Battle of the Roman Empire .
 After Caesar's assassination, he formed a power trio with Marcus Lepidus and Octavian . His growing love of the Egyptian queen Cleopatra would prove to be his downfall .
 Cleopatra was the daughter of Ptolemy XII Auletes . Born in Alexandria in 69 BCE her bloodline propagated a series of brothersister marriages that were frequently corroded by family violence .
 After a tumultuous reign, Octavian of Rome invaded Egypt and ended her rule . After a turbulent reign, he invaded Egypt in a bid to overthrow her .
 Cleopatra committed suicide rather than face the humiliation of defeat . Rather than face defeat, she committed suicide .
 C leopatra VII remains an icon of both the ancient and modern world . The last pharaoh remains a symbol of the Egyptian culture .
 She is one of history's most enchanting and enigmatic figures . Today, she continues to captivate and puzzle historians, remaining one of the most enigmatic figures in history .
 The alliance of Mark Antony and Cleopatra changed the face of the world . The alliance between the two monarchs changed the course of history .
 A coalition which began as a political statement soon evolved into a tumultuous, and later tragic, love affair . A coalition of political statements soon evolved to a tumultuous and tragic affair .
 Cleopatra took only two lovers both were rulers of Rome . Despite her florid reputation, she only had two lovers . Both were Roman rulers .
 Egypt, rich in gold and grain, provided the material resources to fuel that power . Egypt is now the world's most powerful state of power . The country was rich in grain and gold and gold .
 The queen had established a secure and profitable union between Rome and Egypt . They had enabled the queen to establish a secure . union .
 Despite this, however, events took an unexpected turn when she met the younger general . She met the general in a bid to get back in touch with him .
 Cleopatra and Mark Antony fell in love, embarking on a passionate and unpredictable relationship that brought both riches and remorse . The pair met in the Roman capital, Rome, during the reign of Roman Empire .
 Their partnership immortalised and destroyed a dynasty it brought to a close 3,000 years of pharaonic rule . Their partnership, as lovers and politicians, both immortalised the dynasty .
 Cleopatra secured for herself an enormous power base, for Caesar had no heir . In doing so she had secured . for herself . Caesar had . no heir. Caesar had not . Caesar . Caesar died in a battle of the Roman Empire .
 Egypt suffered years of famine that had weakened the reserves of her granaries and her people . Despite its material wealth, Egypt had suffered famine that weakened its people and its granaries .
 In 30 BCE, a love affair between a powerful queen and a respected military leader caused scandal in Rome and ultimately brought about the end of a dynasty their throats . Her allied states had also felt the grip of Rome tightening around in 30 BCE .
 As a gateway to the East, it was a major port with a large cosmopolitan community . The city was known for its large, cosmopolitan population .
 Egypt also had an abundant source of grain with which it fed its imperial army . Egypt had an abundance of grain to feed its imperial forces .
 The Romans regarded Egyptian people and their religion with suspicion its cults, along with its strange animal-headed gods, were an abomination to the refined Roman senses . On the other hand, the Romans regarded the Egyptian people .
 Cleopatra and her throne remained secure in Egypt . While her alliance with Rome continued, her throne was secure .
 He was familiar with upperclass women who were cloistered in the home . His only role in life was to be that of good wives and mothers, he said .
 Cleopatra was the antithesis of a Roman woman . The women of Rome were largely regarded as vessels of chastity . The woman of Rome was seen as a vessel of chastity .
 She was descended from a long line of rulers all named Ptolemy who could trace their line to Alexander the Great . Growing up in a highly political and dangerous household where life was precarious .
 In order to keep their bloodline pure, female rulers often married their brothers .
 Cleopatra witnessed brutal power struggles within her own family during her early life . This practice brought outward strength but inner conflicts; during her life she witnessed brutal family struggles . Cleopsatra was a strong woman who had to deal with her inner conflicts .
 As her power grew, she had no choice but to execute her rival siblings . Indeed, as her power . grew, as she . grew she was no longer alone .
 She spoke several languages, including Egyptian making her unique among her peers . She spoke a variety of languages including Egyptian .
 Despite her reputation as a femme fatale, she was not considered beautiful . Despite her later reputation, she had a low profile .
 It was said she had a charismatic presence, was a fine conversationalist and had a sweet, seductive voice . She may have cultivated as a child .
 Cleopatra knew that in order to sustain her throne, she needed to control the might of Rome, and Mark Antony could offer this . Most importantly, she was a survivor; she knew that she needed this .
 Like Cleopatra, he sought decadence and danger . He had quickly gained a reputation for drinking and gambling .
 He earned fame and fortune among the militia . As the commander of a cavalry regiment he received honours fighting with Caesar's armies in Gaul .
 Antony and Caesar formed a mutual friendship and a distant kinship had strengthened their alliance . Antony’s friendship with Caesar strengthened his alliance with Caesar .
 Antony was appointed Magister Equitum (Master of the Horse) and governed Rome in Caesar's absence . As Caesar’s star ascended, so too had Mark Ancient civilisations Antony's . When the elder man became dictator, Antony became dictator .
 Mark Antony made an impetuous politician highly volatile . His excesses in wine and women became the topic of much public gossip . His affairs included affairs with other men's wives .
 Cleopatra and Mark Antony fled Rome and returned to Egypt . After the assassination of Caesar, the assassination was quashed in Rome . The assassination was the death of Caesar .
 Romans regarded a female ruler with abhorrence and she desperately needed an ally in the Senate . The Romans regarded her as a woman and she had to rely on their support .
 Mark Antony returned to the Forum to find a city outraged at the atrocities that had befallen Caesar . When revolt failed to materialise, he returned to find the city outraged .
 Octavian (Caesar's appointed heir), Lepidus and Mark Antony were left to calm the storm . The assassins were executed or fell into obscurity, and it was left to the three men .
 The three men formed the Second Triumvirate granting themselves equal powers of government . The men were granted equal powers by granting themselves the power of the government .
 As the three men began to carve out Roman territory each assigned themselves important provinces . The three men each assigned important provinces to each other .
 He sent a message to his lover asking her to meet him at Tarsus in modern-day Turkey . He was determined to win her support for his military campaigns .
 On this particular meeting she presented herself as the embodiment of the goddess Venus .
 The imperial queen of Egypt arrived on a golden barge decked in fine linen and precious gems . She was attended by servants dressed as sea nymphs . The Egyptian queen was the first queen to arrive in Egypt in 1877 .
 She drifted towards Mark Antony like a creature from myth, she refused to disembark . While she drifted towards him, she continued to refuse to leave .
 Octavian arranged a marriage between Mark Antony and his sister, Octavia . The move infuriated the Egyptian queen, who was angered by the move .
 To avoid a public insult, Mark Antony stumbled into an acrimonious and dangerous union . To avoid an insult, he should have avoided the union altogether .
 The queen of Egypt financed his army, allowing him to capture Jerusalem where he installed Herod as the puppet king of Judaea . Meanwhile, he captured Jerusalem, installing Herod as a puppet king . Herod was captured by the Egyptian queen .
 His relationship with Cleopatra had gathered momentum and he had made Alexandria his home . He had made it his home in Alexandria .
 Despite his union with Octavia, he married Cleopatra and they had another child . Despite his marriage, he had another baby with Cleopatatra .
 Antony grew tired of luxurious living, exotic palaces and hunting in the Egyptian Delta . He longed for the glories of war, longing for the glory of war . Antony died in the Battle of the Nile in 1777 .
 Octavian took this opportunity; he demoted Lepidus, belittled Mark Antony and seized unilateral power . The Roman king took advantage of this opportunity to take advantage of it .
 He reminded Rome of the menacing relationship between Antony and his abominable foreign queen . Antony was the king of the Roman Empire .
 He feigned shock at the abandonment of his sister, he told the citizens of Rome that Mark Antony was now living as an Egyptian . This was regarded as an act of treason by Roman citizens .
 Mark Antony infuriated his fellow Romans by holding a Triumph in the city of Alexandria . After a successful invasion of Armenia, he infuriated them by holding the Triumph in Alexandria .
 A modern reader's perspective of Cleopatra has no doubt been heavily influenced by the numerous works of fiction that have been released charting her life in the many centuries following her death .
 Shakespeare's 1623 tragedy Antony And Cleopatra follows events from the Sicilian revolt of 44 BCE through to the Final War of the Roman Republic in which Cleopsatra commits suicide in 30 BCE by asp bite .
 In this performance, Cleopatra is frequently portrayed as beautiful, power-hungry and manipulative . In this play, she is often shown as beautiful and power-seeking .
 The one in question from which the Great Bard draws is the Life Of Mark Antony . It does not deal directly with the pharaoh but rather with the Roman general and his relationship to her .
 Shakespeare does not lay out events of the time as stated by Plutarch, with dates and events shifted in time and contrasting accounts of Cleopatra simplified . Shakespeare also does not outline events as stated, with events shifted and dates shifted .
 A good example of this is how varying accounts of her death, including death by poisoning, are rewritten as willing death by snakebite to the breast, rewritten as death by poison .
 Shakespeare's account of Cleopatra has been further embellished in subsequent centuries with other works of fiction such as the well-known 1963 film adaptation of her life .
 This movie introduced many smaller yet pervasive inaccuracies such as Cleopatra wearing her hair in bangs . Aside from Taylor's questionable portrayal, this movie introduces many smaller inaccuracies .
 In reality, the Egyptian queen would have worn a wig of tight curls on top of her head, which would have been shaven . The Egyptian queen's hair would be kept in tight curls . The wig would have had tight curls, instead of being shaved .
 Octavian placed great importance on Roman morality, and was more suited to philosophy than war . Unlike his compatriot Mark Antony, he was more interested in philosophy and morality .
 Julius Caesar was adopted by his maternal great-uncle Gaius Julius Caesar . His rise to power was largely due to adoption by his mother's great uncle . Caesar was born in Rome in the Roman capital, Rome in Rome .
 Along with Mark Antony and Marcus Lepidus he formed the Second Triumvirate . He was a member of the Second Roman Empire .
 The Triumvirate divided the Roman Republic between the three of them and ruled as military dictators . The three men ruled the Roman Roman Republic as dictators .
 Despite his reputation as a cruel and calculating leader, Octavian brought an era of peace and prosperity known as the Pax Romana . Despite reputation for being cruel, he was known as a ruthless and calculating .
 Mark Antony was a seasoned campaigner in Gaul . He accompanied his kinsman Julius Caesar into battle and proved his mettle as a soldier . Antony accompanied Caesar in battle .
 The Ptolemies were descended from a line of Macedonians that could trace their origins to Alexander the Great . They are descended from the same family as the Macedonian .
 Romans found exotic animals for their gladiatorial arenas . The Romans found them in the city of Pompey .
 Mark Antony was born on 14 January 83 BCE and died, aged 53, in Alexandria, Egypt .
 According to Plutarch his early life was spent gambling and drinking as he embarked on a series of dangerous love affairs . According to plutarch, he spent most of his life gambling, drinking and having affairs .
 He was a hedonist and a womaniser whose many wives bore him a cacophony of children . His descendants included notable emperors such as Caligula and Nero .
 As a soldier, he showed promise; his bravery and determination made him popular among his men . As a cavalry officer, he distinguished himself as an officer .
 His connections with the noble families of Rome secured his future role as a powerful but somewhat unpredictable military leader .
 Julius Caesar gave Lepidus great honorary titles and a role in the Senate that was equivalent to that of a prime minister today . Mark Antony was a fierce advocate of Julius Caesar who gave him many honorary titles . He also gave him an honorary Senate post-Roman Senate post .
 In allowing Lepidus to live, Caesar's assassins made an irrevocable error of judgement . Caesar's assassination made an irreversible error of judgment . Caesar was assassinated by his assassins .
 Octavian, Antony and Lepidus became the driving force of Rome . Their initial aim was to cut off the head of the Senate . The three men were driven to Rome by Antony .
 After they had executed many of their enemies, their alliance, the alliance, in effect, heralded the end of the Republic . The alliance was the beginning of the republic's end .
 Lepidus ruled over Spain and Africa and while he was abroad, Octavian began his quest for ultimate power . While he was in Africa, Lepidu ruled over Africa and Spain .
 The battle took place on 2 September 31 BCE, on the Ionian Sea on the border of the city of Actium in Rome .
 Agrippa launched his initial attack from the left wing of the fleet and attempted to outflank Mark Antony the battle was brutal and prolonged .
 Many of Antony's soldiers were dying of malaria and his ships were undermanned . Unfortunately, many of his soldiers died of malaria . Antony was undermanning his ships .
 Liburnian vessels were manned by well-trained and rested soldiers, and the ships were fast and agile . The Liburnians were well trained and rested .
 Deck soldiers used fire arrows and slingshots to diminish enemy's capability . Deck soldiers outmanoeuvred their enemy using fire arrows to diminish their capability .
 Mark Antony decided to retreat and regroup after realising the severity of his situation . Antony was forced to retreat from his job in order to deal with the crisis .
 He took advantage of a break in the enemy formation and made a dash for it . He took the opportunity to make a dash in the direction of the enemy .
 Mark Antony fled the battle, leaving his soldiers to die . Roman law dictated Cleopatra should be treated as an enemy of the state, taken back to Rome and paraded before the mob .
 Mark Antony named Caesarion Caesarion the legitimate son and heir of Caesar Octavian . Caesarion was the 'adopted' son of the former dictator, being the adopted son of Caesar .
 He told the Senate that Antony had ""gone native"" and that he had been effeminated by the Egyptian queen . He said he had "gone native" and that the queen had effemininated him .
 Mark Antony divorced Octavia and accused Octavian of forging Caesar's will . The Roman general accused Octavia of forging the will . Octavia died in childbirth in childbirth .
 Rome was drawn into a civil war which culminated in the defeat of Antony at the Battle of Actium . Antony was defeated by the Roman army in Actium at the end of the war .
 During the 12 months that followed, he left Antony and Cleopatra to contemplate their defeat and consider their demise .
 Antony and Cleopatra's attempts to regroup and raise an army proved futile . Egypt's neighbouring territories were largely annexed to Rome . Antony's attempt to raise a new army was unsuccessful .
 Antony made one last valiant attempt to usurp the Roman leader, but in the end, his fate had been cast . Antony's fate was sealed by the death of the Roman king in the fall of the year .
 He did what was required of all honourable Roman soldiers and fell upon his sword . He did the same thing as all honourful Roman soldiers, fell on his sword.
 Cleopatra made a tentative effort to make terms with Octavian . She made an attempt to protect her children from the Roman king .
 In his final hour, Antony was brought to Cleopatra's mausoleum and he died in her arms . Antony's final hour was spent in her hands .
 Octavian allowed Cleopatra to conduct burial rituals for Antony's body . Antony was buried in the Roman Roman capital .
 While he presented an outward show of friendship, he naturally wanted her dead . "He naturally wanted to kill her," he said of her .
 Roman law dictated that Cleopatra should be treated as an enemy of the state . Roman law dictates that she was treated as a 'enemy' of state . The queen is believed to have been killed in the fall of the Roman Empire .
 She should be taken back to Rome in shackles and paraded before the mob, says Rome mayor . She should also be taken to the mob to see her face-to-face .
 The display could end up backfiring on Octavian and prove highly distasteful . However, a female ruler was a rare entity .
 He was relieved then, when Cleopatra took the courageous decision to end her own life, he said . He said: "I was relieved that she took the courage to end herself"
 Historians believe that she was bitten by a snake hidden in a fig basket . Some historians believe that the queen was bitten in the act of bravery .
 Iras, one of her women, lay dying at her feet, and Charmion, just ready to fall, was adjusting her mistress's diadem . Charmion was adjusting the diadem when Iras was dying .
 In Rome, the son of the orator Cicero announced the deaths of Antony and Cleopatra with relish . Antony was the first Roman Roman ruler to be killed by the death of Cleopatatra .
 Mark Antony was stripped of his accolades, his image erased from coinage and his statues removed . Antony's image was erased from coins and statues were removed . His statues were also removed from public display .
 Under threat from Octavian, Iullus Antonius Mark Antony's eldest son later committed suicide . Iullius Antonius Antony committed suicide after being threatened by the Roman leader .
 Octavian also had Caesarion murdered . Caesarion was the first Caesar of the Roman Empire .
 The remaining children of Cleopatra and Antony were spared and taken to Rome where they were adopted by Antony's family . The children were taken to the Roman capital, Rome, to be adopted by the Antony family . Cleopsatra's children were also spared and adopted by
 The Sun had finally set on the Hellenistic Dynasty and indeed on the 3,000-year rule of the pharaohs . With the death of Cleopatra, the Sun finally set in Egypt .
 Cleopatra's surviving children were adopted by Octavia, became Roman citizens and faded quickly into obscurity . The surviving children faded into obscurity in the Roman Empire .
 Alexandria became a site of many religious and military uprisings . Alexandria continued to flourish, but it became a center of religious, military upreigns . Alexandria was the birthplace of the Second World War .
 Zenobia an admirer of Cleopatra was quick to behead her detested Roman foes . Zenobia was a fan of the queen of Egypt .
 Zenobia appeared in golden chains during Aurelian's Triumph in Rome . She ruled Egypt until 274, before she herself was taken hostage by the Roman Emperor . In an ironic twist of fate, she appeared in chains during Emperor Aurelians' Triumph .
 It can be seen in a series of magnificent temples that were built along the River Nile .
 Images of Cleopatra and Caesarion still dominate the walls of the Temple of Hathor at Dendera . The Temple is one of the most famous sites in the world .
 The delicate amalgamation of the Egyptian and Roman cultures can be seen on many mummy portrait panels from the Greco-Roman period . Many mummy portraits were found in the Egyptian mummy collection .
 Contrasts are visible in paintings and sculptures where traditional Egyptian iconography and Roman symbolism are paired with Roman symbolism .
 The plumes on the top were usually 4 made from horsehair or feathers, though may have only been worn for ceremonial duties . Plumes were usually made of horsehair and feathers .
 Metal-tipped and with a weighted end, the legionnaire’s javelin was between 1. and 2. metres long . The javelins were 1.5 metres long and weighed in at the end of each one .
 It could be hurled to devastating effect and was accurate up to around 30 paces in some hands . The weapon was accurate at around 30 paces in some hands, experts say . It could also be thrown at a distance of up to 60 paces .
 Adopted during the Punic Wars, this short sword was the legionnaire's main offensive weapon of choice . It was the main weapon used during the close battle .
 The sword was primarily a thrusting and slashing sword, ideal for close combat . It became part of the legionnaire's signature parry-and-stab move .
 The only colours not used were black and pink, yellow and green, as they were considered feminine . Only colours that were allowed to be used were yellow, pink and green .
 Despite superficially resembling sandals, these were in reality marching boots . The boots were made of leather with heavy soles . They were made for long marches .
 They were designed to allow air to circulate around the feet and reduce the risk of blisters . In colder locations woollen socks were often worn with them .
 Once only used by the highestranking soldiers, this form of armour eventually became standard after the Romans perfected the ability to massproduce metal goods .
 Strips of iron or steel were heated by coal and quenched in oil or water . They were perfect for deflecting swords and arrows from swords .
 Experts hoard vast libraries of codices that contained secrets to society they had built . They did so across a broad range of fields, from astronomy to medicine, including medicine .
 Much of this knowledge was lost forever when the Spanish conquistadors of Hernan Cortes brought the civilisation to their knees in the early-16th century . These supposedly heretical texts burned en masse .
 A few records of Aztec scientific knowledge survived and today historians are working to unlock their secrets . Historians are working tirelessly to unlock the secrets of the Aztec .
 Some of the world's most impressive scientific knowledge has been revealed . Read on from their scientific knowledge to discover some of their most impressive knowledge .
 Codex Vergara contains a wealth of information about Aztec mathematics . It has been decoded and revealed to be a vigesimal system rather than our decimal system .
 Aztec vigesimal system uses 20 as its base, with written dots equating to one, hyphen-style bars equaling to five and various other symbols accounting for 20 and multiples thereof .
 According to the Vergara, as well as other codices, this system was employed for tax purposes, which was largely based on land owned, and for commerce . It was used for both tax purposes and commerce, with quantities of produce traded with precision .
 Of all the preColumbian peoples of Central America, the Aztecs were the most accomplished mathematicians, using a unique numbering system for arithmetic, record keeping and record keeping .
 Land was also measured mathematically, with a selection of algorithms used to calculate area . The most basic was the multiplication of length by width, while multiplying the averages of two opposite sides by an adjacent side used for irregular shapes .
 Recent evidence suggests the culture grew out of a tribe of hunter-gatherers occupying the northern Mexican plateau prior to the 12th century . While their origin is unknown, recent evidence suggests they grew out from a tribe .
 Tenochtitlan was the heart of their empire until the Spanish invasion of Hernan Cortes led to its collapse in 1520 . Their capital city was founded on Lake Texcoco, and it remained in its heart .
 Analysis of the society's alphabet seals the deal . If you needed any other evidence of the advanced state of Aztec learning then analysis of the alphabet seals it .
 The Aztec alphabet was split into three different sections, utilising pictograms, ideograms and phonograms . The alphabet was created by the ancient Aztec people .
 phonograms were pictures representing sounds, a lot like the vast majority of alphabets today, with letters representing specific sounds that words can be constructed from . On the other hand, phonograms are pictures of sounds, and letters represent specific sounds .
 The Aztec alphabet contained four basic vowels and a large selection of consonants including cu, hu and ch . Aztec letters included four vowels, four consonants and a selection of vowels .
 Ideograms were the most abstract part of the alphabet, consisting of symbols that represented an entire idea . Ideograms are the most concrete symbols that represent an idea or an idea .
 For example, a footprint symbol in the Aztec alphabet represented a journey or passage of time . The footprint symbol would frequently be used to depict the movements of famous people in stories .
 By harnessing the secret knowledge of the celestial cycles, the Aztecs could use astromony to track the length of a solar year’ in length . The Aztec used their alphabet to record information about their cities and culture .
 For measurements under a land rod, a variety of symbols including arrows, hearts and hands were used for indication . Arrows, hearts, hands and arrows were also used for measurements under the rod .
 This level of mathematical precision also stretched into other areas, such as construction . Construction was one area where the Aztecs were most advanced .
 Even the poorest commoner typically lived under human-made shelters . The average dwelling measured in at approximately 20 square metres in the capital city of Tenochtitlan .
 Aztec houses tended to be built on elevated platforms crafted from wattle-and-daub, with codices indicating that they stood approximately 40 centimetres off the surface of the surface .
 Walls were constructed from wooden frames and then filled in with stone, sand, lime and clay with adobe bricks sculpted from a mixture of water, sand and clay very common . Adobe bricks were also common .
 Roofs ranged in both design and construction materials, with both flat-pole and peaked roofs widespread . Everything from straw through to wood and bricks used, including wood and brick .
 A selection of construction tools were used in each build, ranging from cutting tools such as knifes and axes through to trowels and picks . Additional carvings were undertaken if the house's patron was particularly wealthy .
 Aztecs used beetles, beetles and carminic acid to create coloured dyes and paints . Important nobles would often have their dwellings painted .
 Buildings were arranged within a city in terms of importance, which relied largely upon the Aztecs' mastery of astronomy . Buildings in the city were arranged by the Aztec in order to show importance .
 The two cycles formed a 52-year century or ‘calendar round' for the civilisation . The former was based on the movements of the sun and the latter based on religious belief .
 The year-count cycle consisted of eighteen 20-day months, with a separate five-day period at the end that was considered unlucky . The year of the year consisted of 18 20-days months .
 The day-count cycle consisted of twenty 13-day periods . Each trecena was attributed to a different god, with each of them attributed to the same god .
 The Aztecs could harness their advancements in astronomy and mathematics to create a calendar that was so close to an Earth year while deep in the isolated jungles of central America . While it is obvious that many parts of the their calendar system were inaccurate, it is a remarkable feat .
 Aztecs' religious calendar is based on scientific study of the Earth's environment and atmosphere . Many aspects of the Aztec religious calendar are based on the study of Earth's atmosphere .
 Aztec calendar stone is a 3.7m in diameter, 24-ton ornate sun stone that once held great importance in the ancient civilisation of the Aztecs . A good representation of Aztec religious calendar the cycle referred to as the day count can be seen in the Az
 The Aztec stone demonstrates the Aztecs' advanced understanding of geometry . It is broken down into constituent parts in the diagram to the right .
 Circling the calendar's perimeter is a ring of flames, depicted as the tail of a pair of fire serpents, which were referred to as Xiucoatl . Circled the calendar is depicted as a flaming tail of the pair of flame-rattling serpent . Cir
 Along with the Sun, these were thought to fight their natural enemies of night and the Moon . The Sun was thought to be thought to have fought against the Sun's natural enemies .
 Days Surrounding the elemental and sun gods lie graphical representations of the 20 days in the ritual cycle . The day signs are commonly referred to as day signs, or day signs .
 These range from animals, such as rabbits and deers, to abstract abstract concepts such as death and movement .
 At the centre of the stone calendar lies a depiction of the Sun, which is shown with the face of the Aztec sun god Tonatiuh . The calendar is believed to have been created by the ancient Aztec religion .
 Elements Surrounding the Sun are four gods, three of which represent the elements of fire, water and wind . Three of the gods are represented by the gods of fire and water .
 The fourth is the jaguar god Ocelotonatiuh, which in an indirect way represents the passage of time, with the god associated with the most remote cosmological epoch . the night sky for centuries and handing it down through generations in isolation from the wider world .
 Templo Mayor of Tenochtitlan aligned so that on the spring equinox the Sun rose directly between its two top-mounted shrines . Ceremonies were held there in dedication of it .
 Aztecs built temples in perfect alignment so the Sun’s rays shone on their summit during the equinox . The Aztec were able to navigate by the position of the stars, through to their creation of a solar calendar .
 Astronomy was practised primarily by Aztec nobility and priests, with the latter using dedicated observatories within temples to track the movements of celestial bodies .
 Ancient civilisations track the length of a solar year and lunar month . The Aztecs could also determine the duration of Venus's orbit and the prediction of any solar eclipses .
 Aztec were extremely skilled at timing the appearances of comets and asteroids . They often marked such occasions with ritualistic events . According to depictions in Aztec codices, they became extremely skilled in timing comets .
 The former calendar was physically manifested in Tenochtitlan as the Calendar Stone . It was displayed so that all could keep track of the passing of time .
 Aztecs used scientific and technological ingenuity to their farming practices . One area where they utilised their scientific ingenuity to maximum effect was in their farming .
 Aztecs designed and employed terracing and artificial island systems to ensure crops had optimal land area to grow . Living in and around large swamps and lake-heavy areas of Central America, the Aztec used the terracing system .
 They built aqueducts and dug channels to ensure crops were irrigated . They crafted tools and basic farming machines for crop planting and harvesting .
 The most common crop grown by the Aztecs was maize . Many other crops such as squashes, beans, avocados and guavas were delivered .
 Aztecs lived in the middle of Lake Texcoco in their largest city-state of Tenochtitlan . A large and consistent food supply was necessary for the Aztec's food supply .
 Their mastery of irrigation and the chinampas construction system meant that vast fields of produce were grown all-year-round, with maize, beans, squash and much more grown with a frequency unsurpassed .
 Aztecs harnessed knowledge of nutrition in terms of the health of soils and water when used to grow crops . The Aztecans also harnessed the knowledge of health of soil and water .
 Its base was 250,000m 2 and was 60m tall, with a shrine for each deity . Impressive .
 Quetzalcoatl was a round-shaped Aztec building . Its shape was round . It was built in the same shape as other Aztec buildings .
 Tenochtitlan was built in the middle of a lake . This was common in the temples devoted to this god .
 This massive Aztec metropolis floated on Lake Texcoco, one of the largest inland water masses in Mexico . The Aztec city is located in one of Mexico's largest inland waterways .
 Aztecs invented and then mastered the construction of chinampas, raised artificial islands that could be used both for construction and agricultural purposes . These artificial islands were created by staking out the lake bed with wooden poles and fencing off the rest of the lake with wattle .
 The fenced-off area was then layered with mud, sediments and decaying organic matter repeatedly until it rose above the water level of the lake . The area was covered in layers of mud and organic matter .
 Willow or cypress trees would be planted in each corner of the landmass . When grown, they acted as stabilisers, with their roots binding them to each other .
 These chinampas were built in straight lines and separated with small canals, thereby creating a thoroughfare for travel around them in canoes . They were built with canals and separated by canals to create a way around them .
 An adequate surface area had been built through the chinampas system . Buildings could then be constructed on top or crops planted en masse . The fertile soil base and superb water source meant that any plant grew rapidly .
 These artificial, reef-style islands were then interconnected with a series of causeways and terracotta aqueducts . The latter supplied the inhabitants of the floating city with fresh water from the nearby Chapultepec springs .
 Six main channels crossed the city that could be sailed for those wishing to access a different part of it . Channels six main channels were crossed .
 The Aztec settled in the region of the Texcoco lake, south of the Mexico valley . Towards 1325, the Aztec moved to the south of Mexico Valley .
 Tenochtitlan was built on a long islet that reached a population of more than 200,000 inhabitants, the double of any European city of the time . The city reached the double the population of any other European city in the same period .
 It was divided into four neighbourhoods where the twenty clans or calpulli, that grouped the Aztec families, were distributed .
 Each calpulli was relatively autonomous; it had its own temples, schools and markets . The calpullis were relatively autonomous and had their own temples and schools .
 Tens of canals crossed the city sailed by 50,000 reed boats every day and crossed by wooden bridges that were removed at night . The city's canals were crossed by canals and bridges crossed by reed bridges .
 Road to Iztai and Xochimil Road to Tacuba and Chapultepec Road to Tepeyac Great Tenochtitlitlan, ceremonial centre . Road to Ixtai: 1.1.2.3.4.5. Road to
 This great open-air market was divided into sections for different products . Tlatelolco is located in the middle of the country .
 Houses Most of dwellings in the city were simple, single-storey houses .
 Chinampas were artificial floating gardens that served to grow a variety of produce . They included corn, pumpkins, pepper, cocoa, beans, apples, tomatoes and vanilla . They were also known as floating gardens .
 Aztecs granted prestige to the position of a doctor and encouraged them to study the human body and potential remedies it time to recover .
 Specific crops were partnered with ones ensuring a nutritional balance within the planting area . The combination ensured that farms maximised crop yield for every square metre of land used .
 Aztecs also grew many herbs within their systems, with these used in herbology . Aztec herbology was a specialist Aztec science in the Aztec system .
 Aztecs' understanding of medicinal science was incredibly advanced for the time of the time . Aztecans' knowledge of medicinal medicine was extremely advanced for its time .
 Aztec civilisation granted prestige to the position of doctor and encouraged them to study the human body and potential remedies in depth . In a period where most western nations were still addressing illnesses with either prayer or misguided placebos, Aztec doctors were given prestige .
 Other inventions included organic paste painkillers and liquid rubber for curing earaches . Ground obsidian for the sealing of wounds was ground obsidian .
 Aztec physicians became the most skilled herbalists in the world thanks to their in-depth study of the human body and their environment . Aztec herbalists studied the body and environment in the Aztec culture .
 Aztec doctors were encouraged to undertake research, studying the effects of plants grown in large communal gardens . Aztec medics were also encouraged to establish hospitals .
 Our information about the Aztecs comes from a combination of surviving Aztec documents, Spanish reports and archaeological evidence . Our information comes from the codices Borbonicus and Boturini and Aztec priests .
 Of the sources, the primary Aztec codices are the most useful, with rich details about their calendar, rituals, ceremonies and tradition derived from them . The primary codices contain rich details of their calendar and rituals .
 Codices from pre-conquest Mexico are few in number due to the Spanish burning many of them when they took over . The Mesoamerican peoples took mere centuries to build a society the others such as Ancient Egypts took thousands of years .
 The secrets of science that they uncovered have, on the whole, withstood the test of time, with salvaged knowledge leading to further developments in their field and contributing greatly to the sciences .
 Templo Mayor citadel of Tenochtitlan was one of the wonders of the ancient world, towering over the Aztec city state's other structures at close to 30 m in height . Originally constructed in 1325 and then added to and extended six times afterwards, the Templo
 Every part of the temple was decorated with carvings and surrounding it lay a vast stone-slabbed precinct that measured 4,000 m 2 . The precinct was filled with balustrades and further decorative aspects . The temple was built in 4,500 years of construction .
 It was built by slaves and working-class craftsmen under the direction of a ruling class of learned architects and mathematicians . Not bad considering it was constructed by slaves, craftsmen . It was constructed in the style of a working class art and science .
 El Templo Mayor was arguably the culmination of the advanced construction techniques mastered by the Aztecs over their tenure in Central America . Indeed, it is arguably the most advanced construction technique in the world's history .
 Aztecs were the first culture to industrialise this process in Central and South America . From sculpting of vast blocks of stone from dedicated quarries for its terraces to using rope lifts and rope lifts to transport men and tools up its structure, El Templo Mayor became the temple
 It symbolises the height of Athenian power as well as that of that of the great leader who championed its construction .
 Pericles is remembered as a great orator and is famed for his speeches espousing the value of democracy . Pericles secured the Athenian empire He secured Athenian wm democracy .
 During Pericles' rule, Athens became the foremost member of the Delian League . The league was formed to oppose Persia's invading forces . Athens was one of hundreds of Greek city-states in the league .
 This became an Athenian empire, establishing colonies in Italy and expanding into the Mediterranean . This became a colony of the ancient Greek city-of-the-Mediterranean .
 Pericles patronised the theatre, including the tragedian Aeschylus . AFHe ruled almost .unchallenged . AF
 Pericles used state funds to subsidise poorer citizens to attend the theatre, subsidising their entry fee . Later, in his attempts to promote Athenian culture, he subsidised the entry fee for poorer citizens .
 Pericles' popularity with the citizens made it easy for him to remove political opponents . Many, such as his predecessor Cimon, were exiled by popular vote or ostracism . Pericles was the first king of the Greek Empire .
 His political influence was such that he was only deposed once, briefly, during his entire rule . Though he suffered accusations of corruption and tyranny himself, he suffered only a brief ouster from power .
 Saigo Takamori, the leader of the rogue group of samurai, had been wounded in his leg and stomach during the righting . His friend, Beppu Shinsuke, had to carry him to a quiet spot in Japan .
 He committed seppuku a form of suicide by disembowelment practiced by the samurai . Seppuku is considered an honourable way to die .
 With their leader dead and a force of around 30,000 Imperial forces commanded by General Yamagata and his technologically advanced weaponry close by, there seemed little hope for the waniors .
 Beppu Shinsuke gathered the remaining samurai and led them brandishing their swords fiercely on a suicidal charge against the Imperial forces . Rather than suffer the shame of surrender, Shinsuk gathered them to lead the charge .
 The Gatling guns barked in the early morning air and cut the doomed men charging straight at them to pieces . The men were killed by the guns in the battle for their lives .
 The era of the samurai had thereby ended in a brutal yet emphatically memorable fashion . The samurai died in a bloody battle with the Japanese army .
 For much of the previous 1,000 years it would have been unthinkable that the samurai would cease to exist as they had played such an important and vital role in Japanese society . The samurai were ingrained in the fabric of the country .
 Advances in technology aligned with Japan ending its isolationist ways and opening trade routes . With it an exchange of knowledge and culture, it signalled the beginning of the end for a proud warrior caste .
 Samurai developed a complex code of honour, rituals and ethics that meant being a samurai was a whole way of life . They originally came into existence and then prominence through their fighting skills .
 In 646CE the Taika reforms in Japan led to the country being dominated by a handful of large landowners . This created a feudal system similar to that of that of medieval Europe . The Taika system was created in 646 CE .
 Large landowners needed their land to be protected from those who would take their crops or land . These large landowners needed protection from those taking their crops .
 The origins of the samurai began as the men hired to provide protection slowly began to develop a code . In this case, the samurai men hired as protection slowly developed a code.
 After a succession of weak emperors, the Heian Dynasty began to lose control of the country . The warriors began to move into the power gap created by the weak emperor .
 By 1100CE they held significant military and poktical power over the land . By 1100C they had significant military power over land .
 This ushered in a golden period for the samurai and throughout the next centuries until the end of the Edo period . This warrior class was at the heart of Japanese life, as rival clans battled each other for control of the country and dominance .
 The Edo period saw greater peace and stability that meant many samurai were not needed for combat and so became teachers and members of government . Many samurai became members of the government and teachers .
 Despite the decline in use of the samurai, they were still revered in society . They were the only class allowed to carry swords, which was a mark of their rank . The samurai were the last class to be allowed to use swords .
 This period of peace may have reduced the key role of samurai in Japanese society, but it was nothing compared to what was to come . The samurai's role was reduced to that of the samurai in Japan's society .
 The world was experiencing political and social revolutions and against it a bow and arrow or a sword would be unable to hold back the tide of change that was washing in . The World was experiencing social and political revolutions and a new world was being born .
 Commodore Matthew Peny of the U.S. entered Edo Bay in 1853 to seek trade links with Japan . In 1853, Peny entered the area to trade with the United States .
 He began formal sword training very young and one of his books declares that he fought his first duel aged 13 . One of the books he wrote declares he fought first duel as a teenager .
 He was born with a left arm six inches longer than his right, meaning he could generate greater power on his shots by drawing the bowstring further back . The bowstring is said to have been drawn further back in order to generate more power .
 The great bowman committed seppuku in 1170CE after he was captured during battle and the tendons in his left arm were severed, thus rendering him useless as an archer . The tendons were severed and he committed suicide .
 Saigo Takamori is famous for leading the revolt against the Imperial army . He actually had a part in establishing the new government . His troops supported the Emperor in the Meiji restoration .
 He became disillusioned with what he saw as the country's Westernisation, failure to invade Korea and dismissing of samurai importance . He eventually led a doomed revolt against the Imperial forces .
 Samurai were famously loyal to their masters and were expected to show complete obedience to them . Samurai were known for their loyalty to their master . Samurai warriors were known to be loyal and loyal to the masters .
 Many samurai believed that without this integrity the rest of the code would fall apart . Integrity was one of the most important elements in the code many samurai believed .
 Integrity is doing what the samurai believes is right without wavering, no matter what, no mater what . Integrity is what he believes, says the samurai . Integrity means he believes in doing what he thinks is right .
 Courage Samurai were expected to show courage at all times and to commit seppuku to avoid capture . Courage was expected to be at risk of capture by Japanese soldiers .
 If they were in a position on the battlefield where they could not help their side, they were also expected to take their own life . They were expected to kill themselves if they were unable to help their team .
 Mercy Samurai had the power of life and death in their hands . Even if they felt that a peasant had offended their honour, even if they hadn't, they had the right to kill them .
 Politeness and courtesy were a large part of samurai life . They were expected to show both to fellow samurai, as well as to their masters and superiors .
 Any loss of honour often resulted in long and deadly blood feuds between rival factions . Loss of honour was often a source of blood feuding between factions in the Middle Ages .
 In many cases, committing ritual seppuku was the only honourable option left . Seppuku is a form of ritual suicide .
 It was held that true samurai disdained money and that having wealth led to luxury, which was seen as a menace to manhood . Having wealth leads to luxury being seen as an 'manhood' and being honest .
 Confucian philosophy of the samurai dictated that simplicity was the only way of the warrior . “GPP"" eUP THE ED THE ED □ E I in order to compete with other world powers.
 At this point Japan was still, in practice, ruled by an emperor, but the real power resided with the shogun . The real power in Japan was the power of a shogun, not emperor .
 Two daimyos (powerful territorial lords) formed an alliance against the ruling shogun . They aimed to give the Emperor genuine power . Understanding that the country needed drastic change, they formed a alliance .
 Tokugawa Yoshinobu resigned from his position but had no intention of giving up real power . When Emperor Meiji issued an Imperial decree dissolving his house, he sent his samurai army to Kyoto with the aim of deposing the emperor .
 The Emperor, with more modern weaponry and tactics, prevailed . The war followed the same path as the battle and the Emperor prevailed .
 With victory secured, the young Emperor allegedly influenced by his advisors began the process of reshaping Japan . The young Emperor is said to have been influenced by advisors .
 There was also a focus on Westernisation, with an edict issued in 1871CE encouraging the adoption of Western-style clothing and food . Social reforms such as universal elementary education were introduced .
 The biggest change that affected the samurai was the forming of a modern conscript army . Their role as primary fighting men in the country was disappearing and that they were not the only strata of society allowed to bear weapons .
 A peasant with a gun could now conceivably defeat a samurai in combat . New weapons guns and rifles required much less skill to operate than those of the samurai .
 A decree by the Emperor in 1876CE banned samurai from wearing swords in Japan . The decree was followed by the introduction of a conscript army . Samurai were banned from using swords .
 Samurai and peasants from across Japan flocked to join the cause of the rebellion . Even though their position of prestige had been in their position, samurai and peasants . Samurai during the Boshin war period .
 Samurai In service to a daimyo, samurai owed him absolute obedience and loyalty . Samurai owed the utmost loyalty to the daimy .
 Ronin Wandering, masterless samurai who were often dishonoured and outcast from society . Ronin was one of the samurai who was often dishonourable and outcasts from society.
 Samurai cut their own stomach and then a trusted friend cut off their heads . Samurai cut themselves and then trusted friends cut their heads off their own heads .
 Suneate made from leather and cloth, tied with cords around the calves to protect them . Made from leather, cloth, suneate was tied to the calves .
 Samurai were warriors that emerged in Japan with the appearance of the shogunate in the 12th century . Samurai warriors emerged from Japan in 12th Century .
 His aim was to achieve an cultivated philosophy of life called Bushido heroic death in battle . Trained in the art of war, they wamor . . , , . , ... . . His aim is to achieve a philosophy of . life called . Bushido .
 Mempo Protective masks painted with fierce faces were used to frighten the enemy . Mempo masks were painted by Mempo in the 1930s .
 Each warrior wore two swords as a symbol of distinction of their samurai caste . The samurai caste was known as samurai samurai .
 Later the curved shape was preferred, in the search for an even Katana . A long sword measuring at over 61cm. The curved shape is preferred .
 Warriors often gave names to their weapons because they believed they were the soul of their fighting capacity . Warriors often give names to weapons because of their soul, such as their ability to fight .
 Bushido means 'way of the warrior-knight' and required almost religious dedication to military life . Bushido code means 'the way of the samurai-knights' and requires almost religious commitment .
 Only samurai carried out this ritual suicide in preference to a dishonorable death. stronger edge. Seppuku . Only samurai carry out the ritual suicide .
 Haidate protected the lower part of the thigh and was worn under the kusazuri . Haidates protected the upper part of a thigh with the protection of the lower thigh .
 Kusari Kusari protected the upper thigh and was made from lacquered iron plates connected together with several silk cords . Kusari was made of iron plates, silk cords, and a silk cord .
 Ancient civilisations steadily decline, for many samurai this was the final insult . Light and easy to be replaced was the last insult to the samurai .
 Japanese leaders felt they needed to modernise to avoid being left behind . The samurai were simply one of the casualties of war . The government believed that in their current form they belonged to a different era and had no relevance in this new Japan .
 There were some samurai that adapted to this modernisation process and, for the good of the country, abandoned their old beliefs and tried to put themselves at the forefront of this new Japan .
 The government instigated a programme to rehabilitate samurai, help them find employment and try to place them at the head of enterprises . The samurai were more educated than the majority of the population .
 A group of samurai decided that the country was changing too fast and losing its culture and traditions . However, the samurai decided to leave the country and move away .
 Saigo Thkamori was a great bear of a man who stood nearly six-feet tall with a stout and sturdy frame . Saigo stood six feet tall and nearly six inches wide .
 Bom the son of a low-ranking samurai he had previously fallen into disgrace following the death of his lord . Takamori did what honour dictated, as did the remaining samurai who charged into the bullets . Imperial officers in their Western-style uniforms accept the surrender of un-uniform
 For two bloody nights prttaaHHnyitHKew ttoheltitlgupattattlfetiiiEaTfaKiWfaiis attempt to scale them, but the gcattonkHMtifflidpBllSdM
 The rebellion went on to wlrtfbis^apKMhtodndadehlfeibatlvaidffij^aHJitthHtctories . The rebels were K^adhaliy j^hBiKihfcsetiilj
 Following a series of engagements, the depleted rebel force Thkamori's footnote in history looked destined to be a minor one, as he lived out his days honouring sneaked into Kagoshima and took possession of a castle mountain .
 It took the government troops several days to locate them but when they did, there was no doubt what the eventual outcome would be . The government troops eventually found them in the desert .
 Takamori organised a sake party for his closest friends, an impressive display of bloody-mindedness . He must have known what was coming, as he must know what it was coming .
 Imperial forces stormed the mountain castle at 3.00am . It was to be his last night alive . Imperial forces storm the castle .
 By the time they were repelled, only 40 of the rebels were still alive . Takamori was badly injured in the attack .
 Being rendered unable to fight, Takamori did what honour dictated, as did the remaining samurai who charged into the bullets of the waiting Imperial army . The remaining samurai were also killed by the Imperial forces .
 The age of the samurai may have been extinguished that day, but it was done in such a way as to display all of the central ideals that had made this warrior class so legendary honour, courage and loyalty . It was done as well as a way to display the ideals of honour,
 The Mayan race left behind vast and elaborate stone cities and documented evidence of their existence . Like the Aztecs who later dominated the area in the 14th century, the Mayan had vast stone cities in the area .
 They were ruled by kings, or 'kuhul ajaw' , who were viewed as semi-deity figures and representatives of the gods . They were rulers who were seen as semi deity figures .
 The Mayan civilisation spanned the breadth of ancient Mesoamerica, the name of the area that encompassed the Yucatan Peninsula and modern-day Guatemala . The Maya's most visible legacy is their great stone cities, the Mayan cities .
 As many as 40 cities were built, each home to between 2,000 and 20,000 people . Each of the cities was home to as many as 30,000 residents .
 The population of the Mayan civilisation was as high as 2 million at its peak . At its peak, the population of this ancient civilisation was 2 million .
 Much of the Mayan civilisation was based on using local resources, like the rainforests, to their advantage . They participated in long-distance trading with other Mesoamerican races .
 Routes were established stretching from the Gulf of Mexico to Colombia, as well as sea routes to the Caribbean islands . Routes to Colombia and the Caribbean were established .
 He was responsible for building the famous three-temple complex in Palenque, Peru .
 The Maya even had their own ball game, which involved bouncing a rubber ball through hoops located alongside a massive stone court . They loved sport, with a ball game involving bouncing rubber balls through hoops .
 The games had enormous cultural significance, and are believed to have involved human sacrifices as part of the occasion . The games were played in ancient times and believed to involve sacrifices .
 There is also a darker side to Mayan civilisation . Sacrifice and torture were also a feature of Mayan culture .
 There were frequent bloody civil wars between rival Mayan city states, and torture, self-mutilation and human sacrifice were vital components of their religious festivals .
 He consolidated his father's reign by greatly expanding the great city of Tikal . He expanded the city in Tikal and expanded it further .
 The reason for this remains inconclusive, but some blame overpopulation and war . Recent theories suggest it was a weather phenomenon such as drought . Some theories suggest overpopulation was a result of drought .
 Alexander the Great took for himself a vast empire through the sword . He has been called a hero, tyrant and a god . He died quickly, his white robes soaked red .
 The laughter and rejoicing of a royal marriage the wedding of his daughter quickly turned to screams and wails of lament . Pausanias, a member of the king's personal guard, turned on his master, driving a dagger between his ribs . The laughter of the wedding quickly turned
 The assassin tripped on a vine as he fled the scene for his getaway horse . The assassin was brutally stabbed to death by the furious spears of pursuing guards .
 His legacy would leave bloody footprints across the whole of Central Asia and the Middle East . He would be remembered for his bloody legacy in the region .
 Philip II had reformed the Macedonian army into one of the most feared fighting forces in the ancient world . He wanted to bloodied the Achaemenid Empire of Persia, which had humbled and humiliated the Greeks in the Greco-Persian Wars .
 Alexander III of Macedon took the throne at the age of just 20 . Alexander the Great gleefully drove a military machine on the brink of war and into war . Alexander III was soon to be remembered as the head of the military machine .
 Alexander had been groomed for greatness from birth, but he was no pampered prince . Alexander was groomed to greatness by his father, Alexander Alexander III . Alexander III was born in Russia, Russia's first king, Alexander III, in 1903 .
 Alexander was proficient with weapons, horse riding and playing the lyre . He was also an expert in ethics, philosophy and the skills of debate .
 He trained daily in pankration, an Ancient Greek martial art, which focused on savage grapples, punches, kicks and choke holds . Pankration is a form of martial art that focuses on savage grappling and punches .
 A Renaissance man before the Renaissance, he was schooled in the skills to conquer and the knowledge to rule . He was a man of the people who had the skills and knowledge to conquer .
 At 16 he had governed Macedon as regent while his father warred far from home . The young heir put down rebellious tribes in Thrace and founded a whole new city . Alexandropolis was the first city to bear his name .
 Ancient Greeks loved to gossip . Ancient Greeks gossiped about their gossip .
 Olympias, mother of Alexander, had been in danger of losing her status to a younger Alexander the Great . Alexander led the Greeks into war against the powerful Persian Empire .
 With charisma and cunning, he led from the frontline to create an empire that stretched from Libya to India . He created a new golden age for Hellenic culture, creating a new Golden Age .
 Alexander trained in pankration an Ancient Greek martial art, which focused on savage grapples, punches and kicks . Alexander himself executed all other contenders for the crown and crushed rebellions across Greece .
 Olympias had Cleopatra Eurydice, her replacement as consort to the dead king, and her baby daughter burned alive . Olympias, too, set about consolidating her power, having her replacement and her child burned alive. Olympias also set about having Cleop
 Alexander was Alexander's own blueprint for greatness . The dubious heroes of myth were Alexander himself himself . Alexander's life was his own blueprint of greatness .
 With legendary figures on both sides of the family tree, it's hard not not not to be convinced of his own special destiny .
 His father's bloodline claimed descent from Hercules the son of Zeus and bull-wrestling demigod of Twelve Labours fame . His mother's family looked up to Achilles, the all-but-invulnerable champion of the fabled Siege of Troy, while his father's family
 The ambitious new king gave every appearance of being a slave to destiny looking for meaning in flights of birds and consulting oracles at every turn . He steered destiny himself, consciously building a legend that would lift his accomplishments well beyond those of his father . Omens and portents prefigured every
 In just shy of a decade, he crushed the life out of the once-mighty Persian state and expanded the borders of his domain from Libya to India to create a mighty empire .
 The emperor-to-be sent a spear whistling through the air to crash into the undefended soil of Asia Minor . The spear was thrown from a warship in full ceremonial armour .
 Alexander's death was the first blow in a war that would claim for Alexander over 200,000 square miles of land . The war would leave between 75,000-200,000 dead and leave up to 300,000 people dead .
 The coastline of what is now Turkey was littered with Greek cities ruled by the Persian invaders . Of them Troy, Troy had particular significance for Alexander .
 Alexander carried with him on his journey the story of the Trojan War, Homer's epic Iliad, and quoted from it often . The alleged site of his maternal ancestor Achilles' most celebrated victory and tragic death, Achilles, was the site of Achilles' death .
 Macedon king was shown what they claimed were the weapons of Achilles . First, he had the tomb of Achilles opened so he could pay tribute, then riding to a nearby temple of Athena, the Greek goddess of wisdom .
 Alexander wanted to rival Achilles, visiting this site of bloodshed and heroism, and taking the mantle of one of Ancient Greece's greatest heroes . Alexander wasn't merely content with a fanciful familial association with Achilles; he wanted to compete with him .
 His fierce pragmatism and ambition would suggest both a dangerous and unpredictable combination that made him one of the battlefield's most iconic generals . He would be one of many of the world's most famous generals .
 Persian units and their battle-hardened Greek mercenaries spread their line thin and allowed Alexander's cavalry to hammer through their scattered ranks . Leading from the front ranks, a feint drew the stronger Persian units out, spreading their line thinner .
 He was welcomed as a liberator by the Greek subjects of Asia Minor . He endeavoured to win over the local population too .
 Claimed to distrust tyrants, he appointed local rulers and allowed them relative independence . But with a new centralised tax system he ensured their autonomy was reliant upon his handouts .
 Macedon relied upon the professionalism of Macedon's army, as well as the unique talents of its core units . Heavy cavalry prised apart the weakest part of the enemy line while finely drilled infantry kept the bulk the enemy tangled up on their spears .
 Alexander knew how best to use the forces that his father had amassed . Alexander was able to use his father's forces with the help of Alexander's father .
 Alexander's cavalry charge sweeps left and into the flanks of the Persians, who are locked in battle with his phalanx and cavalry . Alexander's phalanix and cavalry charge sweep left and right into the left flanks .
 Alexander's charge against the Persian army is captured in the aftermath of the battle . Alexander's pikemen are seen in the capture of the Persian troops . Alexander is credited with the victory in the battle against the Persians .
 Persians expect the thrust of the attack to come from Alexander's right flank and his feared Companion Cavalry, so deploy more units on that flank . Alexander's forces are deployed on his right flank .
 Alexander and his Companion Cavalry then smash through the weakened centre of the Persian lines in wedge formation . Alexander's companion Cavalry is then able to defeat the Persian forces . Alexander then sets out to destroy the weakened Persian lines .
 Alexander burnt the palace to the ground in, it is believed, retaliation for the sack of Athens"" had to abandon their own city . Phalanx Hypaspists Alexander and companions Victory & Defeat .
 Were the king to fail here then Darius' army would be able to link up with his powerful navy . Alexander's whole campaign would be wiped out and all dreams of Greek civilisation free from the menaces of its aggressive Eastern neighbour would spill out .
 Alexander rode up and down his ranks of assembled men to deliver an address worthy of heroes, playing on old glories and grudges . At Issus, like many battles before and after, Alexander rode to deliver a speech worthy of heroics . Alexander's speech was played on old
 Darius fled the battlefield as the Greek charge cut through his ranks like a scythe, with Alexander at its head, crashing straight through the Persian flanks and then into their rearguard . With shock etched upon his face, Darius fled from the battlefield .
 Unexpectedly, he then turned his attention not east toward the enemy's exposed heart, but west in the direction of Egypt and Libya .
 Asia Minor would welcome him as a saviour, like the Greek colonies of Asia Minor . They would welcome the arrival of a new king .
 With no standing army and whole swathes of the country in the hands of Egyptian rebels, the Persian governor handed over control of the province outright . The governor handed control over to the Egyptian rebels .
 The last set of invaders had disrespected their gods, so perhaps the Egyptians were keen to take advantage of Alexander's vanity and safeguard their faith by placing this new warlord at the heart of it .
 Alexander had seen how illusionary Persian authority was in Egypt, and wanted to try a different tack . Maybe, too, Alexander had . seen how . illusionary . Persian authority in Egypt was in fact an illusionary state .
 He may have been one of the world's greatest generals, but he knew the sword was not the only path to acquiring new territory . He knew that the sword may not be the only way to acquire new territory, he said .
 Alexander rode out to the famous Oracle of Amun the Egyptian answer to Zeus at the Siwa oasis . Alexander was welcomed into the inner sanctum of this ancient temple, an honour usually afforded only to the ordained priests of Amuni .
 The exact details of Alexander's exchange with the Oracle remain a mystery, but the end result was unambiguous . Alexander's exact exchange with Oracle remains a mystery . Alexander is believed to have spoken to the Oracle at the time of his death .
 Even the myth of Achilles reborn could scarcely contain his ambition, and he declared himself himself the son of Zeus .
 His worship spread across Egypt, where he was raised to the rank of Pharaoh . The worship of the Egyptian god spread across the world .
 Despite his 'haughtiness', Alexander had been raised on tales of the Egyptian gods from his mother, and Greeks the philosopher Plato among them had long journeyed to this ancient land to study in .
 Alexander saw around him an ancient power to be held in great respect or feats of long-dead god-kings that he had to better . Standing amid the great pyramids and temples, the 25-year-old Alexander either saw . He either saw around them an ancient . power
 Alexandria was planned in detail by the king, from wide boulevards and great temples to defences and plumbing . The result was the city of Alexandria, which was planned for the king .
 Alexander turned from his ‘liberation’ of the Achaemenid Empire’s downtrodden subjects and drove east with a vengeance . Like an angel of death, Alexander turned .
 Alexander's less heroic qualities were beginning to show themselves with greater regularity an arrogance, cruelty and obsessive drive . Had he failed in his conquest, he would have been remembered as the madness of a tyrant rather than the drive of a king .
 Provincial rulers loyal to the humiliated king of kings promptly surrendered . The king was humiliated by the humiliation of his country .
 Overcome with pity, perhaps respect for this foe they offered the dying king of kings water from a nearby spring . Overcome by pity and perhaps respect they offered him water .
 Companion cavalry Strengths Well trained, wedge formation made turning easier, heavy bronze armour . Well trained and well-prepared, well-trained, bronze armour made easier .
 The Companion Cavalry were the unstoppable knights of Macedonia . Led by Alexander personally, they were led by Alexander . Alexander personally .
 Usually stationed on the right flank, they would punch through the enemy lines with their xyston lances . They would then wheel round to charge the rear .
 Thessalian Cavalry Strengths: Well trained, diamond formation for manoeuvrability, variety of weapons . Well trained and diamond formation: diamond formation .
 Thessalian Cavalry's lighter armour and shorter spears and javelins made them an effective defensive unit . Similar to the Companion Cavalry, they were an effective unit .
 The players were deployed on the left flank to see off any attackers . They were able to go where they were needed to protect themselves from any attack .
 Hoplites were the citizen menat-arms of the other Greek states and one of the army's main cornerstones . Hoplite were the citizens of all the Greek states .
 Hoplites were placed behind the phalanx to prevent the army being encircled . Versatile but not necessarily as well-trained or heavily armoured as other units, Hoplite were placed in the phalalanx .
 The phalanx formation is devastating against cavalry, well trained and fast moving . Phalanx formations can be devastating against well-trained cavalry .
 Alexander's pikemen fought in the dreaded Macedonian phalanx with their 18-foot sarissa lance . Created by Alexander's father the well-drilled and fast-moving pikeman were created by Alexander himself .
 Phalanx could rush forward to tie down enemy cavalry or infantry . Deployed in the centre of the battle line, the phalanx is deployed in the middle of the line .
 The Hypaspists carried large round shields, thrusting spears and swords . They were placed on the flank of the Foot Companions for their protection .
 Alexander was able to make use of local knowledge, as well as his hardy skirmishers, to turn the wild terrain in his favour . He ambushed the Persians in turn and decimated them with his two forces . Despite a rare crushing defeat in the bloody bottleneck of the Persian
 Historians have called this victory 'complete' and 'decisive' and it left him able to take the ancient capital of Persepolis unopposed and claim its massive wealth for himself .
 Weaknesses Variable equipment and training, training, light armour and light armour . Light armour or leather or linen .
 A combination of lighter armed and armoured cavalry from the other Greek states and local horsemen conscripted in Asia . Local horsemen were conscripts in Asia and armed with lighter armed cavalry .
 Alexander came to rely on them as the traditional Greek heavy cavalry dwindled . Deployed dependant on weapons and training, Alexander relied heavily on them . Alexander's heavy cavalry came to prominence in the early years of his reign .
 Alexander the Great and his forces battled an Indian army a fiction, a fiction . Only a handful of frontier provinces remained in the usurper's blood-slick hands . Alexander's forces were defeated by the Indian army .
 Casting the first torch into the building himself, looting and burning spread across the city . The first torch was set alight in the first place in the city, and looting spread across city .
 Zoroastrian prophecy foretold ""demons with dishevelled hair, of the race of wrath" Zoroastrians had foretold "demons" of the 'race of wrath' Persia's holy men realised, the demons were here .
 Bessus was chased down by the ferocious and dogmatic Alexander in what is now Uzbekistan and Afghanistan . As his predecessor Darius had been, he was the same as Darius . Alexander was the most powerful and ruthless ruler of the world .
 Alexander rode across deserts with little supplies, picking up men who fell and lifting their spirits . Alexander rode along his lines, lifting men's spirits and lifting them up .
 A charismatic leader even against the backdrop of the bloodiest of campaigns, he had the power to inspire his weary soldiers . He was the leader of the war's bloodiest campaign .
 With no army worth a damn, he had been forced to burn crops and stores before the Greek advance in a lastditch attempt to slow Alexander's terrible pursuit . Alexander's pursuit was a terrible pursuit for Alexander .
 Fittingly for the betrayer of the last Shahanshah, his own men handed him over to the Greeks . The last Shahanah was handed over to them by the Greeks in ancient times .
 His nose and ears were cut off at Alexander’s command, and he was sent back to Persia in chains to be impaled . The punishment for traitors was impaled, the Persian punishment for a traitor .
 Alexander's rampage across Persia and her furthest fringes wasn't the first time Alexander's determination had taken on a more murderous hue . Alexander had been on a rampage across the Persian borders .
 Alexander laid siege, blockaded the port from the Persian navy and over seven months built a causeway from the mainland to the city . The causeway allowed his catapults to come within range of the city, allowing him to launch catapills .
 Tyre was soon breached, and Alexander's fury fell upon the city's population . Alexander's anger fell on the city of Tyre .
 Of the 40,000 inhabitants of Tyre, 2,000 were crucified on the beach, 4,000 killed in the fighting, a handful were pardoned, and over 30,000 sold into slavery . Over 30,00 people were sold to slavery .
 The Greekspeaking Branchidae were set upon when it became known their ancestors had collaborated with the Achaemenids . Other defenders were murdered because they surrendered too late, or been promised safe passage to lure them from behind their walls .
 Growing accounts of sackings, burnings, enslavement and murder pepper the record of Alexander in gore . Like arterial spray on armour, Alexander's record is covered in blood . Alexander's account of his life is filled with accounts of sacking and burnings .
 It seemed like the further he got from home, the darker his deeds became, he said . He said: "It seemed like it seemed that the further [his] deeds] became darker"
 Persian nobleman Rhoesaces slashed at the back of Alexander’s head, splitting his helmet in two . Alexander was killed at the Battle of the Granicus at the time .
 Alexander quickly regained the initiative and speared his attacker in the chest . Alexander was dazed, but not seriously hurt, and quickly regained his initiative .
 His armour stopped it penetrating too deeply into the king's shoulder, but the Greeks butchered all their prisoners in revenge nonetheless . The king's armour stopped the armour from penetrating into his shoulder .
 Alexander was struck with a rock and concussed in the street fighting in Cyropolis in what is now Tajikistan . Alexander led his soldiers through a dry stream and under the walls .
 Alexander ventured too close to the city walls, and a missile from a catapult split his shield, tore through his armour and into his chest . Alexander was wounded in the Siege of Gaza .
 The king scaled the walls himself, the Indians pushed the ladder back, leaving the king cut off . The king was cut off by the Indians, leaving him unable to escape .
 Taking an arrow in the lung, he fought on drenched in blood until he suffered a haemorrhage . He fought on until he was hit by an arrow to the lung .
 Believing their king dead, the Greeks went berserk and massacred the townspeople . The Greeks believed their king was dead, then massacred them . The Greek king was killed by the Greeks .
 Alexander was struck by an arrow to ankle during the Siege of Massaga . In tribute to his ancestor Achilles, Alexander struck by the arrow broke the bone .
 The Indian fort was then reduced to rubble and its inhabitants massacred . The inhabitants of the fort were massacred by the British army .
 Later that year he struck another body blow against his traditional supporters . Then, later that year, he struck again against the traditional supporters.
 Alexander accused Callisthenes of collusion in the pages' conspiracy, and had him put to death . Alexander accused him of colluding with the pages, and put him down .
 Alexander was convinced he was a god, but the needs of men would bring his conquests to heel . Alexander's conquests would bring the conquests of Alexander to heel, he says . Alexander would have been a god if he had succeeded .
 Alexander pushed his increasingly mutinous army into India . Adamant that they were at the edge of the world and expecting to see the great sea that the Ancient Greeks believed ringed their continent from which they could return home .
 Alexander's increasing pretensions began to grow weary at the end of the war . Alexander was tired of the endless war that had taken him further and further from home . Alexander died of his injuries in the battle .
 This monarch from Greece's barbarian hinterland had begun to dress in Persian robes, train Persians for the army and insist on courtiers throwing themselves to the ground in the manner of subjects before the Persian king of kings . The Greeks took pride in never bowing to their monarch
 The general bristled, turned to Alexander, and told him that he would be nothing without the accomplishments of Philip . Alexander said that all that he now possessed was earned by the blood and sacrifice of Macedonians .
 Alexander threw an apple at the general's head, called for his guards and then for a dagger or spear . Those present quickly began bustling Cleitus from the room and tried to calm their monarch . Alexander, more petulant than entirely regal in his fury, threw the apple at
 Monsoon season drenched the army in water and disease . Battered and broken after 22,000 kilometres and eight years, monsoon season arrived .
 Rumours also reached the camp that India was a bigger than they had previously heard, and contained armies even greater than that of Porus . Rumours were also heard of India being bigger than previously heard .
 Alexander's generals, mindful of the fate that had befalled other critics of their king, approached cautiously and appealed to his nobility . Alexander's general appealed to Alexander's nobility, appealing to him to help .
 Alexander's battle for the Punjab opens up Indra to the Greeks . Despite leaving him with 1,000 dead, Alexander was eventually able to overcome the numerically superior force of King Porus .
 Using a classic pincer movement and refusal to bow down to nature in this case, the fastmoving waters of the Hydaspes River are seen here .
 Porus’ defeat left the Punjab region of northern India open to the Greek invaders, but the death toll would add to rumblings of mutiny in Alexander's ranks . Alexander’s death toll added to the mutiny .
 Alexander secretly leads a small detachment up river to cross via a small island . Alexander secretly led the small detachment to the small island via the island .
 Porus sends a force led by his son to cut Alexander off, but arrives too late, he's easily defeated . Alexander defeated by Porus in the battle .
 King Porus assembles his army on the banks of the Hydaspes river to prevent Alexander's crossing . Porus assembled his army in order to stop Alexander crossing the river .
 Porus wheels his vast army around to confront Alexander head on head on with four times Alexander's forces and terrifying war elephants . Alexander's army was four times larger than Porus's forces .
 Alexander sends light cavalry round the rear, while he leads his heavy cavalry into the weakest part of the Indian line . Pincer attack Alexander sends his light cavalry around the rear of the rear .
 With an attack on two sides and peppered with arrows, the war elephants panic and cause carnage . The elephants panic when they are attacked by two sides . The elephant was attacked by the two sides of the battle .
 Alexander built a temple to Dionysus on the riverbank and left the inscription 'Alexander stopped here' They built a fleet of flat-bottom ships and began a long voyage home . Alexander left a long journey home in the city .
 Alexander the Great's conquest began with Homer’s Iliad as its guide a tale of triumph and conquest and ended with the Odyssey a desperate voyage home . Alexander the . Great's conquests began with the . Odyssey as the guide to Alexander's conquest .
 Many would never see home thanks to long-running battles with Indian kingdoms they passed through on their way down the Indus River toward the Arabian Sea . There were more battles, tragedies and triumphs to come, and many would never be home .
 Alexander fought fiercely until an arrow pierced his lung, his chroniclers describe air escaping with the blood . Even with dreams of ceaseless conquest doused like campfires before battle, Alexander fought .
 Alexander's army believed him dead believing him dead, they rampaged through the city, looting, killing and burning . Even with all Alexander had subjected them to, his army remained devoted to their monarch .
 Alexander had to be sailed past his army while lined up on the riverbank before they would accept he was still alive . Patched up by his doctor, gaunt and unsteady, he had to have his army lined lined up before they accepted he was alive .
 Alexander led the remnants of his army through what is now the Balochistan province of Iran . The area is now a sparsely populated landscape of arid mountains and desert . Alexander led a force exploring the Persian Gulf .
 His men died in their hundreds, gasping for water, stumbling through the baking sands in their tattered sandals and blinking into the brilliant sun . He died in his hundreds . His men .
 The Macedonians he placated, but the grief he felt at the loss of ""the friend I value with my own life"" could not be so easily put right . The grief he feels at loss of "the friend he value with his own life" was not so easily fixed
 Before his eyes poured the spears of the phalanx south into Arabia and west into Carthage and Rome . The spears poured into Arabia, Carthage, Rome and Carthage . The Romans were defeated by the Romans .
 Alexander was far removed from those around him . Alexander's tactical genius, charismatic leadership, enduring legacy and fanatical drive, he says . Alexander: "In his tactical genius and charisma, he is far from the people around him"
 Perhaps in his view, ‘elevated’ above those around him, he was so far removed as to be incomparable . Perhaps in the future, perhaps he would be 'imm incomparable' to others .
 He was never defeated in battle, partly because of his tactical skill, leadership and army, but also because he was prepared to pay a toll in human lives . He was also prepared to take a toll on human lives, and never lost .
 Tales of the Greek gods endure not just because they present an ideal of heroism and greatness, but because they were flawed beings a soap opera on a cosmic scale . Tales of Greek gods are not just for heroism but for beauty and beauty, they're for beauty .
 Alexander the Great was violent, vain, petty and cynical . Like the squabbling deities of Mount Olympus, he overcame impossible odds and accomplished breathtaking feats through ingenuity, charisma, martial prowess and force of will .
 Alexander the Cursed’s' savagery are still told in the lands he wronged . His example were venerated by emperors, and tactics studied by leaders for over 2,000 years .
 Despite wave after wave of Christian knights pouring all their religious fervour and military might into its ancient walls, it had held back the tide . The walls had somehow halted the progress of the foreign hordes that now threatened the entire Near East .
 When the first army had been held at bay, the city's inhabitants thought they were safe, that the invasion was defeated . The invasion was not defeated, but the city was thought to be safe again .
 The city's main artery, its port, provided passage in and out of its walls, was taken . However, then yet another army landed and the city’s main artery was taken by the army .
 The city's defences were tested once more, with an even more ferocious attack battering at the doors and calling for blood . The attack was the first of its kind in the city's history .
 Once more, once more the city held off the mass of warriors, its infidel leaders repelled . Luckily for those within, once again the city fought back . The city was held off by a mass of fighters, but was not destroyed .
 With the new year's sailing season, another invader arrived by sea with a fresh bloodthirsty army . Then, with the new . year's new year, another . invader arrives by sea .
 In May, tens of thousands of soldiers joined the infidels' camp outside the walls, swelling their numbers to terrifying proportions . He was followed in May by yet another such a large number of soldiers joining the camp .
 The lack of food and supplies in the city, and the spread of disease within the invaders' camp, drove both sets of warriors to extremes, stoking the fires that lay within their hearts .
 Today is the eighth day of June 1191 and, as Acre slowly suffocates in the oppressive heat of the Levant's summer months, yet another fleet is landing in the city's once-prosperous port . This time with one of the biggest forces the city has
 If the ruler of Acre, the noble and great Saladin, doesn't send meaningful reinforcements soon, then the city will fall and the gates to the Holy Land will be brutally wrenched open to the Christian hordes . The city of Jerusalem will fall if Saladin does not send meaningful
 They call this one, this man-mountain stepping off his ship onto the dusty dry shore, the Lionheart, and he is here to kill them all in the name of his god and glory . The Lionheart is a man-maintain, the man-who-
 The passage had been long and painful, featuring storms, shipwrecks and a mad despot who threatened to derail the Third Crusade before it had even begun . The passage was long, painful, with storms and shipwrecked shipswrecking .
 King Richard the Lionheart and his army had survived the trip across the Mediterranean Sea and reached the Holy Land . No matter, King Richard and his soldiers had reached the holy land .
 Richard's mission was to take the Holy Land by storm and cut a direct path to the holiest of all cities, Jerusalem . After months of pursuit and planning, they were primed to fulfil their mission, Richard's God's mission .
 At 16, Richard took control of his own army and fought rebels threatening his father's throne . Richard became a great military leader thanks to a series of victories over rebels . Richard took over at 16 and became a military leader .
 Following his father's death and his own coronation he launched the Third Crusade . He launched the crusade against the Roman Empire .
 Richard the Lionheart led an army of religious fanatics with ruthless efficiency . Richard and Saladin faced off at the Battle of Arsuf in the Third Crusade . The battle was a major battle between the Crusaders and the Crusades .
 Knights Templar were the most skilled Christian fighting unit to take part in the Third Crusade . They were wealthy, well-trained and fanatical fighters driven by a holy purpose .
 Few in number in number and fanatically religious, leading to recklessness . Weakness in number . Fanatically religious and recklessly religious .
 The Wood of Arsuf is one of the few forested regions in all of the Levant . To get there, he had to move south along the coast of the Mediterranean Sea and then traverse the wooded region .
 Saladin knew this and after tracking and harassing Richard's slow-moving baggage train and infantry, decided to strike . The woods would be the ideal position to strike, Saladin decided to attack .
 Saladin had already identified a striking point however a narrow clear plain in the forest approximately 91cm from Arsuf . Saladin was already identifying the striking point, however .
 Saladin intended to engage in skirmishes along the length of the convoy and then hit its rear with a decisive attack . Saladin wanted to engage skirmishes with the convoy before attacking it .
 Richard’s scouts reported Saladin's scouts could be seen on 7 September 1191 . HMMi 03 Scouts at dawn . Richard's scouts saw Saladin’'s scouts . Saladin scouts could also be seen .
 Richard realised that Saladin's full army was nearby and started to arrange his army . Richard realised this meant Saladin had his full army nearby and arranged his army for him . Richard then realised that this meant the full army would be nearby .
 Men were deployed at the fore and rear of the convoy column, with the van the foremost division made up of the Knights Templar under the command of their 11th grand master, Robert de Sable .
 The broadsword was a wellbalanced and deadly weapon capable of stabbing and cleaving . The most popular hand-to-hand weapon of all Christian knight orders, including the Knights Templar and Knights Hospitaller, the broadsword .
 At the front, Saladin sent a dense swarm of skirmishers, while behind them streamed squadrons of heavy cavalry and foot and horse archers, splitting so that the army attacked from the centre, left and right .
 Jesus’s city had fallen four years previous to the Saracen Ayyubid hordes, which was now ruled by Christianity's arch-nemesis Saladin, and defiled .
 Saladin's chief tactic was to break the flanks of the crusader column and ordered incursions of javelin throwers and mounted archers to perform lightning strikes along their flanks .
 Conquering Acre was merely the first step in wrestling Jerusalem from Saladin's grip . The battle of Acre began in the 12th century when the Crusades conquered Jerusalem .
 So far the city's capture and wider crusade had been in the hands of a number of other leaders . So far, the city has been under the control of several leaders .
 Guy of Lusignan was the supposed rightful king of Jerusalem through his marriage to Sibylla of Jerusalem . King Philip II of France had helped raise the 'Saladin tithe' to pay for the crusade .
 The Duke of Austria, Leopold V, had overall command of the imperial forces . The Duke was also in charge of the Austrian army .
 Ayyubid army soon routed back into the hills and forests south of Arsuf . There had been yet more leaders at the Lionheart .
 Richard, realising the pursuing knights could be ambushed in a surprise counterattack, drew the warriors back into an orderly formation at Arsuf . Richard ordered them to pitch camp at the now-secure fortress . Richard's son Richard died at the end of the siege .
 Saladin was forced to retreat with his reputation as an invincible leader tarnished . Saladin's reputation was tarnished by the loss of his reputation .
 OS Templars let loose from the tactical order to defend and maintain discipline . The crusader knights took the fight to the Saracens, unleashing their hatred .
 The right wing of Saladin’s army couldn't sustain the assault and collapsed almost immediately, with Richard himself weighing into the heart of the fighting .
 The Knights Templar set off in pursuit of the fleeing Saracens after the day's attacks . The Saracen were killed by the Knights Templar .
 The full weight of the crusader army suddenly switched emphasis from defence to attack, ramming into the Ayyubid army with immense ferocity . The full force of the Crusader army therefore switched emphasis .
 Saladin joined the assault along with his brother to inspire his men to make a breakthrough . Saladin's brother was killed in the battle in the fall of the year .
 Richard held the convoy together despite some losses and edged them toward Arsuf . Richard held on to hold on to his wife's life .
 Grand master of the Knights Hospitaller, Gamier de Nablus, broke ranks and charged the Saracens . Siege's instigation the summer previous but illness and disease had claimed many over the winter months . Frederick of Swabia and even Patriarch Heraclius of
 The siege itself had stalled, so every passing week threatened to allow Saladin to outmanoeuvre the crusaders . Saladin's siege itself stalled, and the siege itself itself was stalled .
 Richard, being the honed and experienced military leader that he was, realised this . He gave orders for vast siege engines to be built, ones that could bring down the walls .
 These engines, these machines of death, once completed, towered over the Christian knights and, when unleashed, brought the siege into a deadly endgame . When unleashed, these engines of death were unleashed, the siege was brought to a bloody end .
 Colossal boulders rained down upon Acre's walls, smashing against them with thunderous brutality .
 Corpses of animals and Muslim soldiers littered the city's streets, spreading disease and sapping the morale of the terrified residents . The city was overrun by soldiers, animals and soldiers, but was overrun with disease .
 Most fearsome of all though, flaming balls and arrows set ablaze anything that wasn't made out of stone . Panic quickly spread among Acre's populace .
 He attained his exalted position as leader of the Ayyubid army and founder of the dynasty . He was a wise and experienced military commander .
 The light cavalry of Saladin was feared throughout the world due to its ability to strike quickly and at range, with skilled marksmen riding the world's fastest horses . Saladin's light cavalry was a key unit that was feared by the world for its rapid movement .
 Cavalry units excelled in bowmanship, with their short bows used to swarm arrows on crusader forces . Weakness Easily cut down by knights in hand-to-hand combat .
 Weakness Could be outranged by the longbow and all-but-useless in hand-tohand combat . Weakness Weakness in combat is outranged and all but useless in combat .
 They call this one the Lionheart AND HE IS HERE TO KILL THEM ALL IN THE NAME OF HIS GOD AND GLORY” Saladin's orders .
 Saladin immediately set out for Acre after receiving the news of Acre's fall . Saladin was in the midst of the fall .
 Richard had taken the surrendering Muslim garrison of 2,400 men captive and was offering their return for a ransom . Richard offered a ransom for the return of the men .
 Saladin, known for his loyalty to his men and his wisdom, agreed to the ransom . The ransom included monetary compensation and the release of all of his Christian prisoners . Saladin was known for being loyal to the men and the wisdom .
 In Acre the banners of the Kingdom of Jerusalem, France, England and the Duchy of Austria fluttered in the light breeze .
 With Acre down, Richard knew that only the city of Jaffa to the south stood in their way of making a direct assault on Jerusalem . He began making preparations for the continued crusade, as well as for the reparation of the sacked city .
 Leaders argued over how the city should be divided up and how the spoils of their victory should be apportioned .
 Richard struck down the Austrian standard from above the city's walls, slighting Leopold . Richard sided with Guy of Lusignan over who should become king of Jerusalem when the city was taken . This quarrelling led Richard to strike down the standard from the walls .
 Philip and Leopold preferred fellow crusader Conrad of Montferrat . Conrad was the Italian nobleman who fought the Ottomans . Philip was so angry he threatened to return to Europe .
 Saladin delayed in paying the garrison's ransom when he delayed paying the ransom . This cauldron of scheming and disagreement was tipped over the edge when Saladin failed to pay it .
 An already irate and disgruntled Richard deemed the lateness a massive slight and ordered every single one of the garrison to be executed . Richard deemed every single soldier a mistake .
 Saladin reached the city just as the decision was made, but could only watch as man after man was publicly executed, their heads lopped from their shoulders atop the city walls . Saladin arrived at the end of the day, but was unable to stop the execution .
 Saladin replied like-for-like, executing the 1,000 Christian prisoners in his custody . The enraged Saladin responded to the execution of the prisoners . Saladin's death was the result of the execution .
 Whatever deal could conceivably have been reached between the rival leaders now lay in ruins, seemingly as dead as the unfortunate prisoners . Whatever deal may have reached, it is now dead as a result .
 Philip and Leopold decided to leave in late August for their European homes . The Third Crusade faced challenges even before reaching the Holy Land .
 Saladin intercepts £ it Richard near the fortress city of Arsuf, pursuing him right up to the city, but Richard wins the engagement . However, Saladin intercepted him and he defeats him .
 The Lionheart's arrival at the siege on 8 June 1191, 1191 . The city's prolonged defence falters following the arrival of the Lionheart .
 Pope Gregory VIII decrees the fall of the Kingdom of Jerusalem is punishment ' for Christian sins' before issuing a papal bull calling for the Third Crusade .
 France i ^ and England heed the call, imposing the 'Saladin tithe’ to fund the mission . The tithe was imposed by France and England in the wake of the fall of Saladin .
 The white garment kept the Sun off their metal armour, also displayed the symbols of the Order .
 The great helm was the mainstay of the Templar Order and offered excellent protection against blows . The sugarloaf helmet and great helm were the key weapons carried by the most elite of Christian warriors .
 Due to narrow viewing corridors and high temperatures experienced in the Holy Land, many opted for more lightweight alternatives with open faces .
 The haubergeon, a padded jerkin that sat against his skin, was often critical in keeping a Knight Templar breathing .
 The jerkin extended over much of the upper body and was the last line of defence from enemy blows . It was worn to protect the wearer of the jerkin from the enemy .
 In colder climates, it also helped keep the warrior warm not an issue in the Holy Land .
 Templar shield was large and long and long, with a teardrop design protecting their entire torso and upper legs .
 It was constructed from wood and had a metal rim, the latter helping to protect against it splitting under the weight of sword blows . The latter helped to protect the rim from splitting under weight of the sword blows.
 The typical Knight Templar was armed with a broadsword . However when fighting on horseback spears were also used . The Knight Templar were armed with spears .
 Two-handed broadswords granted extra reach and cleaving power, but left the knight shieldless . Sometimes, two-handed weapons were opted for while fighting on foot .
 The hauberk is a long-sleeved shirt of chainmail fitted with chain covers for the hands and a chain coif hood for the head . The primary form of defence against enemy strikes, the haberk, was a knight's armour .
 Chainmail would be partnered with iron chausses to protect their legs . The chainmail would also protect the legs of the players from falling .
 Philip managed to persuade Philip to leave behind 10,000 French crusaders along with the necessary funds to pay for their upkeep . For Richard, though, such betrayal of faith was unimaginable, and after calling on the Philip to do right in the eyes of god, he managed to convince him
 The Lionheart was now the central remaining commander of over 20,000 crusaders, knights and soldiers alike . He ordered the continuation of the crusade, with the bulk of the crusading army marching out of Acre .
 Jaffa was an important port that provided passage into the southern Mediterranean Sea . The next city on the crusaders' relentless march to Jerusalem was the city of the Arab Spring .
 As long as Jaffa remained untaken Saladin had a natural avenue to pour more of his troops into the region from his impregnable stronghold of Egypt . But if it fell to the crusaders Saladin would be forced to move men over land, a far less effective and
 The city also lay a mere 65 kilometres (40 miles) from Jerusalem, making it the ideal coastal base for crusaders . The city was also a mere 40 miles from Jerusalem .
 Before it could be taken, the crusaders needed to get there in one piece . The crusaders had to get to the end of the journey .
 Richard knew Saladin was somewhere in the nearby area and ordered his troops to march down the Mediterranean coastline . The baggage train was protected by being nearest to the coast, with the baggage train protected .
 Richard got his fleet to sail down the coast in parallel with them, shutting off the sea as an avenue of possible attack . This tactic prevented Saladin from attacking on one flank, as Richard also got his fleets to sail along the coast .
 The Wood of Arsuf is one of the only forested areas in all of the Levant . To the north of Jaffa, the area is known as the Wood of Al-Arsuf . The Wood is the largest forested area in the Levant, with some of
 The woods ran parallel to the coastline for over 20 kilometres . The woods had to be traversed by Richard's army if they were to reach Jaffa . Richard had to traverse the woods if he was to reach the city .
 Saladin sanctioned a full-scale assault on the crusaders, which led to the largest pitched battle of the Third Crusade . After harassing Richard's troops with small hit-and-run attacks within the woods .
 Saladin knew the battle would be decisive, but couldn't possibly have foreseen how disastrous it would be . The battle was decisive for Saladin, but he couldn't foresee how disastrous for him it was .
 Lionheart was routed in a decisive counterattack led by Richard's Knights Hospitaller . Saladin could only watch as the Saracen army was publicly executed .
 Saladin retreated from Arsuf to regroup what was left of his battered army and lick his wounds . Saladin was forced to retreat to rest in the desert .
 The crusaders made a beeline for Jaffa, swiftly besieging and taking it . The Crusaders were swift to seize the city, and it was captured .
 Richard with Jerusalem almost in sight decided to open negotiations with his enemy . Despite some disagreement with the other crusader leaders, Richard opened negotiations with the enemy . Richard decided to negotiate with Jerusalem with the help of the British .
 Saladin was being questioned by some of his subjects following the defeat at Arsuf . He agreed to the negotiations and sent his brother, Al-Adil, to Jaffa .
 Richard's sister Joan was being talked about as a potential bride for Al-Adil with Jerusalem as a wedding gift . The talks ultimately broke down after talks broke down .
 The breakdown of the talks caused unrest in the crusader ranks, with arguments arising about the best way to proceed toward their goal . The breakdown has caused unrest among the activists .
 Richard ordered the army to move on Jerusalem in November, first moving through Ascalon and then Latrun . Richard, growing tired of the constant in-fighting, acted decisively . The army moved on Jerusalem first in November .
 Christian army was soon at Beit Nuba, a mere 20 kilometres from Jerusalem . Christian army soon arrived at the city, 20 kilometres away from the capital . The Christian army arrived in the city .
 The news quickly spread of the crusaders' progress and the morale in the Muslim garrisons within the city crumbled . The news of the Crusades' progress spread quickly spread .
 Saladin's forces had been crushed, Acre, Arsuf and Jaffa taken and Jerusalem looked set to be next . Saladin’s forces were crushed and Jerusalem was next .
 Richard feared that a retaliation attack, most likely another large-scale ambush, was very near . Saladin had proven himself a worthy and tricky foe and, not knowing the extent to which his forces had been depleted, Richard feared a retaliation .
 The swords the Saracens used in the period of the Crusades were generally straight, unlike the curved blades often depicted in films of the period . The swords were also straight and deadly .
 Lower ranking Saracens wore little or no armour . High ranking warriors would often wear mail coats or other armour under their robes .
 Saracen army in the Third Crusade had a good number of cavalrymen more than their Christian counterparts . Saracens had more cavalrymen than Christian counterparts in their armies .
 The soldiers on these horses were normally archers and could be very effective when harassing their enemy . The soldiers were usually archers, and were very effective in harassing their enemies .
 Most accounts of Saladin make reference to him being quite slight and frail . He did not have the imposing physical stature of Richard but was respected for his wisdom and piety .
 Salah ad-Din Yusuf ibn Ayyub was the first sultan of Egypt and Syria . He was the founder of the Ayyubid dynasty . The modern day city of Jerusalem was the birthplace of the first Egyptian sultan .
 Saladin oversaw the decisive Battle of Hattin in 1187 and instigated the Third Crusade . The fall of Jerusalem led to the famous ‘Saladin tithe’, a tax levied in England and some parts of France .
 Saladin and Richard's armies clashed multiple times during the Third Crusade . The two men famously shared a more complicated relationship than would have been expected, with great respect reported on both sides .
 After the Battle of Arsuf Saladin's army was soundly beaten Saladin sent Richard two excellent horses as Richard had lost his own in the battle . After the battle Richard lost two horses as his own had lost their own in battle .
 Saladin died a year after the Third Crusade, struck down by a fever while staying in Damascus . The two men never met in person, though, and Saladin never met .
 Richard consistently displayed supreme physical courage, gallant and splendid are not adjectives one would use today of the man who slaughtered 3,000 prisoners at the siege of Acre and nearly bankrupted the kingdom twice in his ten-year reign . Richard's reign lasted ten years .
 Richard's mother raised the ransom when he was taken hostage in the Third Crusade . His mother, Eleanor of Aquitaine, raised the public-relations campaign to raise the ransom . The enduring legend of Richard as a heroic Christian warrior is due to his mother's campaign .
 The True Story Of England's Crusading King, published by The History Press. The True story of England's King is published by the History Press .
 Richard paused for thought rather than make straight for the holy city and consulted his fellow crusaders . These factors caused Richard to pause for thought instead of making straight for holy city .
 If they started besieging Jerusalem and were hit with a relieving force from Saladin, the general poor conditions would lead to a massacre . It was agreed that if they started siegeging Jerusalem they would be attacked by Saladin .
 The invading army spent the rest of the winter months in Ascalon before continuing hostilities in the spring of 1192 . The invading armies spent the next year in the region before returning to Spain .
 Saladin was forced by his emirs to disband much of what was left of his army . The emirs favouring consolidation rather than open hostilities launched no major attack .
 A series of small fights and skirmishes slowly eroding the crusader army's numbers and morale . Saracen troops constantly plagued the crusaders .
 This came to a head on 22 May when the fortified town of Darum fell to the crusader forces after five days of fighting .
 The crusaders had won great battles in the Holy Land but no more armies were journeying across the Mediterranean to bolster their forces . Those men who fell in battle weren’t going to be replaced .
 Richard’s crusade was faltering, its primary purpose slipping away like sand in an hourglass . Richard's crusade was . faltering . Richard‘s crusade is faltering. Richard”
 The crusading king of England managed to marshal his remaining forces together for one last advance on Jerusalem in June of that year . He marched inland in June, marching inland .
 This time, far from being checked at Beit Nuba, the crusaders actually came within sight of the hallowed city . The crusaders were able to enter the city for the first time .
 Richard was to return Jesus's city to its rightful owners . He was to reinstate Christianity as the dominant religious and military power in the Holy Land . Richard's mission was to bring Christianity back to Christianity in Israel .
 Once more the poison of dissent started to seep among its leaders . However, as the tired, dusty and bronzed warriors stood there watching the distant city from afar, once more .
 Despite standing before the city, resentment boiled over among the military commanders . Debate over the best military course of action descended into personal attacks and squabbles .
 The majority of the leaders believed the best way to take Jerusalem was not besiege it but to attack Saladin directly in Egypt . Saladin was forced to relinquish it of his own free will as a bargaining chip to prevent his own fall .
 Hugh III believed the only course of action was an immediate and direct assault on the city . The Duke of Burgundy Hugh III was the leader of the surviving French crusaders . However, he believed that an immediate assault was the only way to attack the city would take place .
 News of the split in the leaders' plans filtered down to the crusaders themselves . Knights and soldiers now breaking previous allegiances and siding with one side or the other .
 Neither of the two forces were now powerful enough to assault a city, let alone Jerusalem, and as such Richard was forced to order a retreat .
 Richard decided to return to England after being angry with the French . Richard returned to England .
 Saladin personally oversaw the assault on Jaffa . However, just as he was approaching, news arrived via a scout that the city had fallen to Saladin .
 The scout reported that the lives of all the people there were under a very real threat . The Muslim ruler had lost control of his army, the scout reported . The scout said that the thousands of Muslim soldiers had driven berserk .
 With the lives of the surviving crusaders in his hands, a return to England would have to wait . Richard had been Richard who ordered the Acre executions . Richard ordered the executions of the crusaders .
 Richard launched one final assault on Saladin, approaching Jaffa by sea in surprise attack . With a band of 2,000 surviving knights and soldiers, Richard attacked Saladin's camp .
 Ayyubid soldiers who had only just taken the city were unprepared for the attack and were soon overrun . A combination of knights and crusader crossbowmen decisively broke their resistance .
 Saladin was forced to flee from Jaffa to the south after the attack . The attack was so brutally effective that Saladin had to flee the south . Saladin's death was the result of the brutal attack .
 The geographical region of Palestine, between the River Jordan and the Mediterranean Sea, was referred to as the Holy Land by Christians and Muslims alike . The region is known as Palestine, Palestine and Palestine .
 Both religions claimed ownership due to an association with their faith, with the city of Jerusalem held in particular esteem . Both religions claim ownership of the city due to its association with its faith .
 Islam and Christianity were Abrahamic monotheistic religions . Both sides considered the other to be unbelievers in the one true god and considered their presence heretical .
 By the Third Crusade, Jerusalem and large parts of Palestine and the Levant region had changed hands again and again, with conflicts destabilising the region .
 Richard perceived the fall of Jerusalem to Saladin's forces in 1187 as a direct attack on his faith . Richard, coming from the Christian West, therefore perceived the loss of Jerusalem as an attack on the faith of the West .
 From Saladain's point of view he was merely taking back the spiritual heartland of his own faith . The Christian crusaders and Muslim Ayyubids sapped of any further willpower .
 Fighting had gone on for three years and large parts of historic area lay in ruins . Large parts of the historic area had been destroyed by the fighting .
 Despite some areas of the Levant changing hands, nothing had really changed . Tens of thousands of men, women and children had lost their lives .
 Richard the Lionheart was still the fierce warrior king with a renowned reputation in Europe without a firm foothold in the Holy Land . Jerusalem remained under Muslim control, Saladin was ruler of the Ayyubid Empire and Saladin .
 Saladin and Richard’s desire for more war and bloodshed soon followed . What had changed, though, was the desire to more bloodshed . A treaty soon followed, and so a treaty was made .
 Richard the Lionheart remained in the Holy Land the city, with their rights protected by law . Jerusalem would remain under Muslim control but from now on, Christian pilgrims and traders would be permitted to visit 17 months later .
 The treaty was to be Richard's last act in the Holy Land and the final curtain for the Third Crusade . Richard set out on his return to England immediately after .
 His return journey would not be as straightforward as the one over, with a series of events leading to his own capture, temporary imprisonment and yet more battles . He would return to his homeland, though, after being captured and imprisoned .
 His quest for the Holy Land was a journey full of bloodshed, plunder and religious fanaticism, but little territorial success . However, the war he would go down in history for was his quest for Holy Land .
 It ensured his legacy would forever be debated between those who see him as a crusading Christian king and others who view him as an amoral killer . The debate still rages on today .
 Napoleon I returned from exile on Elba to Paris on 20 March 1815 . The war had begun after Napoleon's return to France from exile . Napoleon I had been in exile since his return to Paris from Elba .
 The Congress of Vienna declared Napoleon an outlaw and the Seventh Coalition pledged to field a large army to bring his rule to an end . This set into motion a chain of events that would see Napoleon reclaim his position as emperor .
 Napoleon struck at the Prussian army before it could join up with Wellington's on 16 June . Napoleon struck two days prior to Waterloo when he attacked Prussian troops .
 The French ruler split his army into three groups, with two dedicated to the Prussians . French ruler did this by splitting his army between three groups of troops .
 Napoleon defeated the Prussians by causing their centre to collapse under repeated French assaults . The Battle of Ligny saw Napoleon defeat the Prussian by causing the centre of the army to collapse .
 While the Prussians lost men, they were not routed however and as we shall see were disastrously left to retreat uninterrupted, with only a cursory French force giving chase .
 Napoleon's army's remaining left flank had been engaged with some of Wellington’s forces at Quatre Bras . Wellington's forces had attempted unsuccessfully to overrun the Prince of Orange's position . Napoleon's troops had been trying to overrun Wellington's position at the same time .
 Napoleon turned his attention on Quatre Bras, reaching the area the following day . The Prussians were apparently defeated, Napoleon turned attention to the area .
 By this point, both sides had abandoned Quatre Bras . Wellington could not hold it without the Prussians . Wellington was forced to abandon the battle .
 Napoleon caught up with his left flank commander, Marshal Michel Ney, who was pursuing Wellington towards Waterloo . Napoleon ordered his right flank commander to see off the Prussians more definitively . Marshal Emmanuel de Grouchy was able to catch up with Ney and capture Wellington .
 Napoleon issued the order late on the afternoon of 17 June . By this time, the Prussians had already made significant ground and regrouped at the town of Wavre a position from which they could easily rejoin Wellington at Waterloo . Marshal Grouchy was unsuccessful in catching
 By this time the Battle of Waterloo was in full swing and Grouchy was unable to take part . Despite eventually defeating a solitary Prussian Corps at Wavre on 18 June, by this time, the battle was over . The French army eventually defeated the Prussian Army at W
 Napoleon continued to hunt down Wellington with his remaining forces . He made camp south-west of Wellington's position at Waterloo . Napoleon continued hunting down Wellington .
 The scene was now set for the Battle of Waterloo the next day . It resulted in a famous victory for the Duke of Wellington and a defeat for Napoleon .
 The French monarchy was restored in July 1815, with King Louis XVIII regaining the throne . Napoleon was banished to the volcanic island of Saint Helena in the Atlantic Ocean .
 Napoleon would live on Saint Helena for a further six years, before passing away in May 1821 . Napoleon lived on the island for six more years before his death . Napoleon died in 1821 at the age of 31 .
 Napoleon’s Old Guard elite veterans of the Imperial Guard were his Old Guard . Napoleon handpicked based on their combat experience . The bodyguard was Napoleon's first bodyguard in the French Revolution .
 One of the most common traits was above average height, meaning that they towered over many other units on the battlefield .
 Their charge famously repelled a key French advance . It caused the complete destruction of a large French infantry column and led to the capture of Napoleon's 45th Regiment of the Line's .
 Other nations joined forces with the British to form a coalition against the new emperor of France . Other nations played a part in the Battle of Waterloo, with the UK and France .
 The Netherlands, Hanover, Nassau, Bavaria and Prussia contributed most significantly . The Netherlands and Hanover contributed to the project .
 Waterloo was not a medieval meatgrinder of a battle, with tactics very firmly on display . But it still had a huge casualty list, with many of its casualties .
 Of Napoleon's 72,000 troops, around 25,000 were killed outright or wounded, 8,000 taken prisoner and 15,000 went missing . Napoleon died at the Battle of the Somalian Peninsula .
 The infantry dug in deep to deny many French cavalry charges at Waterloo . Not the most tactically astute of generals, not the best on the planet .
 Very destructive artillery helped slow the French forces and break up their lines . Versatile troops that could fight at close to medium range . Easily outflanked by cavalry and vulnerable to cannons .
 Battle of Waterloo began with a French attack on a Coalition position at Hougoumont, a large farmhouse . Cannons had excellent range and could do a lot of damage . Needed supporting troops for protection as fairly fragile under fire and few in number .
 By the early afternoon it had become a bloody epicentre for much of the fighting . Coalition forces were holding out against numerous French assaults .
 The cannons caused many casualties in Wellington's cavalry, opening a potential weak point in the defending lines . The cannons were used in the Battle of Stonewall, which ended in defeat .
 Napoleon had hoped to rally his remaining troops behind them, but the strength of the Coalition's forces left this untenable, and all he could do was order a retreat . Despite hoping to rally remaining troops, Napoleon could do nothing to save his troops .
 His exit was covered by the Old Guard, many of whom died holding back the Coalition's advance . The Old Guard died holding off the Coalition forces .
 The initial fighting went the way of the French, with the left’s infantry pressing Wellington's forces back . Wellington's troops were defeated by the French in the Battle of the Somalian Plains .
 Napoleon was informed that Prussian troops were fast approaching . Napoleon was forced to retreat after he was informed of the threat .
 He tried to send word to Marshal Grouchy to engage with them, but his commander was in Wavre . He was unable to communicate with them because of his lack of communication .
 Wellington's First and Second Brigade of heavy cavalry charged and smashed into the French infantry . Seeing their infantry was about to buckle, Wellington's brigade charged .
 By the time they reached the bottom of the hill, they had completely halted the infantry's advance . The British troops had completely stopped the advance .
 In doing so, however, they had left themselves exposed and without backup . They left themselves without backup, leaving themselves vulnerable .
 The Old Guard who had been supporting the French position at Plancenoit beat a hasty retreat . The French had been supported by the Old Guard .
 Napoleon's forces temporarily held off the Prussians at Plancenoit . Napoleon went on one last major offensive in the final days of his life .
 He sent the supposedly undefeatable Imperial Guard into Wellington's army’s centre in an attempt to break through and attack his flanks from within . Wellington's flanks were attacked by the Imperial Guard in a bid to break into his centre .
 The guard had some success, breaching multiple lines of the Coalition force, but eventually they were overrun by Wellington's numerically superior infantry and wiped out . The guard was eventually wiped out in the battle .
 The village of Plancenoit on Napoleon’s right flank was a tactically important position . At roughly 4.30pm the Prussians arrived and began attacking the French forces in position there .
 A massive central battle ensued, with cavalry, infantry and artillery all involved . Cavalry, infantry, and artillery were involved in the battle .
 Napoleon's cavalry regiments took out much of the Coalition's heavy cavalry, but they could not wipe them out . Napoleon's forces were able to defeat the Coalition, but were unable to do so .
 Coalition and French squares undertook a series of back-and-forth exchanges . Coalition and France squares then undertook a number of back and forth exchanges .
 A general melee ensued, with each side seeing their numbers steadily chipped away from each other . All the while cannon and musket fire continued to rain down from all sides .
 French light cavalry was considered the best of its kind in the world and played a large part in holding off Coalition's heavy cavalry charges . Strengths: A savvy strategist with plenty of battle experience . Weaknesses: Erratic, took a detached approach to fighting .
 The musket was wielded by Napoleon's Old Guard with deadly accuracy at Waterloo . Direct cavalry charges rely on surprise to be most effective . The muskets were used to pick off large numbers of Coalition soldiers .
 The verdict on Hitler's leadership has mostly come from the pens and mouths of his generals . Discover the expert verdict on Adolf Hitler's tactical prowess . Discover our verdict on the dictator's tactical genius .
 Many of the men had grown to resent their former leader, and with the fall of Germany they seized the opportunity to criticise and embarrass the Fiihrer at every opportunity . Many of these men grew to resent his former leader .
 Germany declared war on Poland on 1 September 1939 . They had not expected to encounter such fierce opposition from Britain and France .
 World War I was still fresh in the nation's memory, and the country had only just started to thrive again from the harsh penalties imposed after their defeat in 1918 and the Great Depression of the 1930s . After both countries declared war on the Third Reich in response, the German population were
 Nazi leader was dragging them into another war against familiar foes . Now the leader of the Nazi party had dragged them into yet another war . The Nazi party was dragged into another battle against familiar enemies .
 Despite his popularity, Hitler was not immune to criticism . The start of World War II saw a significant drop in morale in Germany . Hitler's popularity was a major factor in the rise in German morale .
 France fell in just a matter of weeks to Germany's Blitzkrieg tactics . But that all changed when France fell just a few weeks to the Germans .
 Hitler involved himself in all aspects of the operations of the German army more so than the respective leaders of other countries . Riding on this success, Hitler quickly involved himself .
 He was known for attention to detail that was interfering at best at best, and detrimental at worst . He was also known for his attention-to-detail attention .
 The popular picture of Hitler is of a man that heeded no advice a leader that would rather listen to his own gut instinct than to the rational arguments of his generals . Hitler was a leader who listened to his gut instinct rather than to his generals' advice . Hitler would listen to no
 Hitler was distrustful of some of his senior officers, who in turn criticised him for his inexperience in warfare . This was true to an extent; Hitler grew more distrustful and erratic as war progressed .
 Officers resented Hitler's involvement in their military, as they resented his involvement . That being said, it was largely the officers themselves that have swayed our view of Hitler's leadership .
 Hitler relied upon his generals greatly for the first few years of the war . Hitler would seek their advice on both strategy and tactics, albeit some more so so than others .
 The Fiihrer was not blithely ignorant; he was well aware of the hatred some of his officers felt towards him . He used this to his advantage at every available opportunity .
 President Obama would go with whoever he agreed with at briefings, so it was sort of a divide-and-conquer kind of approach to leadership . They would throw in their opinions at briefings and he would go along with whoever they agreed with .
 The Fiihrer had an uncanny attention to detail and involved himself in the smallest of minutiae about particular units . Many of his generals would be caught short if they could not supply him with precise information such as the number of tanks in a particular division .
 By 1943 Hitler had started bringing two stenographers to each of his meetings, and although many records were burned at the end of the war, those that survived reveal Hitler's meetings to be intricate to the point that they were discussing the movements of very small units on the front .
 President Barack Obama has been criticized for trying to act as a military commander in Syria . He has been accused of trying to mislead the U.S. by saying how many trucks a unit has at its disposal .
 By the end of the war almost no major unit was allowed to move without Hitler’s permission especially one on the retreat . Such was the extent of his attention for detail that by the . end of . the . war almost all major units were allowed to . move without . Hitler
 Hitler would go on to employ the same tactics in other countries, including France in 1940 . Hitler would use the same tactic in other nations, including Germany, France and France .
 September 1939 was probably the best time to attack, says Dr Megargee . September 1939 would be the time for Germany to attack Germany, he says .
 The campaign in Poland was devised by General Franz Haider, chief of the general staff . But it was ultimately Hitler who gave the order to invade Poland .
 Germany employed Blitzkrieg (which translates as 'lightning war 1 ) tactics, denting Poland's front lines with Panzer tanks and aircraft before troops moved through gaps this created .
 The approach was hugely successful, although it was not one that Hitler came up with . Weren't Hitler's approach was successful, but it wasn't his own, says historian .
 On 27 September 1939 Poland surrendered, albeit with a Soviet invasion from the east dividing the country . Hitler even said that. against Germany at that point .
 He was counting on Britain and France to stay out of it . But, of course, he said he hoped they would stay away from it .
 Case Yellow was Case Yellow, where German forces advanced into the Ardennes region and pushed Allied forces in Belgium back to the sea . Case Yellow is the first case of Case Yellow in the history of the Second World War . Case yellow was the first time Case Yellow saw German forces advance into
 This ultimately resulted in the mass evacuation of the British Expeditionary Force at Dunkirk between 26 May and 4 June . The evacuation of Dunkirk was the largest evacuation of all British forces in the history of the war .
 A second operation known as Case Red began on 5 June, with Germany's air superiority and armoured units overcoming the depleted French forces . Case Red was the second operation to end the war with France .
 German forces pushed into Paris on 14 June, and by 22 June they had signed an armistice with the French . It would see Germany occupy the north and the west of the country until 1944 .
 Hitler convinced the German High Command to accept the plan, which undoubtedly was a significant factor in defeating France . However, Hitler was ultimately responsible for the success of the plan .
 The campaign prevented the stalemate that had occurred in World War I, and enabled Germany to begin focusing its attention on other foes . The war ended in a stalemate .
 Hitler was extremely nervous about how it was going to all work out, expert says . Expert says Hitler was 'extremely nervous' about how the war would work out .
 He was very worried about the left flank of that attack going through the Ardennes to the coast of the English Channel . He was worried that the French might counterattack, and he was worried he might .
 10 May 1940 Germany begins its campaign to take control of western Europe .
 He was one of the main ' instigators' of an offensive through the Ardennes during the invasion of France in 1940 . He ensured Germany a swift victory in Europe in Europe .
 His constant criticism of Hitler's strategies saw him ousted from the German army in 1944 . His failure to turn the tide at the Battle of Stalingrad in 1942 led to him being ousted . He later attained the rank of general, but was ousted from German army .
 He was captured and imprisoned by the British in August 1945, and died almost 30 years later in 1973 .
 At this point in the war Hitler's generals were doing their best to convince him of employing different tactics, such as initiating smaller offensives instead of large ones . Hitler was having none of it .
 Hitler did at times make some smart decisions, but embarking on a war at all was a poor one . For all his shortcomings, though, Hitler did make smart decisions . Hitler did not make a war against the Nazis .
 The idea that Germany could take on the British Empire, the Soviet Union and then the U.S. at the same time was at the very least problematic . The idea of Germany taking on Britain, Russia and the United States was problematic .
 With the hand Hitler had been dealt or rather the hand he had dealt himself he managed to conduct himself, and the army, in a reasonable manner at the start of the conflict . Hitler's conduct of the army was in a 'reasonable manner' at the beginning of the war .
 Hitler was even more of a novice when it came to the sea . The Battle of the Atlantic took place 3 September 1939 8 May 1945 .
 He didn't have any considerable knowledge of navies, and thus left naval operations in the hands of generals he trusted . Erich Raeder and Karl Donitz served as commander-in-chief of the Kriegsmarine .
 The Battle of the Atlantic was the longest military campaign of World War II . It ran continuously from the outbreak of war on 3 September 1939 to 8 May 1945 . The longest campaign of the war ran from 1939 to 1945, ending in 1945 .
 The Germans relied considerably on their U-boat submarines, with only a handful of warships available . The U-boats were used in the early years of WWII .
 The campaign revolved around the Allied blockade of Germany and a counter-blockade by the Kriegsmarine . The campaign was largely based on the blockade of the German capital .
 German U-boats attempted to attack convoy ships travelling across the Atlantic . Allied navies would see the Allies gain control of the Atlantic and Channel by 1944 .
 Experts say Hitler was involved in some key decisions, especially to take U-boats away from the Atlantic and send them to Norway and the Mediterranean . The expert’s view is that Hitler was responsible for some of the key decisions .
 Blitzkrieg strikes Germany takes control of large portions of western Europe, including Belgium, culminating in the surrender of France . Germany takes over Belgium, taking control of France and Belgium .
 The German High Command had been especially unconvinced that France would fall in such a short amount of time . They set about deciding what Germany's next course of action should be .
 Hitler was all too aware that Britain posed a significant threat and, with little chance of a diplomatic resolution, he would have to attack . Hitler was aware of the threat and attacked Britain in 1941 .
 The prospects of a potential invasion of Britain are incredibly slim, however, were incredibly slim . The prospect of a British invasion of the country was incredibly slim.
 The Royal Navy was far superior to the German Navy . The Royal Air Force posed a formidable threat in the skies . The German Navy was a far superior naval force .
 If an invasion were to happen, the German army wanted to get as many troops ashore as possible . However, the Kriegsmarine was adamant that such an operation would be impossible .
 Hitler opted to test out the defensive capabilities of Britain with an attack from the air . Hitler eventually opted to use the tactic to test his forces' strength .
 If the German Luftwaffe could manage to gain air superiority over the Royal Air Force, it could then keep the British Royal Navy at bay while Germany mounted an allout ground invasion . The Luftweaffe could then be able to keep the Royal Navy from being attacked by the
 Britain proved a much more stubborn opponent than Germany had ever anticipated . The RAF was never in too much danger of succumbing to defeat .
 Luftwaffe switched from bombing British military targets and airfields to bombing cities such as London as a terror tactic . One of the key factors that affected the outcome was the decision to switch from bombing military targets to bombing targets such as the capital .
 Hitler postponed Operation Sealion indefinitely in October 1940 . With the Luftwaffe unable to gain air superiority, Hitler postponed the operation indefinitely in 1940 . Operation Sealbren was postponed indefinitely .
 About 6,000 Heinkel He Ills were built, but for the most part they were outperformed by British Hurricanes and Spitfires . However, the bombing of civilian Britain continued in what was to become known as the Blitz .
 Operation Barbarossa began with the five-month-long battle with the Red Army on 22 June 1941 . The Soviets liberated Minsk and Majdanek in July 1944, ending the war with Germany in 1944 .
 Hitler and his generals believed that the Soviet Union would fall if Germany mounted a sustained attack on it . Hitler believed that Russia would collapse if he launched a sustained assault .
 Germany assumed the Red Army would collapse and the Soviet people would surrender after a short military campaign, allowing Germany to occupy large portions of the USSR while focusing their efforts on Britain in the west . They presumed, somewhat naively, that the Red army would collapse .
 Hitler’s underestimation of the Soviet Union was a major failing of the entire campaign . This, of course, was anything but what really happened, and Hitler underestimated the Soviets . Hitler underestimated Soviet Union in advance, he says .
 Hitler ultimately made the choice to focus on the economic resources of the Soviet Union rather than the capital . Hitler ultimately chose to focus his efforts on economic resources .
 Hitler had good instincts in this regard, but the overall decision to attack the Soviet Union was a poor one, he says . Hitler's instincts were good, but he made a poor decision to go on attack, he adds .
 The Soviets refused to 'roll over’ the way the Germans had expected them to . Hitler's direction of the campaign in the summer of 1941 was adequate . His refusal to heed the advice of his generals as the invasion dragged on was a major flaw on his part .
 Germany's Blitzkrieg tactics were nullified by the Red Army's tactic of holding back before launching counteroffensives . The Red Army held back and counter-attacked until the end of the war . Red Army used the tactic to counter-attack tactics that had been so successful
 In December 1941 Germany was at the gates of Moscow, but the Soviets kept attacking and wore the Germans down . The Soviets wore out the Germans with their attacks and wore them down .
 Many of Hitler's generals suggested the German army should retreat and consolidate before attacking again in spring 1942 . With winter approaching, many suggested the Germans should retreat .
 Hitler was adamant the army should hold everywhere to ensure they didn't lose any of their heavy equipment, which he came under much criticism for . Hitler, though, was adamant that the army shouldn't be allowed to lose heavy equipment .
 His decision was arguably the right one at first, but later in the war he became too enamoured with the technique . His decision to use the technique was arguably right one, but he later became too fond of it later .
 With their first attempt at defeating the Soviet Union unsuccessful, Germany would try again before the war was out . Germany would attempt to defeat the Soviets before the end of the war .
 Hitler and his generals were convinced the Red Army was on the ropes, and sustained attacks would wear them out . The Red Army would be worn out by sustained attacks, Hitler said .
 The Russians successfully defended key cities including Moscow in 1942 . Hitler was left with few options but retreat after the battle .
 The genocide of the Jews and the general abuse and destruction of the Soviet population really made it impossible to come to any kind of arrangement with the Soviet people . The expert’s view is that it was impossible to agree with the Soviets .
 There's an argument to be made that if the Germans had gone in with a different attitude they could have taken Ukraine and the Baltic states away . There's also an argument that the Germans should have taken a different approach .
 Hitler assumed they were going to have a quick military victory and saw no reason to compromise . Hitler assumed that they had a quick victory and didn't want to compromise.
 He convinced himself that the Red Army must be on the ropes, and they kept pushing in the winter, still trying to take Moscow . The Red Army "ran out of steam" in winter, he says .
 Dvinsk, Minsk and Lvov were on the Baltic Sea in 1941 . Leningrad was on the eastern coast of Russia when the war broke out in 1941.
 Operation Barbarossa ends . Hitler orders the army to take up defensive positions . Operation Barbarossa is the end of the war .
 Britain has refused to enter into any sort of diplomatic negotiations with the Syrian government .
 He was not going to be able to continue this war over the long run against the British because, sooner or later, Germany was going to run out of strength for that even with the support of the Soviet Union . He was in an economic bind .
 The decision was based on the assumption which his generals shared and backed that the USSR would collapse that there would be one short military campaign which would destroy the Red Army . That decision was backed by the assumption that the Soviet Union would collapse .
 War came to a point in 1941 where defeat for Germany seemed all but inevitable and Hitler's strategic choices became ever-more limited . Hitler's strategy choices were ever more limited .
 By 1942, after a second attempt at defeating the Soviet Union had failed, Dr Megargee suggests that, for Hitler, it became "just a matter of holding out as best he could" in the hope that the Allied coalition would break up .
 By 1945 Hitler was all but dictating to his generals exactly what to do, and he had very little trust left in any of them . By 1945 he was dictating what he wanted to do .
 For all the strategic knowledge in the world, Hitler had no hope of leading the Third Reich to an eventual victory . But by then, and possibly even much earlier, for all the . world's strategic knowledge, for . all the knowledge in . the world . The Third Reich had no
 Hitler's deterioration from sanity to irrationality was not the deciding factor in the war . However there can be little doubt that his leadership style did little to help what was already a difficult cause for Germany .
 Perhaps even with the greatest generals in the world the Third Reich would have been defeated, of that we cannot be certain . Of that, perhaps even with . the greatest . generals in . the world would have . been defeated; of that . of that, of course .
 Hitler was not the great military leader he himself thought he was . What we do know, however, was that he was not a military leader himself himself . Hitler was never a military genius, but he was a great leader .
 For his handful of victories there was a huge truckload of defeats, and his refusal to listen to reason ultimately accelerated Nazi Germany down the path to an unavoidable defeat .
 Tensions between the largely industrial North and agricultural South had been rising . The election of Abraham Lincoln as president on a platform of keeping slavery out of the new territories tipped the balance .
 Before he even took office in March 1861, seven Southern states had seceded from the Union . Before he took office, seven of the seven states had already secedered .
 The American Civil War was a conflict between the 11 Confederate states who sought independence from the remaining Northern and other loyal states . The war was fought between the Northern and the remaining Confederate states .
 The key issues causing division between the North and South were state rights, the economy and tied up in both were the abolition of slavery .
 The American Civil War is considered to be the template for many subsequent industrial wars that would follow . The Battle of Gettysburg is considered the first industrial war .
 It became characterised by large-scale conscription of the civilian population, use of railroads and other fast transportation for troop deployment, and communication by telegraph and wireless devices .
 Gettysburg, Pennsylvania, was the ground for one of the bloodiest confrontations of the Civil War . Lincoln's Gettysburg Address was the site of one of America's bloodiest Civil War confrontations .
 Gettysburg is estimated to have been around 51,000 that accounts for around eight per cent of all casualties during the four-year conflict . Casualties from the Gettysburg are estimated to be around seven-figure casualties .
 The Emancipation Proclamation was an executive order issued by President Lincoln on 1 January 1863, freeing slaves in the Confederate states . President Lincoln issued the order on January 1 1863 .
 The 13th Amendment was passed by the Senate in April 1864 and ratified in December the following year, abolishing slavery nationwide . It paved the way for the abolition of slavery in America .
 The Union, ie Northern States, was made up of 20 free states and five border slave states . It stood against 11 Southern slave states, making up the Confederacy . The Union vs Confederacy was signed at the start of 1863 .
 It has been estimated that the forces on each side numbered around 2.13 million Union troops against 1.08 million Confederate troops . Union troops were estimated to have outnumbered Confederate troops in the battle .
 More troops were killed in the Civil War than in any other conflict in which the U.S. has been involved before or since . The Civil War was the most violent and bloody war of all time .
 Of the estimated 620,000 casualties, almost two-thirds are believed to have perished to disease . Of the . estimated 620.000 casualties of the . population, almost 2-thirds died from disease . Almost two-quarters of the casualties are thought to have died of disease .
 Lincoln was pronounced dead at a nearby guesthouse at 7.22am on 15 April . Lincoln's funeral was held at the same guesthouse as a memorial service held in London .
 Lincoln was a Kentucky-born congressman for Illinois . He was a lawyer before running for president . Lincoln was the president of Illinois from 1809-1865 .
 General and commander of the Confederate army, he was actually offered command of Union forces first . Robert E Lee 18071870 General and . commander of . Confederate army .
 Ulysses S Grant 1822-1885 Lieutenant general during the Civil War . Grant was later elected president, holding office from 1869 to 1877 .
 Confederate president during the Civil War, he was captured but freed after two years without facing treason charges . Jefferson Davis was captured in 18081889 but never charged with treason .
 The assassin who killed Lincoln at Ford's Theatre had originally plotted only kidnap before changing the plan to murder . John Wilkes Booth had originally planned to kidnap Lincoln before changing his plans .
 Abraham Lincoln elected 6 November 1860 . Abraham Lincoln won a very divisive election despite receiving no support from a single Southern state . Lincoln was elected President of the Union in 1860 .
 Confederate States of America was formed by six of the seven secession states . Confederacy formed 8 February 1861 . Confederate states of America formed by 6 of the 7 states .
 Lincoln announces preliminary proclamation stating his aim to free Southern slaves . Emancipation Proclamation 22 September 1862 .
 Battle of Gettysburg is the bloodiest confrontation of the Civil War . The battle is described as the turning point of the war .
 Nadia had completed her first solo flight and her first parachute jump aged 16 . Nadia was a member of one of the Soviet Union's numerous flying clubs . Aviation was one of many symbols of modernity and dynamism in communist society .
 As soon as war declared she abandoned the dress she was ironing and rushed to the airfield to enlist . It would only be October 1941 four months of heartbreak later that her offer would be accepted .
 She would become part of a unit a squadron leader that flew up to 30,000 missions and dropped an estimated 23,000 tons of bombs . She would be part of the unit that flew an estimated $1 billion in bombs .
 She lost 30 comrades in action, and would be one of the 23 women of her regiment awarded the nation's highest honour the Hero of the Soviet Union . She was awarded the Order of Lenin and three Orders of the Patriotic War .
 By 1945, this incredible young woman would write her name in pencil on the wall of Reichstag in Berlin . The red flag of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics was fluttering through the smoke and booming artillery as Hitler's empire finally died .
 Nadezhda Popova was a Night Witch, and institutionalised disdain was as implacable an opponent as the Nazi aggressors she lined up in her sights . Popova fought the Nazis in the 1930s in a bid to defeat the Nazis .
 In June 1941 the Wehrmacht ground a murderous trail across the vast unprepared expanse of the Soviet Union . Operation Barbarossa was well underway .
 Hitler’s plan to seize vast swathes of fertile Belorusian farmland, Ukrainian oil fields and Russian industrial centres had taken Soviet despot Joseph Stalin by surprise .
 More than a war of conquest, this was, in the Fuhrer's own words, a ""war of annihilation"" that transformed Europe's eastern fringe into a great and terrible charnel house . More than conquest, it was a 'war of annihilation' that turned Europe's
 The unprepared Red Army was overrun, and by October 1941 the swastika was flying over Estonia, Lithuania, Latvia, Belarus, and Ukraine .
 Despite the supposed egalitarianism of communist society, women were refused combat roles . Despite the number of women prepared to fight or fly to defend their homeland and avenge their loved ones, the women were denied combat roles.
 Recruitment officer recalls recruiting officer telling her, "Things may be bad but we're not so desperate that we're going to put little girls like you up in the skies" One young woman, eager to serve, recalled a recruiting officer saying, "We don't want to put
 It would take a personal plea to Stalin from Marina Raskova for the situation to change . The situation would take place in Russia .
 Raskova, who was 29 when war broke out, was one of the Soviet Union's most famous aviators . She was 29 at the time of the Second World War when she died .
 With Stalin's blessing Raskova formed and trained the 586th Fighter Aviation Regiment, flying Yakovlev Yak-1, Yak-7B and Yak-9 fighters . The 125th Guards Bomber Aviation Regiment flew state-of-the-art Petlyakov Pe-2
 Later renamed 46th ‘Taman' Guards Night Bomber Aviation Regiment . Known as 'Night Witches' by its German enemies die Nachthexen, or the Night Witches .
 The Night Witches' role was to keep the enemy on edge, unable to sleep or rest without fear of death from the skies at any time . 'Harassment bombing' and 'harassment bombing’ were the Night Witches’ role .
 Iron Cross the highest military honour awarded to German soldiers would be issued to anyone who brought down a Night Witch . Many refused to smoke at night, lest the glow of their cigarettes reveal their positions .
 They used wood-frame Polikarpov Po-2 biplanes mockingly referred to as 'sewing machines' They first saw service in 1928 and had since been relegated to crop-dusting and training . They were used to carry out crop-dust and training missions .
 The Po-2’s open cockpit exposed the pilot and navigator to frostbite . The small carrying capacity meant their two bombs were at the expense of even a radio . Popova's record was 18 gruelling sorties in one night .
 With an all-female ground crew as well as pilots, they moved from airbases behind Soviet lines to temporary airfields closer to the front . They deployed on missions from Popova's native Donetsk Basin to the besieged Crimea, Belarus and Poland, and even Germany itself .
 Each Night Witch would fly around 1,000 missions by the end of the war when the average for a British bomber crew was 30 .
 The Night Witches received orders on the Belorusian Front in 1944 . obsolete biplanes which flew too low to bail out of, would burst into to flames with sickening ease when hit by tracer shells from the 'circus of flak'
 To combat the searchlights the Night Witches developed a strategy that tested their already beleaguered nerves . The first two planes would deliberately probe the circus until they had the attention of searchlights and their accompanying symphony of gunfire, allowing the third plane to dip in and deliver its payload .
 The whole crew which was shot during the night flight was burning alive, and it was awful . The crew was shot in the face and body of the plane . The plane was shot by the crew during the shooting of the crew .
 "Before each mission and as we approached the target, I became a concentration of nerves and tension," says the author of the book . "I became the concentration of nervousness and tension. Before each mission, I become the . target," she says .
 The Germans were forced to start deploying their own mothballed biplanes to counter them . Eventually the Germans began using mothballing biplanes as a counter to the threat .
 Having a plane too clunky to dogfight was scarcely a fair trade for their vulnerability or the punishing frequency of their deployment . As advantages go, having a plane that can't be used in dogfights was hardly a good trade for vulnerability .
 The Night Witches were eventually awarded the coveted 'Guards Regiment' status, along with the variety of battle honours and medals they had rightfully earned . The prejudices that kept women out of combat until Operation Barbarossa reached its height weren't easily dispelled .
 Some male pilots refused to let their planes be maintained by female ground crews . Officers made disparaging reports of airwomen colouring in their lips with navigation pencil used to mark routes on maps .
 The Soviet Union's female flyers managed this without sacrificing their femininity . They could and they did, and amazingly, they managed to do it without sacrificing femininity. They could .
 Lydia Litvyak is a pilot with one of the Night Witches' sister regiments . She is the 'White Rose of Stalingrad' and 'The Night Witch' .
 Upon fly everything from the Spitfire to the B-25 Mitchell, and rocket and jet-powered fighters for the U.S. Air Force .
 Ataturk enrolled her as the Turkish Airforce's first counterparts . By 1943 their pay would be placed in line with the male wonderfully WASP's winged munchkin mascot .
 The Battle Of Fifinella was invented by children's author Roald Dahl and female trainee . Dahl invented by Dahl and the trainee who was a trainee in the book .
 Nadia Popova would fluff up her hair pressed flat by the leather flying cap in a tortoiseshell mirror after each flight . She would eventually meet her future husband pilot Semyon Kharlamov in a convoy, after being shot down .
 When Popova ended the war in the ruins of the Reichstag, Semyon was by her side, and they wrote their names together on the crumbling walls . Popova, who died in the end of the war, was by the side of her husband when the war ended
 Marina Raskova and Lydia Litvyak died in combat in 1943 and 1944 . Popova was one of many of her contemporaries who died in battle .
 Popova survived, married, and returned to her home town a hero . She was greeted by crowds throwing flowers and a marching band a more triumphant and provincial echo of Marina Raskova's state funeral in Moscow .
 Despite the glory and the tragedy, the 588th and its sister regiments would be sadly disbanded . Much like in Britain and America, the role of women who had served their country was expected to return to its pre-war setting .
 Nadia Popova died aged 91 in July 2013, aged 91 . Her death was mourned not just in her native Russia, but around the world .
 History provides few enough examples of women being able to endure the same terrible hardships and perform the same incredible feats as men . Fewer still exist where they were allowed to accomplish these things on their own terms as women .
 These 20-something girls from collective farms and steel towns defied society once when they became pilots, and then defied it again when they abandoned their ironing and took to the skies in war . Their example in an era when the idea of women in combat roles is still contested defies it
 Albert Einstein's most famous discovery, this deceptively simple equation states that mass and energy are related, and can work out how much energy is generated from mass being converted . 1905 Equation: How much energy can be generated from how much mass is converted into energy .
 Isaac Newton's discovery of the force of gravity was a central tenet of all physics . Newton discovered the gravity of the Earth bound objects to the Earth . Newton's theory of gravity is now a central part of physics and remains so to today .
 Newton introduced his law of universal gravitation in Principia Mathematica in 1687 . He helped lay down a coherent explanation of how the physical world worked that would dominate science .
 Newton's theory of gravitation was first formulated as he sat in Cambridge's Trinity College and witnessed an apple fall from a tree . Newton himself liked to repeat the story to colleagues .
 It is myth that the apple fell on Newton's head . Texts from the time such as William Stukeley's Memoirs Of Sir Isaac Newton's Life confirm the incident . Newton was inspired to determine why that apple should always descend perpendicular to the ground .
 The precursor to modern calculus was discovered in the 17th century, when Isaac Newton and Gottfried Leibniz both created their own systems .
 Newton's was based on the idea that change was a variable over time, while Leibniz's had the idea ranging over a sequence of infinitely close values . Newton's version of the Newton's theory is based on an infinitely close sequence of values .
 The tale of the discovery of DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) begins with a Swiss physician and biologist named Johannes Friedrich Miescher . The discovery was made by a Swiss doctor and biologist .
 Originally trained to become a doctor, after suffering a severe bout of typhoid fever that damaged his hearing, he was forced to abandon that vocation and instead turned to physiological chemistry . He is now the world's leading scientist in the world of physiological chemistry.
 He thought at first he would study lymphocytes (one type of white blood cell) but was subsequently pointed in the direction of leukocytes by Felix Hoppe-Seyler .
 After filtering cell samples, Miescher attempted to isolate the nuclei from the cytoplasm . The nuclei was subjected to an alkaline extraction and then acidification . The nucleus was then acidified .
 DNA has been studied extensively and revealed to be responsible for encoding genetic instructions in the functioning of every living organism on the planet . DNA is responsible for the encoding of genetic instructions .
 Originally theorised to exist in 1964 by Peter Higgs and five others, the boson's discovery in July 2012 is a milestone . The boson is considered the pivotal missing element in the Standard Model of physics .
 Mass is a key building block for the construction of the universe . It explains why fundamental particles have mass . It also explains why mass is key to the creation of the cosmos .
 Despite its discovery being considered monumental, there is no immediate benefit that the Higgs boson brings . The discovery is considered monumental .
 Scientifically, if it were conclusively proven to exist, it could answer many currently unexplained questions such as how particles gain mass, how cosmic inflation occurs and what might happen to the universe .
 Finding the Higgs boson in the Large Hadron Collider at CERN is purely academic . However, finding the boson is not the answer to the question: 'What do you know?'
 Whether quantum mechanics will have an impact on society later much like quantum mechanics remains to be seen .
 Nothing can come from nothing so modern physics tells us . Nothing can be created out of nothing, modern physics says . It's a myth that nothing can be made from nothing .
 This was the birth of atomic theory and a crude notion of atoms that would remain unchallenged until the 19th century . The idea of atoms remained largely unchallied until the next century .
 Nothing really changed until English scientist John Dalton produced his own atomic theory, published in A New System Of Chemical Philosophy .
 Modern atomic theory is considered the birth of modern atomic theory . It describes how elements are made from extremely small particles called atoms . atoms of different elements combine to form compounds .
 Dalton didn't realise atoms could be split something that would be achieved just over a century later by New Zealand-born scientist Ernest Rutherford .
 German physicist Wilhelm Rontgen first found the electromagnetic radiation X-rays in 1895 . German physicist discovered the X-ray rays in 1895.
 His breakthrough was the result of studying Crookes tubes experimental discharge tubes invented by scientists investigating cathode rays and tubes .
 They were the precursor to the cathode-ray tubes used in computer monitors and televisions . The tubes were used in computers, televisions and monitors .
 These discharge tubes generated free electrons that were accelerated out of the devices at such high speed that, when they hit the glass walls of the cylinder, they produced X-rays .
 Rontgen studied this phenomenon extensively, creating numerous X-ray images of his wife’s hand . The first of which was of her hand .
 For thousands of years the origins of the Earth and the universe had been held captive by a mixture of ignorance and religious scripture . The origin of the universe has never been known until now .
 Of course, while the Big Bang theory still remains a theory, it provides a plausible model for its formation and continued activity one that is being backed up by scientific evidence .
 The origin of the Big Bang theory emerges with a Catholic priest and scientist called Georges Lemaitre, who in 1931 published his Hypothesis Of The Primeval Atom .
 Lemaitre proposed a model of the universe beginning with a cataclysmic explosion that is still expanding -• and at an accelerated rate . Lemaitr proposed a new model of a universe that began with an explosion that was still expanding .
 Lemaitre described it most accurately, with Albert Einstein moving to endorse it after its publication . Albert Einstein moved to endorse the theory after it was published . Other theories from Edwin Hubble and Alexander Friedmann also emerged around the same time .
 Lemaitre’s prediction of the accelerating expansion of the universe would go . on to be confirmed in the Nineties by observations made by, ironically, the Hubble Space Telescope .
 Lemaitre's theory was later ratified by the Hubble telescope in 1991 . The development of penicillin was an amazing story of accidental discovery .
 Scottish scientist Alexander Fleming took a month-long holiday in August 1928 to see his family . Fleming was working hard in his laboratory for months on end . Fleming decided to take a break from his work to visit his family in Scotland .
 Staphylococci was found in a Petri dish filled with the bacteria staphyloccci . Quickly throwing some of his things together he promptly left London .
 Fleming did not realise that these Petri dishes would help him revolutionise the world of medicine . Little did Fleming realise that he was helping to develop the technique .
 Fleming noticed that on one of his Petri dishes a distinctive mould had grown and killed any of the nearby staphylococci bacteria . Fleming immediately noticed the mould on the Petri dish had grown .
 After tidying up, Fleming attempted to regrow the mould himself in a pure culture . Fleming was inspired to create a 'pure culture' of his art .
 He succeeded shortly after and, after trialling the culture on various bacteria, saw that it destroyed several that caused disease .
 Fleming published his findings and so was born the precursor to the modern-day antibiotic . Fleming's work was published in the 1930s and was the precursor of the modern antibiotic .
 It determines how everything about an organism is made and how that organism's cells will be reproduced . Simply put, it determines how the cells are made and reproduced .
 The discovery of a genetic code was a monumental breakthrough in the grand scheme of human biology . As such, simply discovering the very concept of a gene code was an enormous breakthrough in human biology.
 DNA’s structure by James Watson and Francis Crick in 1953 . Scientists embarked on a mission to determine what bases were responsible for encoding the 20 amino acids used by living cells to build proteins .
 To dispute this geocentric model of the Solar System was considered heretical by the Catholic Church . Earth was the focal point of the galaxy (which was considered to be the entire universe in 16th century)
 Einstein's theory of relativity has single-handedly revolutionised modern physics . Einstein's theories of special and general relativity have revolutionised the world of physics .
 Since its conception the theory has transformed theoretical physics and astronomy entirely superseded Newton's take on classical mechanics . The theory has been used in almost every aspect of astronomy and physics .
 It enabled the nuclear age to prosper both for better and worse as well as furthering our grasp of neutron stars and black holes . The nuclear age has been a boon to the world's nuclear age, but it was also a boon for the future .
 For centuries the Standard Model of physics set by Newton and his contemporaries was considered the definitive set of laws that governed the physical world . The Standard Model was considered to be the most powerful theory of the universe .
 By the start of the 20th century multiple disciplines such as atomic theory were hinting there could be a whole other level to physics that was yet unaccounted for .
 By 1920 these disciplines loosely intertwined to create quantum theory, a new branch of physics . Quantum theory focused on physical phenomena on truly microscopic scales .
 Increasingly complex models for how physics works have been theorised or partly demonstrated . From Einstein's work on electromagnetic radiation, through to Werner Heisenberg's matrix mechanics and Erwin Schrodinger's wave mechanics, increasingly complex models have been at the least theorised .
 Since then quantum theory has become increasingly important to almost all scientific disciplines . branches such as quantum chemistry, quantum optics and quantum information science are expanding our understanding .
 Marie Curie's theory of radioactivity helped us understand how particles move as well as the health risks of radiation . The discovery of radiation could be attributed to numerous people, ranging from Johann Wilhelm Ritter who found ultraviolet in 1801, through to the discovery of neutron radiation in the 1930
 Polish physicist and chemist Marie Curie along with her husband, Pierre studied radiation extensively during their lives . The pair uncovered two new elements in the late-19th century . Curie and Pierre Curie uncovered the new elements of radiation .
 She was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics jointly with her husband and fellow French physicist Henri Becquerel for their 'researches on the radiation phenomena' in 1903 . Due to her continued work in the field, she coined the phrase 'radioactivity'
 In 1911 she would receive the Nobel Prize in Chemistry for the discovery of radium and polonium . Pierre had tragically been killed in a road accident in 1911 .
 Marie Curie famously died of radiation poisoning in 1934 . Her work into radiation has proven invaluable to modern science, with everything from energy generation, medicine and astronomy benefiting massively from her findings .
 The motive force behind cannons, muskets, rifles and bombs has resulted in the deaths of countless millions . Gunpowder has evolved in use from simple firecracker-style explosives to fireworks and on to fireworks .
 The development of gunpowder as we know it today was a gradual process and involved many accidents . According to science historian Joseph Needham's Science And Civilisation In China, the process was gradual .
 A large gunpowder arsenal at Wei-yang accidentally caught fire in 1280 . Gunpowder was accidentally set alight in a large fire at the site .
 The theorem states that in any right-angled triangle, the square of the hypotenuse (the longest side) is equal in length to the sum of the squares of the other two shorter sides . Despite its abstract appearance, the theorem simply states that .
 Charles Darwin set off on his roundthe-world voyage on 27 December 1831, little did he realise that history was about to be made . Darwin and his voyage was the first of his kind .
 Darwin's theory of his was being fleshed out before his eyes . Darwin was studying geology, natural history and wildlife in far-flung lands . Darwin's theories of his were fleshing out in Darwin's travels .
 Evolution the change in inherited characteristics of biological populations over generations was becoming irrefutable . Evolution was proving the change of inherited characteristics over generations .
 Darwin published On The Origin Of Species in 1859 that he would deliver evolution with compelling evidence and, at the time, religious institutions and many learned scholars decried it .
 It was not until the sixth century BCE that just the concept of a spherical Earth was even speculated . Indeed, it was only speculated until the 6th century BCE .
 The model for the planets of the heavens slowly dispersed via the old trade routes . Even then it was not until around the third century BCE that Greek astronomy demonstrated Earth was spherical .
 Ferdinand Magellan led the first expedition around the planet around the globe in the early 16th century . Magellan was the first explorer to discover the shape of the planet .
 Magellan died on the three-year journey killed during battle in the Philippines . A handful of sailors continued the voyage and arrived in Spain on 6 September 1522 .
 As soon as we ventured into space in the mid-20th century there could no longer be any doubt. Of course, as soon . as soon as . we ventured . into space, there could be no doubt. of course .
 Evidence that finger and thumb prints were used in ancient times . Fingerprints were used to identify people and catch criminals . Fingerprint is a relatively modern form of identification .
 thumbprints were used in ancient China as a means of 'signing' documents . For example, the Babylonians pressed the tips of their fingers into clay to record business transactions .
 It wasn't until the 19th century that fingerprints were used to reduce crime . Fingerprints were first used to help reduce crime in the 1800s .
 Sir William Herschel, a chief magistrate in India, had residents record their fingerprints when signing business deals to fight fraud in 1858 .
 Scottish doctor Henry Faulds published an article discussing using prints as a means of personal identification in 1880 . 12 years later Argentine police officer Juan Vucetich was the first to use prints to catch criminals . From this point the path to a more universal adoption of fingerprint records was relatively
 By 1896 Sir Edward Richard Henry developed a classification system that enabled prints to be classified and sorted . Scotland Yard adopted this system in 1901 .
 This led to the capture of criminals due to their genetic makeup . It would indelibly change the way that the police solved crime . The genetic make-up of criminals led to their capture .
 Standard Model of particle physics addresses the strong, electromagnetic and weak nuclear interactions that control the dynamics of subatomic particles . The Standard Model is the theory of absolutely everything L970s .
 This robust theory is essential for explaining how the physical world works, says the author of the book .
 Prior to the discovery of bacteria in 1676 by Dutch scientist Antonie van Leeuwenhoek and the later discovery of the connected germ theory of disease .
 The belief in the miasma theory was that deadly diseases such as cholera, chlamydia and the Black Death were caused by the spreading of a noxious form of air .
 This was the prevailing theory of explaining disease right up until the 19th century . Indeed, this was the theory of . explaining disease .
 Koch devised a set of rules to test if an organism such as bacteria causes disease . These criteria are still used in modern medicine today .
 Certain bacteria and viruses can cause infectious diseases and can be spread via environmental mechanisms, like water, air or physical contact . Doctors have a far more accurate understanding of how to both prevent and treat many illnesses .
 The British Empire was the largest of any in human history, but the monarch who reigned over it would not live another day . How a tiny island in the Atlantic Ocean came to own an empire so large that the sun never set .
 As Queen Victoria lay dying in Osborne House on the Isle of Wight she looked back on a reign that spanned over 63 years . Queen Victoria's reign spanned 63 years and ended in 18 months .
 She had seen her empire grow from a collection of scattered isles, separated by vast plains of lands and insurmountable oceans, to the greatest the world had known .
 It had reached over India, plucked its riches and mounted it as the glimmering jewel in her crown . It had plucked the riches from India and plucked them from India's riches .
 It had butchered its way mercilessly across Africa at the cost of thousands of British corpses and countless natives who had tried to stand in its way .
 As Victoria drew her last breath, she left a world forever transformed by the empire she had built . It was powered forward both by Christian values and colonial greed, so as she drew her .
 When a young Princess Victoria ascended the steps of Westminster Abbey on her coronation day, few would have foreseen the mighty empire she would eventually rule over . She was crowned Queen of England at the end of the Victorian era .
 The British public were increasingly disenchanted with the monarchy and her grandfather, George III, had failed to protect British interest in the Americas . Her uncle George IV's terrible relations with his wife and reckless spending had tarnished the monarchy's prestige .
 This blue-eyed, silvery-voiced lady possessed a stubborn will of iron . Her reign would become the longest in British history .
 Her ascension marked not the death of the British Empire, but the new dawn of a kingdom so massive that none could ever hope to challenge it . Her rise marked the birth of an empire so massive it would never be challenged .
 The tiny, scattered rural villages of England were being abandoned en masse and the cities were transforming into sprawling metropolises . Rural villages were being left behind en masse in the 1970s .
 Great towering concrete chimneys rose from the ground and the whirr of machines sounded across the country the age of steam had arrived . Great towering . chimneys began to be built in the 1930s and the steam age had passed .
 At 63 years her reign is currently the longest in British history . Her reign is associated with the Industrial Revolution, economic progress and most notably, expansion of the British Empire .
 Egypt sold half its stake in the Suez Canal to Britain . Egypt was in economic rot and sold half of its stake .
 This prompted an eventual revolt and launched the 1882 Anglo-Egyptian War . This prompted a revolt against the Egyptian government in 1882 .
 Egypt provided a vital trade route between Britain and India, cutting out the long journey around Africa . Egypt was a vital part of the British trade route to India .
 England captured Canada from France after the Seven Years' War in 1763, also known as the French and Indian War . Canada was captured by England during the war .
 Canada added a massive landmass to the British Empire's bragging rights . The country was a resource-rich country with a small population .
 Benjamin Disraeli was the first British prime minister with a Jewish heritage . The British gained control of the Cape of Good Hope in early-19th century and set up a colony in Canada .
 When South African Dutch settlers felt their territory was at /.* risk, the two powers engaged in a series of military clashes known as the Boer Wars . The Boers submitted to British rule after the Boers were forced to submit to /.* British rule .
 Southern Africa was also rich in gold and diamonds . Serving as a stopping station on the way to India, it was also a stopping point for travellers to India .
 Disraeli pursued many early business ventures that failed, leaving him in crippling debt . This led to a nervous breakdown from which it took him years to recover from . The British Prime Minister spent years in debt .
 He introduced much legislation that benefited the poor, such as the 1877 Artisans Dwelling Act that provided housing, and the Public Health Act the same year .
 Railways and steamships brought the British overseas territory closer to the mother country, opening up opportunities for trade and commerce that were previously unfathomable .
 Albert opened her and Britain's eyes to the ideas that went on to shape her empire . Albert, Victoria's beloved husband, was the man who opened her eyes to her ideas . Victoria's husband was Albert, who opened the door to the idea .
 The Great Exhibition at the Crystal Palace was a temple to the ingenuity of the rapidly developing modern world . Fascinated by mechanisms and inventions, Albert organised the Great Exhibition .
 Inventions from around the world were displayed, but this was Britain's show, first and foremost . Inventions were displayed in a bid to show off Britain's inventions .
 The symbols of British might, which occupied half of the entire display space, served as clear examples of what the British Empire was capable of and fostered the ideas of national supremacy in the eyes of Victoria and the majority of the British population .
 The Great Exhibition proved that far from the crumbling remains of a once-powerful nation, the British Empire had the might, ingenuity and limitless ambition to conquer the world . The exhibition was held in London, London and New York .
 The opportunity to pave the road for this empire arose in 1857 with the Indian Mutiny . The opportunity for the British Empire arose in India in the 1857, 1857 .
 British involvement in Australia began when Captain Cook landed on the continent in the late-18th century . India had India had Victoria's Empire .
 The number of Aboriginals living there quickly plummeted because of European diseases and loss of land . Aboriginal population fell due to European diseases, loss of the land .
 Australia became a penal colony and thousands of British convicts were transported there as punishment . Thousands of convicts have been transported to Australia as punishment for British crimes .
 When gold was discovered there, British immigrants raced to the sandy shores in search of their fortune . Gold was discovered in the early 1900s .
 India became part of the British Empire after the Government of India Act in 1858 . India was largely controlled by the East A i T Ji T Ji * India Company .
 India was the most valuable piece of Britain's empire, with lucrative trade from spices, jewels and textiles . Known as the 'jewel in the crown’, India was Britain's most profitable piece of the empire .
 The most important provision of India, though, was its manpower, which contributed massively to Britain’s military might . India contributed greatly to Britain's military might.
 How Victoria's British Empire became the world's biggest been ruled by a private entity the East India Company from 1757 . The East Indian Company was the largest private company in the world .
 The rebellion manifested the discontent felt by the Indian people for the blatant disrespect of their beliefs and customs . The rebellion was a rebellion against the government of India .
 Company showed disregard for the Indian caste system and issued new cartridges greased with cow and pig fat . The cartridges had to be opened with the mouth, highly offensive to Muslim and Hindu soldiers .
 Unrest snowballed into mass riots and an uprising in India . These actions opened the eyes of the Indian people to the daily injustice they were being subjected to .
 Although the mutiny was eventually quelled, the rebellion led to the dissolution of the company and the passing of power to the British state . Victoria would call it the jewel in her crown the British Indian Empire .
 She presented herself as a maternal figure and a crusader for peace, justice and honest government ideals . Her husband was largely inspired by her husband, who she said was a mother .
 Albert had instilled in her mind the vision of King Arthur's Camelot, an empire ruled not by tyranny but by justice, where the strong serve the weak, where good triumphs over evil, and where trade, education and welfare are not oppression and bloodshed .
 His influence on Victoria was immense and when he died of suspected typhoid fever, the empire veered into a new direction . Victoria died in December 1861, 1861 .
 When Albert drew his last breath in the blue room at Windsor Castle, the queen was inconsolable . The loss of the love of her life changed not only herself as a person, but the fate of her empire .
 As she donned the mourning clothes she would wear until her own death, she drew a veil over Albert's vision and pursued a different path for her kingdom one of world domination .
 An emerging figure in Parliament would come to foster her views Benjamin Disraeli . Her views would foster her view of the British Prime Minister .
 The ambitious and rebellious leader of the Conservatives was led by a passion for imperial power and glory . He was a passionate fan of imperial glory and imperial power .
 Disraeli believed Britain should pursue an empire of power and prestige . He was inspired by tales of imperial adventures and wanted Britain to pursue a more powerful empire .
 J , simple enterprise of London businessmen who wanted to make money from importing spices . J . Wanted to make . ‘ ‘ 1 *l money . from importing . spices .
 The company was granted a royal charter by Queen Elizabeth I in 1600 . James Lancaster led its first voyage in 1601 . He led the company to the first voyage .
 The company set up trade outposts in Indian settlements that slowly developed into commercial towns . The town was set up by the company in 1903 .
 Company claims vital trading ports from Aden to Penang . Steadily increasing its territory .
 As its control extended, the company became the most powerful private company in history, with its own army established by Robert Clive, the first British governor of Bengal .
 ffjf company controlled + ^ India with a combination of direct rule and v> ' alliances with Indian princes . With its great military power .
 Lancaster was an the world trade and Elizabethan trader specialised in cotton and privateer silk, tea and opium . The East India Company eventually accounted for half Lancaster .
 William Gladstone, the leader of the Liberals, thought the empire should serve a high moral purpose . The empire should follow not a path of conquest but one of commerce, he says .
 These two fiery and driven men fought over these opposing visions in Parliament as Victoria continued to mourn . Victoria and Victoria fought over this opposing vision in Parliament in Parliament .
 Without Albert she felt incompetent and unable to face the immense duty that her role dictated . She felt unable to cope with the immense task her role had to perform without Albert .
 Gladstone found Gladstone and his liberal reforms dangerous and unpredictable . Gladstone was a conservative conservative who opposed Gladstone's liberal reforms . She died in 1918 at the age of 92 .
 Disraeli, suave, coy and dripping with forthright confidence, enchanted the lonely queen . The writer, who died at the age of 50, was a great lover of the Queen .
 With his constant flattery and sharp wit, Disraeli reignited her interest in politics and captivated her, as Albert had done so previously . With his vision of just how mighty the empire could be, she was captivated by his vision .
 Gladstone's liberal vision and Albert's quest for Camelot had not completely faded . However, Gladstone and Albert were able to find Camelot . Gladstone died at the age of 80 in 1881 .
 The British people, led by strong Protestant beliefs Victoria herself had instilled in them, felt it was Britain’s role their duty even to civilise people around the world . Victoria's Protestant beliefs were strong enough to instill in them that she instilled .
 They believed the British cause was to export not only trade, but also gospel values of morality and justice . They believed that they were to export morality and social justice to Britain .
 This policy ensured British dominance of the seas with a string of naval bases encompassing the whole world . The policy was meant to ensure British dominance .
 The pure size and strength of the navy served its purpose deterring any would be competitors . It confirmed its position as ruler of the waves .
 Britain was the first nation to harness the power of steam and the first to undergo an industrial revolution . The nation was first to harness steam and undergo a revolution in the steam era .
 This resulted in mass production of low-cost goods to trade around the world . This led to the creation of cheap and easy-to-be-produced goods . This has led to mass production in the world of low cost goods .
 It also gave Britain an array of resources like rifles, steamships and trains, equipping it to defeat possible enemies .
 Medical advances allowed explorers to penetrate remote areas without fear of tropical diseases . Medical advances also allowed British explorers to enter remote areas .
 The British Empire was led by a strong Protestant desire to improve the world . Land grabbing aside, the British Empire had a desire to spread democracy .
 Britain saw itself as an agent of civilisation one they wanted to spread worldwide, bringing peace, order and stability . Britain wanted to be a 'agent of civilisation' to spread around the world, bringing stability .
 This belief that they were doing genuine good led men like David Livingstone to travel to Africa to spread the word of God . With it, the British Empire turned their attention to Africa .
 Little was known of the 'Dark Continent', but the common perception was that it was a place of pagan worship ravaged by tribal wars . The common belief was that the 'dark continent' was ravaged by tribes .
 One missionary in particular would capture the attention of the British nation . A missionary in the 1930s would be captured on camera .
 David Livingstone embodied everything the British believed their nation to represent . Livingstone was a tall, handsome and heroic man who embodied everything British believed they were .
 Livingstone's daring adventures around the continent were followed by a captivated British public . A medical missionary, Livingstone was a medical missionary . Livingstone travelled around the world as a missionary .
 Livingstone was the heroic face of the empire's Christian ideals . Fighting vicious beasts, battling through dense jungles and suffering a multitude of illnesses, he was the hero of the British Empire .
 Livingstone's horrific confrontation with African chain gangs was to drive the British cause of expansion . Livingstone was to lead the British army to Africa in the 1920s .
 The slavery rife in Africa was abhorrent to Livingstone and the British public . The practice had been abolished across the empire in 1833 . Slavery was abolished in the British empire in the same year .
 The queen and government united behind Livingstone's quest to find a suitable trade route . She hoped that by doing so, African people would find ways to make a living that wasn't built on the backs of slaves .
 Livingstone's journey was a failure and he returned to scathing criticism something the imperialist Disraeli leapt on with glee . Livingstone was a failed leader and the result was the result of a failed attempt to reform the world's first African leader .
 His flattery of Victoria had completely won her over . The monarchy and government became united in pursuit of one goal the expansion of the empire .
 The perfect opportunity to begin this new empire emerged as another nation struggled to survive, the perfect opportunity emerged . The perfect place to start this empire emerged in the midst of another nation struggling to survive .
 Egyptian ruler, Isma'il Pasha, was confronted with crippling debts after reckless spending on lavish ceremonies and a costly war with Ethiopia .
 In an act of desperation he made an offer to sell to the British Egypt's shares in the Suez Canal . The offer was rejected by the British and Egypt .
 The canal was more than a mere trading port, it opened up a short route to India across Egypt and down the Red Sea . It cut out the lengthy journey around Africa, cutting out the long journey to India .
 The Egyptian ruler's offer would give the British controlling influence over the jugular of the empire . Disraeli urged Victoria to accept .
 With control of India, Britain was already the most powerful nation on Earth . Three-quarters of the world's trade was transported in British ships .
 The Russian Empire had been steadily expanding east . Spain, France, the Netherlands and the Ottomans were losing power .
 Britain was able to take advantage of the European wars that had weakened other nations as it enjoyed a period of relative peace, allowing uninterrupted expansion of its empire . The British Empire was built on the strength of Europe's European wars .
 Any threats that did emerge, such a Russia, just gave Britain new zeal to cement its powerful hold on the world . Any threats such as Russia just gave the UK new zeal .
 Britain was ruled by a single monarch throughout most of the 19th century Queen Victoria . Queen Victoria was the only monarch to hold the throne in Britain for more than a century .
 The record-breaking length of her reign brought a sense of stability and stability . She contributed to the unconquerable notion of the British Empire . Her reign was one of the longest reigns in British history .
 Victoria did involve herself in government, but her role was symbolic rather than one of direct power . Her role ensured stability of British politics, which ensured stability .
 Britain enjoyed a long period of relative domestic peace . While other nations were dealing with socialist movements, Britain enjoyed domestic peace in the 1930s .
 The ironclad battleships of the 1870s and ‘80s were replaced by pre-dreadnought ships . Pre-readnoughs were built from tough steel and reinforced with hardened steel armour .
 The engines were powered by eight coal-fired cylindrical boilers . The engines produced an impressive speed, but at the cost of high fuel consumption . The engine was powered by coal and coal-based boilers with eight coal engines .
 The first purpose-built steam battleship was Le Napoleon of France with a speed of 12 knots regardless of wind direction . Le Napoleon was built in 1903 and was the first to be built in France .
 The United Kingdom was rapidly producing steam battleships to challenge France's strength, building 18 new ships and converting 41 to steam power . Soon the U.K. was producing more ships than France's fleet .
 There were four heavy slow-firing guns, which were difficult to operate but capable of penetrating the armour of enemy ships . Four heavy slow fire guns were capable of hitting enemy ships with heavy armour .
 HMS Prince George also carried a secondary battery of 12 quick-firing .40-calibre guns . HMS Prince Prince George was also equipped with 12 quick firing guns .
 The ship was reinforced with 22.9cm of Harvey armour, which provided it with equal protection for less weight . The ship's armour provided equal protection with less weight.
 The pre-dreadnought ships benefited from a lighter belt than any previous battleships, without any loss in protection . As a result of the belt belt, they were lighter than any other battleships .
 The battery, conning tower and deck were also protected by thick steel . The ship was getting uncomfortably close to Victoria’s prized jewel India .
 The Middle East was largely controlled by the Turks, but they were busy dealing with violent rebellions . The Mideast was largely ruled by the Turkish, but it was also under attack from the Turks .
 The Turkish treatment of their Christian subjects was shocking and atrocious, but as Russia backed the rebels the British had no option but to support the Turks . The British were forced to back the Turks, but were not able to resist the rebels .
 The British public, to whom Russia stood for everything Britain opposed ignorance, slavery and subjugation, largely supported this choice . Russia stood to everything Britain stood for, including slavery, subjugation and ignorance .
 Facing the prospect of imminent war with the strongest nation on the planet, Russia agreed to peace talks . Thanks to the charisma and negotiation skills of Disraeli, the Russian agreed to stop their advance on the Middle East .
 Imperial spirit rushed through the public as the might of British muscle flexed and proved itself again . The might of the British might flexed again as the British government proved itself .
 Empire came face to face with the most powerful African nation the Zulus . Empire continued its steady expansion across Africa .
 The British underestimated the strength of their spear-wielding enemies and suffered a crushing initial defeat . The British, with a bloated ego, underestimated their strength and suffered from a crushing defeat .
 In the end it took 16,000 British reinforcements to prise the Zulus’ independence from their grip . The Zulus were eventually freed by the British forces .
 The victorious army were surprised to discover that British opinions were changing once again . Expecting to return to a wave of praise for their daring exploits, the victorious army was surprised to find that British opinion was changing again .
 Gladstone preached his outraged opinions about the mass slaughter of Zulus and rampant destruction of their homes . Gladstone, the ""half-mad firebrand"", as Victoria dubbed him, preached the outraged opinions .
 Victoria was outraged but the public sided with Gladstone and, much to the queen’s dismay, the power of the government switched hands once more . The queen was outraged by Gladstone's actions and was forced to give up her throne .
 All of Europe's attention was firmly fixed on Africa as nations began a scramble to establish colonies there .
 In amongst this mad rush to establish new territory by European powers, it was arguably one man’s actions that would determine the ultimate fate of Victoria's empire . Victoria's actions were arguably one of the most important moments of her reign .
 The Sudanese tribes rose against their corrupt rulers . Led by Muhammad Ahmed, revolution was tearing through Sudan .
 As this holy war drew uncomfortably close to the Suez Canal, Victoria urged Gladstone to utilise the British troops stationed there to defend it .
 General Charles Gordon was sent to secure the evacuation of loyal civilians and soldiers . General Gordon was able to buy time to save the lives of loyal soldiers and civilians .
 He was brave, dashing, popular and his decorated military career had painted him in the British public's eyes as a gleaming knight of old . He had painted himself in the public as a glancing knight old .
 When he reached the Sudan he was horrified by the slavery rife in the region . He decided to face the Mahdi in battle and decided to confront him in battle .
 With limited forces, Gordon soon found himself besieged in the city of Khartoum . Gordon's forces were limited to only limited forces . Gordon was forced to withdraw from the city .
 His appeals for aid, to the adoring public, fell on deaf ears in the government . He appealed for aid to the public, but the government failed to take action .
 Gordon, the nation's hero of Christianity, was dead . It took more than eight months of public fury to force Gladstone's hand, but it was too late Gordon's death .
 Gladstone was voted out and his moral influence departed with him . In an instance the liberal vision was shattered, Gladstone's moral influence was shattered . Gladstone won't be remembered for his role as a prime minister .
 The renewed crusading spirit of British imperialism found its poster boy in a Victoria's Empire Right 1892 caricature of Cecil Rhodes . Rhodes had announced plans for a telegraph line and railroad from Cape Town to Cairo .
 Cecil John Rhodes had become outrageously wealthy from the diamond rush . He wanted more the whole of Africa, but he wanted more of Africa . Rhodes moved from England to Africa to work on a cotton farm .
 Rhodes wished to create a British colony across Africa, not for the betterment of its people or to spread Christian values, but for profit and business . Rhodes was driven by greed and lust for power, Rhodes wanted to create an empire across Africa .
 Rhodes tricked and butchered his way across the continent with the British government backing him every bloody step of the way . Using the tenacity and cunning that had elevated him to success, Rhodes tricked his way through the continent .
 His path of colonial greed led Britain head-first into a conflict now known as the Boer Wars . His path led Britain to a conflict that saw the Boers wiped out the majority of Africa .
 Gold had been found in Transvaal in northern South Africa . Rhodes worried that this would prompt an alliance with the Germans, thus cutting off his route to the north of the continent .
 Rhodes planned an uprising to overthrow the Boers, but it did not go as planned far from the naked, spear-wielding foes he had previously conquered . The Boers had guns, and they fought back hard with skill and courage . Rhodes planned to overthrow Boers leaders, but
 Outrage tore across Europe against what was seen as an unprovoked attack on an independent state, but not in Britain . Outrage was felt across Europe but not across Britain .
 The British people believed the Boers to be vicious and uncompromising . The Boers were the most brutal of the British people .
 More soldiers poured into the region into a war they believed would be short and glorious . But as more British bodies piled up Victoria's own grandson among them British confidence in their unconquerable might began to wane .
 As British reinforcements continued to flood into the territory, the tide slowly began to turn . The tide began to begin to turn when British reinforcements began to flood in .
 Rhodes managed to squeeze a win from the jaws of defeat and the Boer territories became British colonies . Rhodes had managed to beat the Boers to become British colonies in South Africa . Rhodes's victory was enough to secure a victory for Rhodes in the war .
 Rhodes' controversial actions during the war including forming what would come to be known as the first concentration camps had been a step too far for the British public . Rhodes’ controversial actions in the war had been seen as being too far by the public .
 What had begun as a noble quest of Christianity had transformed into a greedy and brutal scramble for power . What began as a quest for Christianity had turned into a brutal scramble to power .
 When Rhodes died his merciless version of imperialism was buried with him in the dry African dirt . Rhodes died with his merciless imperialism buried in Africa's dry African soil .
 When Victoria passed away she was finally rid of the black mourning clothes she had worn for 40 years and was dressed entirely in white . When she died she finally got rid of her mourning clothes and wore white .
 Spring flowers were scattered around her body and her wedding veil was placed on her head as she prepared to reunite with the dearest love of her life . Spring flowers are scattered around the body and a wedding veil is placed .
 The Empire she had mothered now stretched across the globe with large parts of maps of the word coloured in the pink that showed British rule .
 As the sun set on the quiet room in which she lay in Osborne House, it was rising on the bustling spice markets of India . Soon the vast plains of British land in Africa would be bathed in warm golden light .
 Victoria had died, but the legacy she left behind expanded over the face of the entire planet . She left behind a legacy that extended over the world's borders .
 This reduces the weight of the second axle behind it, making it faster . This reduced the weight behind it to make it lighter and faster .
 Stephenson’s famous Rocket experiment was examined and documented by spectators gathered at the unveiling of the Liverpool and Manchester railway line the day after . British prime minister Arthur Wellesley, Duke of Wellington saw the latest breakthrough in steam locomotion .
 Stephenson's design was used as a template for all future steam engine production . Stephenson wrote technical specifications on all of his inventions .
 It has gone down in history as a triumph of British engineering and as such has been studied and written about extensively . It is one of the world's greatest engineering achievements .
 The Rocket is currently housed and displayed at the Science Museum in London . The Rocket currently sits in a permanent home in London and is displayed in a museum .
 One to 'drive' the engine and look out for obstructions on the track . Another to feed coke (derivative of coal) into the firebox and keep an eye on the amount of heat being produced .
 As the steam was released through the exhaust pipe, steam entered from the other side of the piston rod by the eccentric rod D-valve, which forced the piston rods back up . The eccentric rod forced the rod back up, forcing the rod to move .
 Previous models relied on one tube surface for the gas to travel through to produce steam . The Rocket had multiple tubes, increasing the heated surface area within the boiler, which produced more steam .
 The hot gas then traveled through firetube pipes into the water-filled boiler, creating steam . The steam traveled through the fire tube pipes to create steam . Firetube pipes then connected the water to the boiler and created steam .
 The Rocket's firebox was separated with a water jacket which, when it got hot, increased the temperature in the boiler . The Rocket was separated from the firebox by the water jacket .
 Robert Stephenson's steam locomotive prototype popularly known as Stephenson's Rocket . Stevenson’s Rocket was the first steam-powered locomotive built in 1903 .
 With its successful test at the Rainhill trials in Liverpool in October 1829, a new dawn of steam locomotion was born . It brought every community in Britain together through speedy and reliable rail travel .
 Stephenson had a lot riding on the success of the Rocket, as the engineering company he co-owned with his father had created its engine with many costly new refinements . Stephenson's company had created many costly refinements to the engine .
 Stephenson's rivals had produced bigger machines with seemingly more powerful engines . Adding to this pressure was the fact that Stephenson's competitors had produced larger machines . Stephenson's car was eventually driven by his own son .
 The Rocket did have one advantage over its competitors though it was not reliant on redundant technology . The Rocket was not the first team to use redundant technology, but it was the first to do so .
 Stephenson incorporated new ideas to make better use of its steam-powered pistons . Stephenson had incorporated new ways to make use of the steam engine .
 The design combined established principles of locomotion with some new enhancements . The design was combined with existing locomotion principles and enhancements .
 Multiple firetube boiler enabled the Rocket to punch above its weight when hauling freight and passengers . Rocket was powered by multiple firetube boilers, which included a multiple boiler .
 The Rocket also had a blast pipe, which increased the intensity of the fire that produced the steam, making the boiler more effective . The Rocket was the first of its kind to have a steam-powered boiler .
 Stephenson's small yellow engine pulled carriages three times its own weight on the train tracks . It reached a maximum speed of 30 mph unheard of at the time and even climbed up a shallow incline .
 The other locomotives had either broken down or could not reach the required minimum average speed . All the other locomotsies were either breaking down or not reaching the required speed limit .
 Stephenson was awarded the £500 prize money for creating the first reliable steam-powered train locomotive which could be used for passenger and material transport .
 The design set the standard for steam locomotives and all trains produced by workshops from that moment were based on this invention . The design of the locomotive was the first steam locomotive to be built in a workshop .
 As the cylinder compressed the steam and the rod was forced up and down it drove the wheels on the track, creating forward motion . The cylinder compressed steam and forced the rod to move the track .
 The dome also acted as a barrier to stop water getting from the boiler into the cylinder . The dome was also used to keep water from getting into the boiler .
 The chimney expelled the hot gas through a vertical pipe safely away from the driver and engineer . Chimney expelled hot gas safely from the vehicle and engineer safely away .
 Another of the Rocket's innovations was the blast pipe located within the chimney . The blast pipe was located within a chimney and was used to blow up the flames .
 Blast pipe allowed firetubes to work more efficiently by creating a vacuum at the bottom of the chimney . Blast pipe created vacuum at bottom of chimney, pulling the gas from firebox through the firetube . Blast pipes allowed the fire tubes to work efficiently .
 The exhaust pipe only pushed the steam in one direction, which created a fully integrated system . The Rocket was one of the reasons the Rocket was so powerful .
 Sculptor Amelia Peabody invented the world's first solar-powered house . The house was created by a sculptor and artist who asked her to design it .
 Isaac Newton was the inventor of the world's first reflecting telescope . Newton was born in 1642-1727 and died in 1727 .
 Newton used his creation to prove that white light was made up of a spectrum of colours . Newton had studied and lectured on the optical theories behind the reflecting telescope for a number of years before inventing one .
 The main advantage of the Newtonian telescope was that it gave a clearer picture since it did not suffer from the chromatic aberration problem of the refracting designs available at the time .
 His talent and curiosity allowed him to rub shoulders with the upper echelons of Italian society .
 His inventions included a grinding machine, hydraulic engines and contraptions used for draining water from harbours . He also invented hydraulic engines used to drain water from harvoirs .
 Many of the inventions he designed never saw use, as they were too outlandish to be constructed, such as a flying machine and an armoured tank .
 Mark Zuckerberg created the idea of the social networking site from his college bedroom at Harvard as a means for the college fraternity to keep in touch with each other . Zuckerberg is widely credited as the inventor of the site .
 Zuckerberg and his four co-founders built their company through one vision to make the world open . Zuckerberg: "We want the world to be open. We want to open the world"
 The World Wide Web was created by Tim Berners-Lee while he was working for CERN, the European organisation for nuclear research . Facebook has over one billion active users throughout the world .
 James Dyson’s first invention was the Ballbarrow, a modified version of a wheelbarrow using a ball . Dyson is one of the late-20th-century's most iconic inventors and inventor .
 Other inventions also using a ball followed including a trolley that launched boats . The inventor became frustrated at the performance of his vacuum cleaner .
 After five years of different prototypes, his invention was completed . No UK manufacturer would take the product so he launched it in Japan through catalogue sales .
 Dyson vacuum cleaners are now one of the industry's premier brands . Dyson continues to invent, with his latest product a fan fan .
 He is perhaps best known for the Archimedes screw, which is reputed to have been invented in the Hellenistic period . The screw is thought to be the world's first screw screw .
 The screw revolutionised irrigation techniques in Ancient Greece and Egypt by allowing farmers to transfer water from a low to a high position . It revolutionised farming techniques in ancient Egypt and Ancient Greece .
 Thomas Edison revolutionized communication in 1877 when he invented the carbon microphone . The microphone allowed one person to hear another through a telephone . Edison revolutionsed communication in . 1877 .
 The invention was essential in radio broadcasting and saw widespread application in telephones until the 1980s . It was essential for radio broadcasting but saw widespread use in phone phones .
 Tesla delivered power to thousands of U.S. homes using direct current distribution system . Tesla's system transferring electricity from generators to homes was superseded by Tesla's .
 Benjamin Franklin is credited as the inventor of a number of contraptions, such as the lightning rod, harnessing electricity from storms, and the Franklin stove . Benjamin Franklin was one of the founding fathers of the United States .
 He proposed a thesis on kites being used to pull ships across waterways . He also proposed a number of theories on harnessing nature .
 He never patented his inventions, as he believed everybody should be able to enjoy them . The inventor believed that everybody should enjoy his inventions .
 The Bleriot XI flyer channel-hopped from England to France in 1909, winning the Daily Mail English Channel challenge . His designs did not achieve the recognition his enormous skill deserved .
 After his daredevil flight he stopped flying altogether and founded the SPAD aviation company . After his wife's concerns over his safety he founded the company .
 Glen H Curtiss' pusher proved to be a success, enabling the 1903 Page P.P.42 . Based on the designs of World War I bombers, the Page was big, ugly and slow .
 The Wright Flyer was as much of a moral triumph as it was a triumph of aerial engineering . The Flyer came from the ashes of the World War II era .
 Orville Wright's successful flight on December 17 1903 . There had been countless failures, crashes and accidents resulting in near death before Wright's flight .
 The first flight ended in failure, as a problem with one of the Flyers' elevators sent it crashing into the sand around the takeoff zone . A problem with the elevators also caused the first flight to fail .
 The rudimentary pusher engine, the huge wingspan and the pulley system the flyer sat on were designed to overcome the power-to-weight problem all worked .
 The Wright Flyer proved it was possible for an aircraft that was 'heavier than air' to fly . It was the Bleriot Flyer that showed that air travel was a viable form of transportation .
 The Bleriot XI was the first plane to fly across the English Channel in 1909 . It was also the first aircraft to fly over the Channel in England .
 The brothers flew their craft in absolute secrecy barring a few select witnesses who could testify that they'd done it . The brothers were able to fly the craft in secrecy .
 To the public at large flight was in the purview of socially awkward inventors and university professors, not on the horizon of wider society . Flight was not a popular subject for wider society, but it was a social experiment .
 These contraptions were little more than unreliable, flimsy experiments . But they were good for the inventors who professed that it could be done, but good for little more .
 Until 1914 there simply wasn't the pioneering spirit outside of the brave experiments of Wright and Bleriot for serious attention to be given to flight . Until 1914, there was no serious attention given to the subject of flight .
 War gave inventors the opportunity they needed to bring their designs to the attention of powerful men . Inventors were able to make their inventions available for the first time .
 With the resources of industrialised nations preparing for war, the flyers were given the time and money they needed to truly get off the ground .
 War brought the concept of the aerial bomber capable of levelling cities and ever-faster single-seat fighters that filled the skies with deadly dogfights . Terrible weapons were invented .
 As the war drew to its catastrophic conclusion, the aircraft of the early 1900s bore little resemblance to the reliable, skinned war birds of 1918 . The planes of the first World War I aircraft were skinned aircraft .
 Man could now fly into the heavens and have a reasonable expectation that he would make it back to earth in one piece . Man now has a realistic expectation he would return to earth safely .
 The airline started out in the freight industry, offering a mail service from America to the Caribbean . The airline is now based in Miami, Florida .
 The company then branched out to offer passenger routes to the Caribbean, Cuba and the paradise locations of Hawaii and the Philippines .
 The airline was renowned for the destinations it would fly to, even offering a service to Hong Kong, opening the wonders of the Far East . The airline is renowned for its destinations, including Hong Kong .
 Spirit of St Louis was the first plane to cross the Atlantic nonstop nonstop . Spirit cf St Leu is the first to fly nonstop from the Atlantic to Europe .
 Flying beat Imperial Airways, later to be known as British Airways, offered comfort and style . Imperial Airways was later known as Imperial Airways .
 Page H.P.42 was a carrier for colonial officials in the 1930s . The airline quickly grew to accommodate civil passengers flying to exotic destinations .
 Howard Hughes, the eccentric legend whose millionaire status meant that he could afford to design and build aircraft, designed the H-1 racer .
 Hughes broke the speed record in 1935 when he broke the world record . Hughes was at the controls of the car at the time of the record breaking event .
 In the attempt he even flew the plane until it ran out of petrol, resulting in him having to make an emergency landing .
 Howard Hughes was a maverick designer and test pilot of the air industry during the golden age of flight . The eccentric millionaire millionaire died in 1976 at the age of 75 .
 Hughes designed his H-1 racer to be the fastest aircraft on earth . His H-4 Hercules was the largest aircraft in the world . He designed the fastest and largest aircraft ever .
 The designs currently in circulation could easily be modified to create passenger planes . What's more the designs could be modified into passenger planes.
 Converted military bomber designs such as the Page H.P.42 offered few luxuries apart from the bonus that it no longer took colonial officials weeks to get anywhere in their vast empires .
 Ferrying around the masters of Europe kept fledgling aviation businesses afloat . But it didn't make them the super corporations we know them to be today . Imperial Airways was the first airline to launch in the 1930s .
 As memories of World War I slowly ebbed away into the new hope of the roaring twenties, pilots started to break records once again .
 Charles Lindbergh broke distance records across the Atlantic ocean in the elegant Spirit of St Louis in 1927 . Charles flew the plane over the Atlantic Ocean in the beautiful Spirit St Louis . The plane was the first airplane to fly from New York to New York .
 In 1933 the eccentric one-eyed pilot Wiley Post flew his Vega 5C the 'Winnie Mae' around the world in seven days . In 1933 he flew the plane around the globe in a seven-day flight .
 Planes became more and more powerful with new designs to their wings and bodies to make them slick and streamlined . Planes were designed to be sleek and streamlined in the 1970s .
 Reginald Mitchell’s designs for Supermarine created the Supermarine K5054 later to be known as the Spitfire .
 It was still not commercially viable for everyone despite the immense interest and press that was lavished on the heroes of the industry . The industry was not as commercially viable as it was in the 1980s .
 It wouldn't be enough to fund such a risky business into a mass market on the expectation that people would simply want to travel in planes as an extremely expensive alternative .
 The answer to convince people to use air travel was found in its appeal the dream of flight . The answer is to convince them to fly, and the dream is to be fulfilled .
 The aspirational luxury of travelling in a wonderful flying machine to an exotic destination . The world's most expensive private jet is now a flying machine .
 Chuck Yeager saw the advent of a new age of air travel from the propeller to the jet . Yeager was the pilot of the first Air Force jetliner, a World War II submarine .
 Yeager left school and immediately joined the Army Air Corps as a mechanic . Yeager joined the Air Force in 1944 as a member of the first Air Force Wing .
 In 1947 he became the first man to break the sound barrier in the Bell X-1 and Lindbergh . His adventures in flight did not stop there and in 1947 he was the first person in the world to break sound barrier .
 People wanted to travel and they fell in love with the romanticism of the great pilotexplorers of the age . The pilot explorer was a pioneer of the aviation industry .
 The next problem was designing an aircraft that matched the dream’s expectations . The next step was designing a plane that meets the expectations .
 The romanticism of air travel would die a quick death if passengers were forced into cramped, dirty, cold, converted bomb bays of a dressed-up warplane . Air travel is romantic, but passengers would be cramped and cold .
 The answer lay in a standardised, cheap, cheap-to-construct plane that could offer comfort and style for customers and keep the operator in business .
 In 1926, the airliner was invented and adopted by American Airlines .
 Henry Ford created the first of these new 'air trains' in the form of the Ford 5 AT Tri-Motor . Henry Ford had been interested in developing a production line base model for the airline industry .
 The cabins were still cramped but uncle Ford's planes offered leather interiors, in-flight meals, room for luggage and a host of air stewardesses on hand to offer stiff drinks and hearty reassurance .
 The noise of the engine and the juddery ride didn't make for a restful flight, however . The noise and judderiness of the flight made it difficult to sleep .
 Designs were proposed for safer craft that offered all the luxury of a sea voyage, the air industry's biggest competitor . Designers proposed for 'sophisticated' craft that were designed to offer passengers all access to sea travel .
 The new flying boats of Boeing encapsulated this drive for luxury travel . Boeing's flying boats are the latest in a long line of luxury travel destinations .
 The designs were wild, opulent and captured the essence of glamour inside and out of the aircraft .
 Domestic airlines started to set the standard for modern airline services . Domestic airlines set the standards for modern air travel .
 Routes within the U.S. and beyond started to be serviced by the new DC-4s and Boeing 307s . The new planes offer more luxury, comfort and safety .
 World War II changed the aircraft industry yet again this time by unprecedented propositions . The aircraft industry was transformed by the creation of the Air Force .
 The advent of the jet engine created bigger, faster and more numerous aircraft . It was the first jet engine to be powered by a jet engine .
 The industry had developed from the domain of the super rich to a service attainable by the new middle classes of the free world . The new middle class will be able to use the technology to reach them .
 Aerial regulation, tighter business control and the need to make air travel cost-effective meant that much of the golden age extravagance was lost .
 There were to be no more flying boats . They were simply too expensive to operate .
 Three-course gourmet dinners in a saloon-style bar in-flight were too dangerous for rival fighter aircraft .
 Yeager was reportedly one of the only men to ever shoot down Me-262 . Yeager reportedly shot down the plane in a single mission .
 The turbo prop allowed the propeller to be driven by compressed air making it faster and more fuelefficient . The propeller was powered by a turbo prop made it more fuel efficient .
 The aircraft would be travelling too fast for pilots to simply open the canopy and jump . The plane would be flying too fast to simply jump .
 A seat combining vertical rockets and seat restraints was designed . Instead of a seat with vertical rockets, the seat was designed to combine vertical rockets with seat restraints . The seat is designed to fit passengers in a vertical rocket seat .
 In order to get the pilot clear of the tail fin, the seat had to accelerate the occupant vertically to lOOmph in 0.2 seconds . The seat has to accelerate vertically to 0.5 mph in order to avoid the tail fins .
 Jacqueline Auriol was one of the only female test pilots during the Cold War . Auriol worked as a test pilot for the U.S. Air Force in the 1950s .
 As daughter-inlaw to the French President during the Forties, she was already a minor celebrity . As daughter inlaw to a French President, she became a celebrity .
 Bell X-1 was the first plane to travel faster than the speed of sound . She than set a world speed record in 1963 with the Dassault Mirage flying at 1,274mph .
 Its shape was modelled on a bullet, with its oval nose and thin wings making it as aero-dynamic as possible . Its shape is modelled like a bullet with an oval nose, thin wings and oval nose .
 The X-1 was equipped with four rocket chambers that, if fired all at once, created an, ""impact nearly knocks you back into next week"", in the words of test pilot Chuck Yeager . If fired at all at one, the impact of the rocket would knock you
 Competition between East and West created a drive for faster and bigger flying machines me Cell X I to have half-drunk passengers wandering around the cabin if the plane experienced an emergency .
 The elaborate styles of the Twenties and Thirties were lost forever . This meant that as standard shapes and sizes in plane design emerged, the elaborate styles were lost . Boeing model 377 was the Boeing model of the 1930s .
 Big corporations now decide what flew and what didn't, based on profit margins . Big corporations decided what flew, what did not, and what did it for profit margins, says CNN.com .
 Bell X-1 broke the sound barrier in the Mojave Desert in the early 1950s . No one could put this principle better than the American test pilots in the desert .
 Their funding was being cut to make way for space rockets, the next great adventure into the heavens . The funding for the space rockets was also being cut in order to save their lives .
 The need for evergreater passenger capacity per aircraft was the new Holy Grail airlines were forced to pursue . In-keeping with this tight eye on business, standard safety features and the need for even greater passenger capacity were the focus of airlines .
 By 1957 more people were crossing the Atlantic by plane than they were by boat . New long-range airliners by 1957 were used to ferry passengers across the Atlantic .
 The jet engine was gratefully acquired and adapted from the military and soon the propeller-driven airliner was a thing of the past .
 The sex appeal of air travel with beautiful women and the huge jet planes was used to attract the rich and powerful . The power of the media was harnessed by the media .
 As the money started to finally roll in, the market began to shrink to the big players . The market has shrunk to the biggest players in the world .
 Pan Am, unable to sustain its fleet of flying boats or its routes adequately without incurring huge losses, finally folded . Imperial Airways became British Airways, United Airlines became united under United Airlines and Pan Am .
 It was now possible to travel from London to Sydney in less than 24 hours non-stop . The airlines had created a global village that the global village had created .
 Planes were no longer designed to offer extravagance but rather a safe and comfortable ride . Planes were designed to be a safe, comfortable ride rather than an extravagant ride . Plane was designed to provide a comfortable and safe ride .
 There was no need for airlines to see themselves in competition with sea voyages . The by-gone years of sea travel in luxury was an expense .
 Business became so successful that airlines could offer evercheaper fares, opening up more markets to well and truly stamp their dominance over the travel industry .
 It soon became a dreary era of bigger planes for bigger capacity based on the same basic designs . The planes soon became the standard standard for bigger planes .
 In amongst this mediocrity stood one machine that was a piece of breathtaking aeroengineering genius . The plane was the first of its kind to fly in the sky .
 It blended the envelope of technological advancement with pure style and luxury worthy of the golden age of flight . The plane was designed to blend technology and luxury with luxury .
 Many airports have had to modify their facilities to accommodate the gigantic size of the aircraft .
 The technical challenge of getting an airliner to perform like a fighter aircraft was so huge that when British-Frano aerial engineers started working on the designs more than one critic said it could never be done .
 Everything about Concorde was built for speed, its delta wings, its four Rolls Royce engines and its airflow control system were designed to give maximum velocity with minimal drag . Concorde's delta wings and four Rolls-Royce engines were designed for maximum velocity .
 The SR-71 Blackbird was the highest and fastest aircraft in the world . Reaching a velocity of over three times the speed of sound and a height of 100,000 feet .
 The U.S. Air Force One was designed to give maximum power for the least amount of drag . It was used by the United States military for spy missions . The plane's aerodynamics aimed to give the most of its power to the least drag .
 In order for its pilots to survive the extreme conditions of near space flight, they had to don a space suit with its own oxygen and heat supply . The space suit is designed to protect pilots from the extreme temperatures of near-space flight .
 The most technically advanced fighter aircraft and widely rumoured to be the last manned fighter . The F-35 is a true stealth, fly-by-wire, air-superiority fighter . It is the world's most advanced and most advanced aircraft .
 Richard Branson founded one of the world's most important airlines, Virgin Atlantic . He has since been involved in a number of different air challenges .
 One of his most famous record attempts was to be the first man to travel around the world in a hot air balloon, which failed in 1998 . One of the most famous attempts to travel the world was in 1998, but failed .
 Concorde is the name of the Concorde, a plane that took off from London . The plane's name was Concorde and it offered passengers the chance to travel faster than a speeding bullet .
 Concorde's retractable nose and delta wing enabled it to pierce the sound barrier . Its four custom-made Rolls Royce engines were powerful enough to give a cruising speed of mach 2.2 .
 Concorde launched into a world that was becoming increasingly hostile to air travel . Yet Concorde was launched into an increasingly hostile world of air travel.
 Flight was no longer viewed as the glamorous adventure it was three decades before . Flight was not viewed as a glamorous adventure three decades ago .
 Some of the crucial factors stacked against the plane were fuel and noise pollution, the cost of a ticket which for Concorde clocked in at £6,000 return and the extraordinary expense the Concorde planes took to maintain .
 In 2000 an Air France-run flight crashed shortly after take-off, killing over a hundred people . There were also serious questions being asked about the aircraft's safety, when in 2000 a 100 people died .
 Luxury and speed are now seen as optional extras rather than requirements . Luxury is seen as an important part of the car's development .
 Concorde represented a technical marvel but one meant for a different age . Concorde was meant for an age when air travel was something special rather than a mundane day-to-day activity .
 The air industry has always inspired and been inspired by the dreams of entrepreneurs, pilots and adventurers . From the tentative first flight of the Wright Flyer lifting a few feet off the ground to Concorde's Rolls Royce engines at the cusp of the sound barrier, the industry has inspired
 Greater and more powerful machines continue to be designed by the top names in the industry . From the smart fighter jets of the F-22 and F-35, to the first green aircraft of NASA's Helios, people continue to take to the skies above .
 Offer code ‘ZGGZIN’ must be quoted to receive this special subscriptions price . Offer code ZGGZin is offered at the bottom of the price of a subscription .
 The USA issue rate is based on an annual subscription price of £50 for 13 issues, which is equivalent to $78 at the time of writing compared with $9.99 for 13 .