 The words that follow will not be to the liking of those who consider themselves ""peace activists" UZI LANDAU: Peace activists are not satisfied with Israel's lack of progress .
 President Obama waited to see how young president of the United States would respond . He knew this represented an immediate threat to the U.S.
 On October 22, he addressed the American people declaring that any attack upon the U.S. emanating from Cuba would be viewed as an attack on the United States by the Soviet Union itself .
 United States vessels and planes imposed a blockade on Cuba, stopping Soviet ships from reaching the island . The blockade was imposed by the U.S. and Cuba in the early 1950s .
 Six tense days passed before Khrushchev ordered the removal of the missiles . Six days later, the missiles were removed from the Soviet Union . The missiles had been removed from Russia .
 Kennedy lifted the blockade on November 20, and not before the last missile had been removed, the blockade was lifted .
 Israel withdrew from its security zone in South Lebanon in the wake of terrorist attacks in 2000 . In the aftermath of serious terrorist attacks, Israel unilaterally withdrew from the security zone . Israel was forced to withdraw from the area after the attacks .
 Hizbullah was born in the early 1980s, inspired by Iran and energetically fostered by Syria . It was formed in the 1980s and is now based in Syria .
 Israel's withdrawal gifted its enemies with a perfect opportunity to increase the flow of arms to Hizbullah in South Lebanon and train it for the next war . The withdrawal of Israel has given its enemies the chance to increase their arms flow to the region .
 In a short time, thousands of rockets threatening Israel were deployed in the region creating a new balance of terror . Thousands of rockets threaten Israel with a short-time deployment of thousands .
 Israeli prime ministers received intelligence reports on the rocket array capable of reaching beyond northern Israel virtually to the country's center . Israel's prime minister received detailed intelligence reports about the rocket .
 Our leaders also turned a blind eye when Hizbullah detonated explosive charges along the northern security fence, and basically disregarded the abduction and killing of IDF soldiers on various occasions . The Israeli government "baselessly disregarded" the abduction of Israeli soldiers .
 Hizbullah had created a chain of underground bunkers, protected rocket-launching sites and command and control systems . The Israeli leadership continued to shirk its responsibilities to deal with the military infrastructure . The military infrastructure was created in underground bunks and protected rocket sites .
 Hizbullah then ran for the Lebanese parliament, further consolidating its already powerful political position within Lebanon . Having established its strength in the field, the Lebanese political party has also run for parliament .
 Damascus was directly supplying the missiles and openly preventing Lebanon from acting against Hizbullah . Not a single word of warning to Syria was uttered by Lebanon .
 Syria, Hizbullah and Hamas understood Jerusalem's acquiescence to Arab assertiveness . That may be the way peace activists view the world, but it is not the way Syria and Hamas understand it . Peace activists may be peace activists but not peace activists .
 Terror-supporting groups saw Israel as weak and indecisive . Instead, the terror-supported groups saw it as indecisive and weak . Israel has been accused of being weak in the past .
 In the face of the powder keg threatening to explode in its face from Lebanon, Jerusalem mostly sat on its hands . The Kassam rockets were raining down on its citizens in the South, but the Kassam attacks were largely ineffective .
 Hizbullah attacked Israel's northern border on July 12, killing eight soldiers and abducting two others . Eight soldiers and two others were killed in the attack, killing 8 soldiers . The attack was a diversionary rocket assault on nearby boarder towns .
 Syria continued to send missiles to Hizbullah, paralyzing a third of the State of Israel . All the while, Syria continued sending missiles to Israel .
 Israel did attack convoys coming from Syria, but only after they had crossed into Lebanon . Israel attacked convoys crossing into Lebanon, but not into Syria .
 It proved the United States' willingness to confront the USSR in order to defend its own citizens . The U.S. proved the U.K. was willing to confront its neighbor .
 It was also this American assertiveness that prevented a nuclear confrontation between the two superpowers . U.S. assertiveness prevented a nuke confrontation between Russia and the West .
 Kennedy's standing grew as a result of his steadfastness against aggression . Khrushchev was deposed not long afterwards, and Kennedy was toppled by the Soviet Union .
 In comparison, our Lebanese ""missile crisis"" ended with a victory for the Axis of Evil. In comparison to the 'Missile crisis' in Lebanon, the 'Axis of Evil' ended with victory .
 Iran has contemptuously dismissed the latest ultimatum from the international community . That helps explain why Iran has stepped up its nuclear development program .
 Nasrallah's standing is growing ever stronger in Lebanon, despite the fact that he is forced to hide in his bunker . It explains why he is still in power in Lebanon despite his hiding place in Lebanon .
 It is Israel's position that has been weakened, first of all in the eyes of its enemies, says Israel's ambassador to Israel . Israel's enemies have weakened the country's position, he says .
 Some of our friends now view Israel as less of a strategic asset and more as a burden . But even more worrying, some of their friends now think Israel is less of an asset . Israel is now more of a 'strategic asset' than a 'burden'
 He lacks the courage and historic wisdom needed to guide Israel in this treacherous region and difficult time . He lacks courage, historic wisdom, he says . Israel is in a treacherous region .
 If only he had learned from Kennedy to threaten the messenger, but place the onus on and act mainly against the actor actually calling the shots . If only, he should learn from Kennedy, but not from Kennedy .
 Olmert failed to hold Syria rather than Lebanon responsible for the rocket attacks . Olmerot failed to blame Syria for the attacks that sent a million Israelis to bomb shelters .
 He might have prevented the war that was. Had he done so from the start, he might have stopped it from happening .
 Olmert's fear of confronting Syria despite its blatant role in the month-long bombing campaign against the North has sown the seeds for the next war . But even more ominously, the fear is that Syria will be involved in the bombing campaign .
 More than Israel needs a commission of inquiry, it needs to speedily rehabilitate the Israel Defense Forces . Israel needs an inquiry into the Israeli Defense Forces, says Yossi Levin .
 Israel must be willing to go to war to prevent future rocket and missile attacks against our population centers . Israel must also be prepared to go on the attack, Israel says . Israel has been accused of attacking Israel's population centers in Gaza .
 Jack Kennedy would have been a hero for his country . But what we most need is the kind of courageous, wise and determined leadership provided by a Jack Kennedy .
 Half a century ago this week, Russia and America squared up to each other with the threat of nuclear weapons . Russia and the U.S. squared up with each other in the face of a nuclear threat .
 When the tense stand-off ended with the withdrawal of the Soviet missiles from Cuba, it was widely seen as a triumph for President Kennedy . It was emblematic of his presidency and proof of his skills as a crisis manager, communicator, team leader and PR genius .
 Nikita Khrushchev's climbdown was seen as an embarrassing climbdown and he fell from power two years later . For Soviet leader, it was a humiliating climbdown that led to his resignation .
 Newly released tapes of Kennedy's meetings reveal secret deal with the Russians . Kennedy conceded more to the Russians than anyone suspected . But newly released tapes reveal a secret deal that was never publicly revealed .
 The Soviets installed 12 SS-5 and three SS-4 nuclear missile launch pad sites on Cuba, only 90 miles from the U.S. coast . It was on October 16 that photographs from United States spy planes showed the Soviets had installed the sites .
 Kennedy's reaction was to set up a special Executive Committee to offer advice . Kennedy set up the committee to offer him advice . He set up an executive committee to advise him .
 President LBJ's brother Bobby, Vice President Lyndon Johnson, Secretary of State Dean Rusk, Defense Robert McNamara and other top advisors, including CIA boss John McCone . LBJ: "It was a great day for LBJ. It was a very special time for the nation
 The transcripts emerged 23 years later under the Freedom of Information Act . The transcripts were released under the FOI Act .
 ExComm favoured an air strike to destroy missiles, until the air force said it could not guarantee the destruction of all sites . He and most of ExComm preferred air strike, but air force says it can't guarantee destruction .
 President Obama announced a blockade of Cuba in a TV address on October 22 . He announced the blockade to stop any more getting there . The blockade was announced by Obama in October .
 Since these were international waters, it could have been considered a declaration of war . The incident occurred in international waters .
 Turks owned 15 Jupiter ballistic missiles under Nato control with U.S. warheads at the time . The Turks own 15 Jupiter missiles with United States warheads . Turkey owned 15 JPs with warheads at time of 9/11 .
 U-2 spy plane pilot Major Rudolf Anderson Jr was shot down over Cuba on October 27 by Soviet forces acting without Khrushchev's approval .
 If things had escalated, events could have been put in train that might have led to the end of life on Earth . If events had escalated it might have been possible to lead to an end .
 If the Russians had rolled their numerically superior Warsaw Pact forces into western Europe, it could have been only a matter of time before Nato would have been forced to use nuclear weapons it could not have held back a conventional attack . Nato could have used nuclear weapons in a nuclear attack it could
 Both sides had enough nuclear megatonnage to destroy the Earth many times over . Both sides also had enough nukes to destroy many times the Earth .
 At the United Nations, Adlai Stevenson said unless the second Khrushchev letter was dealt with, the initiative would be lost . At the U.N. at the United States, United States ambassador Adlia Stevenson said . The initiative would have been lost, he said .
 It was feared that Turkey, unwilling to be treated like pawns, would derail any deal by blocking the removal of the Jupiters . Turkey was feared to block any deal with the US to remove them .
 Work is continuing round the clock in Cuba to make the nuclear sites operational .
 Difficulties are multiplying in maintaining the blockade without a conflict . Difficults are also multiplying in keeping the blockade .
 At 7.45pm on October 27, Bobby Kennedy the US Attorney General and Soviet ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin had a private conversation in Washington . The conversation took place in Washington, D.C. at the time of the conversation .
 Bobby threatened to invade Cuba, but he also offered to remove the Jupiters within six months accepting the terms of the second letter . Bobby also said he would remove them from Cuba in six months .
 He was publicly accepting the first and privately accepting the second a brilliant tactic far removed from what he publicly claimed to be doing . He was therefore publicly accepting and privately accepted the second .
 By 9am on October 28, Washington had been informed Khrushchev had accepted terms . Washington was informed by 9am that the terms had been accepted .
 Within three hours, workmen in Cuba began dismantling the nuclear sites . The sites were dismantled within three hours .
 The Americans ended the blockade and stood down their forces from DefCon 2 . The blockade ended and the U.S. stood down its forces .
 The Cuba-Turkey connection should be secret or it would smell of appeasement, Kennedy said . One of the stipulations Robert Kennedy made was that the Cuba- Turkey connection should not be secret .
 If the Russians publicised it, he said Washington would deny its existence . Washington would keep the Jupiters in Turkey .
 Khrushchev was seen to have ""blinked first"" but the Russians got more than they could have hoped, considering their aims were more limited than people realised . The Russians got a lot of what they hoped for, but their aim was limited .
 The United States gave up its missiles and gave an undertaking that Communism was safe only 90 miles from its shores . The U.S. gave up missiles and said it was safe 90 miles away from the Soviet Union .
 The Castro regime still rules Cuba today and has long outlived the Soviet Union itself . Castro's regime still ruled Cuba and has outlived its predecessor .
 Afterward, men on both sides of the drama came away believing only luck prevented the two superpowers from plunging the world into a nuclear war .
 Kennedy's admirers recount how he kept his nerve and averted war . His admirers recall how he avoided war with the U.S. Kennedy .
 Khrushchev decided in May 1962 to send more than 40,000 troops and dozens of nuclear missiles to Cuba . Concerned about the Americans' edge in nuclear weapons and U.S. efforts to topple Cuba's pro-Moscow regime, he sent troops and missiles .
 Khrushchev kept reassuring Washington that deploying Soviet offensive weapons to Cuba was out of the question . Washington would not have wanted to use offensive weapons in Cuba .
 American leaders were astonished when they learned of the presence of Soviet missiles in Cuba, captured in photos taken by a U-2 spy plane . American leaders learned on October 16 that the missiles were in Cuba .
 Kennedy laid out the crisis in a speech to Americans on October 22, 1962 . Kennedy ordered United States forces on a state of maximum alert .
 The president rejected the advice of his generals and opted for the naval blockade . The blockade is the first of its kind in the Middle East since 2001 .
 The White House waited anxiously for the arrival of Soviet ships steaming towards Cuba . With U.S. warships in place, the White House was anxious for Soviet ships .
 The Soviet vessels turned around and headed back home, a move greeted with relief around the world . The move was greeted by relief from the world.
 Kennedy and Khrushchev searched for a way out of the deadlock, but their efforts were hamstrung by crossed wires, misunderstandings and cumbersome diplomatic correspondence .
 On the evening of October 26, the Soviets proposed withdrawing their missiles on the condition the Americans promise not to invade Cuba . The Soviets proposed withdrawal on the night of the proposal .
 Moscow issued a public demand for the United States to pull out its Jupiter missiles from Turkey . But the following day, Moscow demanded the U.S. pull out of Turkey .
 On October 27, what would become known as ""Black Saturday,"" a U-2 aircraft was shot down over Cuba . Kennedy's advisers then debated retaliatory air strikes on Cuba .
 It was not until 30 years later that the Americans learned the Soviets had dozens of short-range battlefield missiles on the island, equipped with nuclear warheads .
 Under a compromise, Washington pledged not to invade Cuba and secretly agreed to pull out its missiles from Turkey . Moscow promised to withdraw its warheads from the island, while Washington promised to pull them out .
 Nikolai Leonov is the former head of the KGB's Cuban department . Leonov: "Peaceful ending seemed like a miracle"
 Ardolino, of Burnt Store Marina, south of Punta Gorda, served in Germany during the early 1960s . He served in the 25th Signal Battalion in Germany .
 He and his buddies strung telephone lines from the command center to the front lines in case war broke out . The phone lines were put in place by the U.S. Army in the early 1950s .
 Ardolino was sent to Fort Gordon, Ga., in the Signal Corps . He learned to set telephone poles and string wire from his Signal Corps experience . Ardlino was born in New Jersey .
 He was sent to Germany to serve the final two years of a three-year hitch in the Army . Then he was sent abroad to serve two more years in the army .
 The other eight months we were in the field on maneuvers living in 10-man tents . We were living in tents for eight months . We also spent eight months in 10 man tents on maneuvers in the Middle East .
 'We had cots and sleeping bags that got dirty and you didn’t want to get into after a couple of weeks' 'You had to get dirty,' says the author .
 We had a 2 ½-ton truck and were on our way back from the field and stopped in a local restaurant to get something to eat . We were on their way back after the field .
 When we left the restaurant our team chief wanted to drive and got behind the wheel of the truck . When we got out of the car, he wanted to get behind the truck and drive .
 "I don't think we went three-quarters of a mile in the cold when our leader couldn’t negotiate a curve and the truck flipped after running off the road," he said . "I'm not sure what happened to the accident," he added .
 We flipped a coin to see who was going to get the warm spot and sit in the center with each one of us on either side . We’d flip a coin and sit together in the middle of the room with each other .
 My other buddy was thrown clear of the truck and only suffered a broken ankle . The other friend suffered only minor injuries in the crash .
 Ardolino ended up in the hospital for weeks recovering from a severe gash on one leg and a broken bone in his other leg . Ardolano ended up recovering from the injuries he sustained in the fall .
 When he was released he was put on light duty for a few months until he could get back on his feet . He was released from the hospital and put back in the military .
 She wrote me and said the Army wouldn't tell her very much about what happened to her son . The Army wouldn’t tell her about what it happened to him, she said .
 "I couldn’t write her back and tell her anything without being reprimanded by my superiors," she says . "I was reprimanded for not writing her back," she adds . "It was a very difficult time for me to write back to my superiors"
 'They told me my records showed the only injury I suffered in the accident was a broken nose. They told me I suffered only a small broken nose,' he said . 'They said I was not injured in the crash,' he added .
 After the hearing, the VA bumped his claim up from 10 percent to 40 percent . The VA bumped the claim up to 10 percent .
 They also issued us live ammunition when we were on guard duty and that was a big thing . We were issued with live ammunition and were given live ammunition .
 Nikita Khrushchev sent JFK a letter diffusing the incident when he wrote he would pull the Soviet missiles out of Cuba if the U.S. would pull its missiles from Turkey . JFK said the incident was a mistake . The letter diffused the incident and JFK was the president
 After he was discharged from the state police, he and his wife, Diana, moved to Burnt Store Marina in 1978 .
 The ensuing crisis brought the world the closest it has ever come to thermonuclear destruction . The resulting crisis was the first time nuclear weapons have been used in nuclear weapons .
 During the next 13 days, as Kennedy's inner circle debated what to do, the president secretly tape-recorded the discussions . The president secretly taped the discussions for 13 days . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 The tapes, meticulously edited by Harvard historians, present a definitive record of how the U.S. government functions in mortal crisis . The tapes are meticulously edited .
 The tapes should prove invaluable to historians and foreign policy mavins willing to put in the often tedious work of reading them .
 In addition to the raw material of the tapes, the editors present a background of key historical experiences, such as Munich, Pearl Harbour and the Bay of Pigs, which dominated the minds of the president .
 They also supply continuity when key discussions are unrecorded, and assess the thinking of the Soviet side, based on records, such as Nikita S Khrushchev's memoirs, that are now available .
 The editors do not provide any perspective to help the reader see the crisis in the broader scope of history or the moral struggle of the species . What the editors do is not provide is any perspective .
 Khrushchev has initiated the crisis and commands the only force on Earth that seriously can challenge the U.S. Staring at them -in their imaginations -is the ghostly visage of the Soviet chairman . The ghostly . visage is that of Soviet Chairman Khrush
 Kennedy's job, and that of his advisers, is to discern Khrushchev's motives and anticipate his actions . Kennedy: "Krushchev is a man who is not a man, not a politician."
 Throughout the debate, Kennedy seems considerably less in charge than the editors of this volume claim . The editors of the book claim that Kennedy is not in charge .
 Whatever structure exists, and many of the final solutions, are provided mainly by McNamara, whose role the editors inexplicitly slight .
 The tapes tell the familiar story of how the U.S. imposed a naval blockade to stop delivery of new missiles and warheads to Cuba . Khrushchev ordered Soviet ships to turn around, and the blockade was successful .
 Kennedy secretly agreed to remove U.S. nuclear-armed Jupiter missiles from Turkey, in return for a Soviet agreement to dismantle the missiles in Cuba . The tapes contain a major revelation or, at least, a confirmation of what many historians long have suspected, many historians have long suspected .
 Secrecy was maintained to protect the credibility of the NATO alliance . Secrecy of the information was kept to protect NATO's credibility .
 Kennedy warns Khrushchev that if the deal is made public, the offer will be withdrawn . Kennedy: "If the deal was made public it would be withdrawn. Indeed, indeed, Kennedy warns that if it is made .
 When the two-week crisis is over, the sigh of relief from the American team is almost audible . American team, nerve-frayed and exhausted, is nearly audible .
 How close the world came to Armageddon, how chaotic the process of decision-making was. How close . The world came close to Armageddon . How close they came . How chaotic the . process of . decision making was .
 In providing a record of the crisis, The Kennedy Tapes begs the question if ever again the world can afford an international system that permits the world to come this close to destruction . In providing an accurate record, the world should never again be able to afford this kind of crisis .
 Craig Eisendrath was a U.S. Foreign Service Officer during the Cuban missile crisis . He was a United States Foreign Service officer during the crisis in Cuba .
 Retired Air Force colonel was on the front lines of the 1962 Cuban missile crisis . The U.S. and the Soviet Union came close to war over the installation of Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba .
 Cuban Premier Fidel Castro agreed to remove Soviet bombers, as well as missiles . U.S. blockade lasted until Nov. 11, when Cuban premier agreed to pull them .
 Kern was one of nine pilots brought in to fly U-2s for the Strategic Air Command during the summer of 1962 . Kern was then a captain and a captain of the U.2 .
 There were reports as early as July of Soviet missile shipments to Cuba . There were also reports of missile shipments from Cuba .
 During the height of the crisis, Kern and the other U-2 pilots flew out of Laughlin AFB in Del Rio for almost daily flights over Cuba . Kern and other U.2 pilots were stationed in Cuba during the crisis .
 Pilot's worst nightmare: A mission in mid-October turned out to be a pilot's own nightmare . Pilot: "It's not a mission mission. It's a nightmare," pilot says of the mission .
 Kern was approaching Havana International Airport when he saw two Soviet-made MiG-21 fighters take off and head in his direction . Kern was approached by the fighters at the time of the incident .
 The cabin frosted over, so Kern couldn't see out the windows and his pressurized flight suit inflated automatically . Kern's pressurized suit also inflated automatically when he was in flight .
 He was gliding in a lifeless plane and his only view of the outside was through his drift sight, a device used to see out the bottom of the plane . His only view was to see the outside of the aircraft .
 Kern broke radio silence to report enemy plane action to ground control in Florida . Kern saw the MiGs take off and reported the action . Kern was the pilot of a U.S. Navy plane that was shot down by Soviet Union forces .
 Robert Spencer was flying a parallel track about 10 miles to the right and five minutes ahead . He also called Robert Spencer, another U-2 pilot, who was flying 10 miles ahead .
 If he had waited much longer, his radio messages wouldn't have gotten through . If he'd waited too long, they would have been able to get through .
 He knew he could restart his engine once he got to a lower altitude, where the air has more oxygen, he said . He said he was going to be able to restart the engine if he got lower altitude . He was able to do so because of the oxygen in the air,
 U.S. fighter planes went after the MiGs, who decided to withdraw rather than risk a confrontation . The MiGs were withdrawn rather than risking a confrontation with the United States . United States fighter planes were attacked by MiGs .
 Kern was born and raised in San Antonio, Texas . He graduated from Jefferson High School . Kern is a former high school athlete .
 He remained a U-2 pilot participating in missions over Vietnam and other areas . He received many decorations, including the Distinguished Flying Cross, Air Medal and the Legion of Merit .
 Kern said he has flown 16 different types of military aircraft, but seemed especially well suited to the U-2 . Kern: "I have flown 16 types of aircraft ... I'm not afraid to fly the U.2"
 Charles Jr. works on the flight line for a commercial airline in Boston and William is a playwright based in Chicago . William is the son of Charles Jr., Charles Sr. and William Jr. William is an actor in Boston, Massachusetts .
 Khrushchev's thoughts outlined in extraordinary exchange of post-crisis letters with Kennedy . State Department made public after keeping letters secret for more than 29 years . The letters were made public Monday .
 The letters highlight the hopes, fears and deep mistrust of the two leaders . They sought to come to grips with the aftermath of the most dangerous nuclear crisis the world has confronted .
 The disclosure of the letters ended a four-year campaign for their release by the National Security Archives . The National Security Archive is a private foreign policy research group based in Washington .
 Fifteen letters exchanged between October, 1962, and Dec., 1962, were released . Fifteen of the letters were exchanged between Oct. 1962 and Dec. 1962 .
 The crisis erupted in October 1962 after U.S. reconnaissance flights verified reports that the Soviet Union was building missile launching sites in Cuba . The crisis was the first time the United States had confirmed the sites were being built .
 Kennedy rejected advice from the Pentagon to launch a surprise attack to destroy the sites . Kennedy rejected the Pentagon's advice to launch an attack .
 President Obama declared a ""quarantine,"" or naval blockade, around Cuba in October . He demanded withdrawal of all missiles from Cuba .
 Khrushchev agreed to remove the missiles while Kennedy promised not to invade Cuba . Kennedy promised to remove Cuba and remove the blockade . After two tense weeks during which it seemed as though nuclear war was inevitable .
 Khrushchev wrote Kennedy, "We received your assurances that you would not invade Cuba and would not permit others to do it" Two days after the crisis ended, on Nov. 11, Khrushche wrote Kennedy .
 The outcome of the crisis was widely viewed as an American triumph because Kennedy had been able to induce Khrushchev to dismantle the missiles . At the time, the outcome was viewed as a triumph .
 There is little new information contained in the letters, but they underscored the difficulties the two sides experienced in working out the final details of the tentative agreement that defused the threat of a nuclear war .
 The two leaders expressed concern that the agreement could have fallen apart, reviving the crisis . The exchanges indicated the concern of the two leaders that the deal could fall apart .
 Kennedy expressed concern about opposition of Cuban President Fidel Castro to outside verification that the missiles had been withdrawn . Castro had initially refused to go along with the U.S. demand that several high-performance Soviet bombers be removed from Cuba .
 Khrushchev sought to minimize the significance of the bombers . Kennedy said their presence in Cuba was a matter of ""great importance"" to the U.S.
 After weeks of sparring, the flap ended with an agreement to return the bombers to the Soviet Union . The Soviets and the U.S. agreed to return them to Moscow .
 John Kennedy is a grim-faced Kennedy, sitting at a desk with a speech clutched in his hands . Kennedy was the president of the United States in 1968 . He was assassinated in 1968, and his assassination was the first to be assassinated .
 He announced that missile bases were being built on the ""imprisoned island" Without ado, he announced that missiles would be built .
 In downtown Miami, folks crowded around televisions in the windows of appliance stores . People crowded around TVs in the window of appliances stores .
 The president announced a ""quarantine,"" blocking any military supplies going to Cuba . Stunned, they watched in silence as the president announced the decision .
 About 80 nuclear-laden B-52s were in the air, heading toward the Arctic . They were prepared to launch an immediate attack on the Soviet Union if there were indications that the Soviets were ordering a first-strike .
 Strategic Air Command had been ordered to Defcom 2 status, one step short of all-out war . For the first and only time in its existence, the only time, the Strategic Air command had been given Defcom2 status .
 The largest mobilization of the U.S. military since World War II is under way . The largest mobilisation of the United States military since WWII is underway .
 For the next week, one-eighth of the nation's B-52s were to be airborne at any given moment . One of the world's most powerful military aircrafts was to be on the ground at any moment .
 22 U.S. interceptor aircraft were sent into the sky over Key West and the Florida Straits . Interceptor aircraft prepared to stop any sudden air strike that might come out of Cuba .
 The speech culminated a long, tension-filled day for the Kennedy administration . The speech culminates a long day for Kennedy administration.
 Leaders had been busy briefing a steady stream of politicians and allies about the Cuban situation . Leaders were briefed on the situation by the Cuban government .
 Richard Russell of Georgia had exploded, demanding that the U.S. invade Cuba immediately . Russell was responding to a call for the United States to invade Cuba . Russell: "The United States is going to do whatever it wants to do"
 Kennedy said he had considered that option, but rejected it because he thought it could well lead to nuclear war . Kennedy: "I thought it would lead to a nuclear war" Kennedy said that option was considered but rejected .
 Republicans, even though the off-year election was only days away, decided they had to support the President . Republicans decided to back the President even though it was just days before the election .
 At a symphony concert in Dade County Auditorium, 2,000 people stood and sang the national anthem after being told about the speech . The speech was made at a Dade symphony show .
 The Greater Miami Council of Churches asked all churches to remain open all night and the next day for prayer .
 Tony Varona, leader of Rescate, a Miami exile group, asked Washington to form all Cubans into military units . He wanted to participate in the invasion that he was convinced was imminent .
 Fidel Castro ordered the Cuban military to its highest alert level at 5:40m.m., more than an hour before Kennedy's speech . Fidel Castro had ordered the military to be on alert at 5.40m., over an hour earlier than Kennedy's planned speech .
 Castro was ready for anything and willing to sacrifice anything to defend Cuba and the revolution . Castro was willing to defend his country and its revolution, Castro said .
 Aleksander Alekseev, Soviet ambassador to Cuba at the time of the crisis, urged Kremlin leaders to allow release of the letters . Aleksandand Alekseyev: "The letters are still being held in Cuba, but they should be released"
 Other 'very close to Gorbachev and the Central Committee' also embraced the idea, he said .
 Blight said the Soviets would not release the correspondence without the State Department approval . Blight says the Soviets will not release it without State Dept. approval . The State Department says the correspondence will not be released .
 Previous requests by the library on behalf of individual scholars have been rejected . Previous requests have been refused .
 The State Department has not announced its decision to the school or library . The library has not been contacted by the State Department .
 Edward M Kennedy, D-Mass., said in a letter and a telephone conversation last month that the documents would remain sealed . Kennedy said last month he would keep the documents sealed .
 Kennedy had been working on behalf of the school to have the documents declassified . Kennedy had worked on behalf the school .
 Kennedy aide Paul Donovan said discussions between Shultz and the senator were private . Kennedy would not release correspondence with the secretary of state, Donovan said .
 The world leaders exchanged 22 letters between Oct. and Dec. 2012 concerning the missile crisis . The letters were exchanged between October and December .
 Ten of the letters were declassified in 1973 by the State Department and the 11th was released in 1979 . The 11th letter was released by the U.S. in 1979, she said .
 The remaining letters, written by both men from Oct. through Dec., have remained sealed at the Boston library . They have been requested by scholars to have them released by the library .
 Blight expressed skepticism about the ""national security"" reason for keeping the letters classified . Blight said he was skeptical about the security reasons for keeping them classified .
 Blight also suggested that the State Department may fear setting a precedent . Blight said that the U.S. government may not want to set precedent .
 Julio Castro sat at his uncle's Miami home as President Kennedy came on the television to tell the nation the Soviet Union was building launch sites for nuclear missiles in Cuba . The missiles were capable of reaching almost every city in the Western Hemisphere .
 Castro fled the Caribbean island earlier that year, and his parents and siblings were still there . Castro had fled the island, but his family was still there when he was killed .
 He'd joined the United States Army in August, thinking that with the help of a superpower, he and a growing contingent of exiles in Miami could defeat the communists who had taken control nearly four years before .
 Castro stood ready for his orders, ready to do anything to secure the U.S. and free his family . Castro was ready to fight for his country . Castro: "I'm ready for my orders. I'm ready to defend my country"
 Julio and Jose Castro had both enlisted in the military, the older brother with the U.S. and the younger brother with Cuba . Unbeknownst to one another, Jose Castro and Julio Castro enlisted in military together . Jose Castro was the brother of Julio Castro .
 The U.S. and the Soviets inched closer to catastrophe half a century ago this month . One brother stood in the trenches watching Soviet troops set up outside Havana, while the other awaited orders in Miami .
 Each well knows what may have happened had Kennedy heeded some advisors' call to invade Cuba . Kennedy's advisors were critical of the Cuban government .
 He would go around the city in his red Austin Healey coupe and hit the clubs with friends with friends . He would drive around in the city and go to the clubs .
 Under Fulgencio Batista's rule, the gap between rich and poor grew wider . Corruption was rampant under the Batista regime .
 The boys' own grandfather, a congressman who belonged to an opposition political party, was followed and harassed . The boys say they were harassed by their grandfather, who was a congressman .
 Fidel Castro, not related to the Castro brothers, took control of Cuba in 1959 . Fidel Castro's family was unhappy when he took over the government in Cuba . The Castro brothers' parents were unhappy when Castro took over Cuba .
 Their father, who had studied philosophy, liked the ideas of socialism . Their father also liked the idea of socialism.
 Their mother was startled by the firing squad executions of former Batista officials and many others shown on television . Their mother, on the other hand, was startled .
 Jose Castro was also starting to develop a political consciousness of his own . Jose Castro became a leader of the Cuban Revolution in 1959 .
 He'd been asked to leave his Catholic school after joining a student revolutionary group, and because he was still too young for most jobs, his options were limited . He was too young to get a job because of his age, he said .
 At night, when they met at home, the two young men refrained from discussing their political differences . The two men would not discuss politics at home .
 Jose Castro joined a union and pledged to enlist in the new government's revolutionary army . Castro was no small commitment, joining the union and army .
 Jose had to complete a 38-mile walk to prove his stamina to join up with the group .
 He looked at his mother, wishing he could say something to console her, but knowing that his mind was firm . He wished he could console her .
 The Cuban military routed an invading brigade of American-trained Cuban exiles in the battle at the Bay of Pigs . His older brother had begun making arrangements to leave Cuba in the months after the battle .
 Julio Castro applied for a student visa with the help of an uncle in Miami, not telling his brother or father . He applied for the student visa without telling his father or brother or brother . Julio Castro has been in the country since 2008 .
 If either knew, he feared it could put his exit in jeopardy or endanger the entire family, he said . "I'm not sure what I really want to do," he added .
 In 1962, he left for the airport alone in a taxicab, without saying goodbye to anyone . So on a January day, 1962, in 1962, the man left for an airport alone . He never said goodbye .
 A member of the revolutionary guard, a young man from their neighborhood, recognized him . As he worked his way through an inspection at the airport, he was recognized by a member of their neighborhood .
 Several U.S. officials argued for an immediate invasion of Cuba, but Kennedy doubted that was the best approach . Kennedy doubted the invasion would be the best .
 Jose Castro received orders to guard a Soviet base in a wooded area . While he was told there were missiles inside, Castro never saw them himself . Jose Castro was ordered to guard the base .
 He was assigned to stand in the trenches outside, and could see the Soviets enter and leave the base . He could see them entering and leaving the base, he said . He said: "I'm not going to be scared. I'm not scared."
 Kennedy informed Americans of the impending nuclear threat in Oct. 1962 . Kennedy went on television to inform them of the threat . Kennedy: "It's a good thing to say 'Yes'
 Any attack from Cuba in the Western Hemisphere would require "full retaliatory response upon the Soviet Union,"" he said . The U.S. would respond to any attack from the Cuban territory, he added .
 He had already agreed to participate in Operation Mongoose, another CIA plot to remove Fidel Castro and the communist regime from power . He was already planning to take part in the operation .
 As the missile crisis unfolded, he was awaiting his orders to be sent for bacterial, chemical and nuclear training at Fort Knox .
 B-52s and intercontinental ballistic missiles were prepared to launch at a moment's notice . The U.S. military was in the midst of a crisis in the Middle East .
 Soviet and U.S. diplomats went back and forth, seeking a peaceful solution . Soviet and United States diplomats sought peaceful solution to the conflict .
 Kennedy agreed to remove missiles in Italy and Turkey in exchange for the Soviets dismantling and removing nuclear weapons in Cuba . Kennedy agreed in Oct. 1962 to remove the missiles in Turkey and Italy in exchange with the Soviets removing the nuclear weapons .
 Jose Castro was sent back to the factory, where he had continued working, not yet a full member of the military . Castro was not a full military member when he was sent home from the factory .
 Julio Castro was shipped the next month to Fort Knox . Even after the crisis was averted, he worked on Operation Mongoose and hoped to overthrow communists .
 His mother and two sisters left the island and joined his older brother in the U.S. during that time . His mother, two sisters and brother joined him in the United States during the time .
 His mother kept in contact with his wife, and sent him One A Day vitamins that he took for decades, even when he was sent to Angola . His wife kept in touch with him, and his mother kept him in touch .
 Jose Castro entered the civilian workforce when he was in the military . Castro was a major success in his military career .
 He didn't have the benefits given to members of the military anymore food and vacations for his family and rides to work . He was forced to give up on the benefits he received .
 He and his family lived in a modest apartment with furniture his mother had bought in the 1950s . His mother bought the furniture he inherited from his mother in the 1960s .
 Jose Castro was granted permission to leave the country in 2004 . In 2004, more than 10 years after retiring from the military, Jose Castro retired from the country .
 In some ways, Jose Castro grew up to be more like his big brother than he might have known . Jose Castro's brother, Fidel Castro, says he grew up more like him than his brother . The Castro family is proud of his brother's success .
 Cuba's communist leaders remain at odds with the United States 50 years later . Both governments have eased their policies allowing more interaction between Cubans on either side of the Florida Straits .
 For Julio Castro, the Cold War still remains, the mission he wanted to accomplish only half complete . Julio Castro: "I'm not going to let it go, but I'm going to do it" Julio Castro's mission was only half completed, he says .
 The family is reunited, though in a different country than they had hoped to be . The family was reunited in a new country, but it's not the same country they hoped for .