 The crisis really began Oct. 28, 1962, when Maj. Maj. Gen. John Sutter was killed by a U.S. soldier in October 1962 .
 Richard Heyser took off from the California desert in a U-2 spy plane, flew over Cuba and landed at Orlando's McCoy Air Force Base . The plane landed at the base in Orlando, Florida, after taking off from California .
 The images he captured from 70,000 feet above Cuba would start the U.S. on the road to a scary confrontation with the Soviet Union . The images would be the first time the United States faced a confrontation with Russia .
 President Kennedy told the nation on live television that the Soviets were installing nuclear missiles in Cuba that were capable of striking most U.S. cities . Eight days later, on Oct. 31, President Kennedy said that the missiles were installed in Cuba .
 Two of the Air Force's top-performing fighter planes had also been spotted at McCoy . The sky over the Orlando area roared with ""an endless procession of troop carriers and cargo planes,""
 McCoy was a Strategic Air Command base . ""and you didn't see paratroopers at a SAC base,"" Grierson said in 1987 . McCoy was one of the oldest bases in the world .
 McCoy's B-52 fliers were told that the Air Force was sending them to other bases to make room at McCoy for more Army paratroopers . Soon, they were told they were being sent to make space for paratrooper who could be dropped into Cuba for an invasion .
 Central Floridians look back at October 1962, many remember confusion and fear . Bomb shelters, mall openings opened in Florida in 1962 . Many remember confusion, fear and confusion over what happened .
 Low-profile crisis appears to have been a low-profile affair in October . But if you scan the city's newspapers from late that October, you might be impressed by how low it appears .
 Colonial Plaza expanded in Orlando, Florida, has expanded to include more than 1 million square feet . Colonial Plaza is the largest shopping mall in the city's history, with more than 2,000 square feet of space .
 The shopping center now includes an enclosed mall capped by a four-story Jordan Marsh department store . Hailed as ""the largest and newest shopping complex south of Atlanta,"" the shopping complex now included an enclosed shopping center capped by an eight-story mall .
 At the mall's opening Oct. 11 beauty queens snipped a ribbon, kicking off ""one of the biggest shopping sprees in the history of Orlando," the Sentinel reported .
 By Oct. the Parade of Homes vied for front-page space with the latest from Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev . The parade of Homes was the biggest of its kind in the world .
 It's important to remember that news coverage in 1962 was far different than it is today . It was important to keep up with the coverage of the events in 1962 .
 Television stations didn't broadcast around the clock . They signaled the end of the broadcast day with the national anthem, followed by a test pattern .
 President Kennedy asked for TV time from the three broadcast networks for 7m. on a Monday night . Kennedy's address signaled a major event not only in the Cold War but also in the evolution of television .
 When the Soviet Union deployed missiles in Cuba, it led to the Caribbean crisis,"" Putin said . Putin said, using the Russian term for the Cuban missile crisis, "The Caribbean crisis" Putin says .
 The discovery in October 1962 that Moscow was secretly building nuclear missile launchpads in Cuba pushed the world close to nuclear war in a terrifying 13-day brinkmanship between the Soviet Union and the United States .
 Moscow has reacted angrily to the plans, saying the missile defence system is actually aimed at Russia . Moscow says the plans are aimed at attacking Russia .
 Putin says Washington is creating ""threats"" near Russia's borders . Putin said Washington was creating "threats" near Russian borders . The Russian president said Washington created "threat" near Russia .
 Russian president was speaking at a press conference after meeting EU leaders at a summit in Portugal .
 Head of Russian strategic missile forces warns Moscow could restart at short notice production of short and medium-range missiles . Comes amid fears of a renewed arms race between Russia and the West .
 General Nikolai Solovtsov: "We have everything needed to do this"""We are ready to go to war with Russia, says General Solovtssov .
 US and Russian officials have discussed possible compromises on missile defence shield . US and Russia have discussed allowing Russia access to the installations and ensuring they are only activated when a threat has been identified .
 The United States and the Soviet Union came to the brink of nuclear war . Some 21 meetings were held during the succeeding two weeks as the U.S. and Soviet Union faced nuclear war.
 The existence of tapes of these meetings was a closely held secret until the summer of 1973 . The tapes were revealed during the investigations of the Watergate scandal .
 The documents were transferred to the John F Kennedy Presidential Library in 1975 . They remained classified for the most part .
 The result is a work of nonfiction as gripping as any fictional account of international crisis, and more compelling by virtue of being true . The result of this work is a nonfiction nonfiction account of an international crisis . It is more compelling than a fictional account, it's more compelling
 Robert McNamara, secretary of defense, mused, ""I'll be quite frank. After Kennedy left the tape running, McNamara said, "I'm quite frank" The tape was left running after Kennedy left his final meeting .
 McNamara floated the idea of a blockade of offensive weapons . McNamara was concerned about the risk of escalation following military action .
 Kennedy and his advisers talked their way through the maze of options as tension increased . The blockade became the first line of American response to the discovery of tactical nuclear weapons in Cuba .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff were never far in the background, preparing for air strikes and an invasion . Joint chiefs of Staff urged commitment to significant military action as soon as possible .
 Khrushchev publicly offered a deal radically different from one he had proposed privately the night before . The tension reached a climax the evening of Oct. 11, 1962 .
 Soviet ships continued to head for Cuba, Cuban forces were mobilizing, and a U2 spy plane inadvertently strayed over Soviet air space . Another U2 was shot down by the Cubans .
 The last meeting of that nightmare of a day ended with a bit of gallows humor . It was the last of the nightmare of that day . "The last meeting" ended with the last meeting .
 President Kennedy stayed up late to watch "Roman Holiday" with Audrey Hepburn and Gregory Peck . The 5th Marine Expeditionary Brigade boarded ships to carry it to staging areas .
 'The Kennedy Tapes' is reassuring in the view it gives us of American crisis management in action . It is reassuring to see the Kennedy tapes as a reassuring example of U.S. crisis management .
 Kennedy's advisers represented a wide range of points of view, and wildly different characters . Kennedy's advisors represented a range of different characters, CNN's John Sutter says .
 With courage, patience and the calm determination to find the best option, they managed to avoid the war that might have destroyed our civilization . With courage and patience, the U.S. has avoided the war .
 Castro is the only surviving leader of the three involved in the 1962 confrontation that brought the U.S. and Soviet Union to the brink of war . Castro welcomed more than 30 participants to a three-day conference on the crisis .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev confronted each other over Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba in 1962 . The crisis occurred when the U.S. President Kennedy and Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchchev confronted him .
 Castro said he had not yet had a chance to study letters between Kennedy and Khrushchev recently released in the U.S. Castro: "I'm not sure what I think about the letters" Castro said the letters were recently released .
 Other unpublished messages between the two leaders could ""shed a little light"" on the 1962 crisis, he said .
 Kennedy's defense secretary, Andrei A Gromyko, is a former Soviet Foreign Minister . Kennedy was defense secretary during his time in Soviet Union .
 Each side has its own version of events of what happened in October 1962, when the Soviets deployed nuclear missiles in Cuba . The U.S. imposed a quarantine on Cuba and demanded and obtained the removal of the rockets .
 The session was closed to reporters, and the participant spoke on the condition of anonymity . The session is closed to journalists .
 The U.S. should have used diplomatic channels to express its demand that the Soviet missiles be withdrawn, a participant said . The participant said the Cubans also had complained that the United States should have expressed its desire to withdraw missiles .
 Khrushchev erred in shipping nuclear missiles to Cuba because he had not anticipated the U.S. reaction, a participant says . Georgy A Arbatov told a conference that then-Soviet leader Nikita S Khruschev had erred . Khrushchev had
 Other Soviet officials praised Khrushchev as a ''great statesman'' who succeeded in getting the Americans to promise not to invade Cuba . But other Soviet officials at the session praised him for his role in getting Americans to stop invading Cuba .
 McNamara and other U.S. participants exchanged thoughts with Soviets, including Gromyko, Arbatov and Dobrynin . Seated around oval table topped with blue felt, McNamara exchanged thoughts .
 Bush called the session the ''latest example of the new openness'' under Mikhail S Gorbachev . Bush: The session is the latest example of ''new openness'' in the Soviet Union .
 Bush said international security would be helped by closer study of the Cuban missile crisis . Bush said the crisis would help the U.S. in the wake of the crisis .
 Americans and Soviets who led their nations through the Cuban missile crisis of 1962 met Friday to draw lessons from the incident .
 Brookings Institution senior fellow at Brookings Institution based his article on Soviet sources who under the policy of greater openness, or glasnost, are beginning to discuss formerly taboo subjects .
 The full Soviet military complement in Cuba in October 1962 totaled 42,000 men,' Garthoff wrote . Sergo Mikoyan has now confirmed that the full . Soviet military . complement in . October 1962 .
 Such ""voluntaristic' actions led to Khrushchev's downfall two years later . Such actions led the downfall of the Soviet Union in 1968 .
 The deal called for the withdrawal of Soviet missiles from Cuba in return for removal of United States missiles from Turkey . The deal, which was very close to the final resolution, was close to a resolution .
 Fyodor Burlatski was a member of Khrushchev's inner circle . Sergo Mikoyan is an expert of Soviet-Cuban relations . He is the son of Anastas Mikoyans, who is also an expert in relations with Cuba .
 Garthoff also quoted a number of unidentified Soviet officials who he said are well-placed but not ready to step into the spotlight . The former Soviet officials are not ready for the spotlight, he said .
 More disclosures are possible at an international conference on the Cuban missile crisis . The conference is scheduled for January in Moscow .
 The U.S. forced the Soviet Union to withdraw its missiles from Cuba . By standing firm and acting tough, the United States forced the Soviets to pull the missiles out of Cuba .
 The U.S. secretly promised the Soviets it would not invade Cuba and it would remove its nuclear missiles from Turkey, Lebow says . But the crisis really ended in a tie, since the United States secretly promised to remove the nuclear missiles .
 The tough guy act is reflected in current U.S. nuclear policy, he says . Nonetheless, what people remember is the 'tough guy act,' he said .
 He is an expert on crisis management, a scientist thrilled by uncovering how statesmen behave in times of pressure . He is also a scientist and a scientist .
 As a professor of government and director of the Peace Studies Program at Cornell, Lebow is in a position to influence national thinking about nuclear crisis management . Lebow: As a government professor, he can influence thinking about crisis management.
 Lebow also has created war games for high-ranking military men . He has lectured to the staffs of President Reagan and former President Carter .
 Lebow hopes to help statesmen make better decisions in the future . By analyzing the assumptions and mistakes made in past military crises, he says . Lebow: By analyzing past military failures, statesmen will be able to better understand each other .
 The stakes are much higher now, with thousands of nuclear weapons scattered around the world . The stakes were much higher when the U.S. became aware of the threat of nuclear war .
 The motives of the other side are not always what they appear to be, he says . Countries may actually act tough because they feel insecure, not strong, he adds .
 Lebow participated in two meetings last year on the 25th anniversary of the Cuban missile crisis . Lebow is writing a book on the subject .
 The idea was to have policy makers speak frankly about the 13 tension-filled days that brought the world to the brink of a nuclear confrontation, says Lebow .
 The meetings were extraordinary because three top Soviet officials gave their perceptions about the crisis . They demonstrated how wrongly the U.S. interpreted the motives of the Soviets, says Lebow .
 The Soviet officials who visited Harvard in October were Georgi Shaknazarov, a member of the Soviet Central Committee . Fedor Burlatsky, a speech writer for Khrushchev; and Sergi Mikoyan, a Foreign Ministry officer .
 From Kennedy's point of view it seemed as if Khrushchev was flexing his nuclear muscles, says Lebow . Kennedy's view was that it seemed like Khrushchem was 'flexing his muscles'
 Khrushchev claimed to have more missiles than the U.S. and had started the Berlin blockade . He also had started a Berlin blockade and tightened the grip of communism in Eastern Europe . The Soviet Union claimed to be stronger than the United States .
 Khrushchev put the missiles in Cuba because he felt weak, says Lebow . Khruschev put them there because he was weak, he says . Lebow: Khruski felt weak .
 The United States response only worsened that feeling and tightened his room to maneuver . And the U.S. response to the situation only worsened it .
 With the help of newly installed satellites, the U.S. was able to see that the Soviet Union did not really have nuclear superiority over the United States . The United States believed the Soviets had nuclear superiority .
 Kennedy imparted this to Khrushchev, said Lebow, and the Soviet leader was worried that the U.S. might publicly expose the weakness . Lebow: Kennedy was worried about the United States' weakness in Vietnam .
 Khrushchev also was intimidated by the U.S. Jupiter missiles in Turkey, Lebow says . The missiles were right next to the Soviet Union, he says .
 Lebow wanted Kennedy to have the same feeling -that death was at his back door, said Lebow . He said he wanted Kennedy's death to be at the back door .
 The Soviets misinterpreted actions of the United States, said Lebow . The Soviets also misinterpreted the U.S. military actions, he said .
 The U.S. military conducted a series of what it considered benign exercises before the crisis . The United States military conducted the exercises before .
 They were a mock invasion of an island nation with the intent to overthrow a communist dictator . The mock invasion took place in an attempt to overthrow the dictator .
 The code name for the exercises was ORTSAC -Castro spelled backwards, said Lebow . OrTSAC was the name of the exercises, he said .
 The CIA's repeated attempts to kill Fidel Castro convinced the Soviets that an invasion of Cuba was imminent - even though the U.S. had no such plans at the time .
 Two small components of the Cuban missile crisis demonstrate how misperception can color and influence the creation of policy, said Lebow .
 The U.S. and the Soviet Union felt challenged because they misinterpreted other's actions, he says . The United States and the Soviets felt challenged, he said .
 Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum to commemorate 50th anniversary of Cuban missile crisis . Kennedy Presidential Museum to be held at Kennedy's home in Washington, D.C. Museum .
 Caroline Kennedy unveiled the ""Rape of the Sabine Women"" on Thursday . The exhibit is on loan through Jan. 31 at the Museum of Fine Arts .
 The 6-foot-by-4-foot vertical oil on canvas depicts in bold colors two armed men with spear and sword raised toward each other, standing over a woman and wailing child . The painting, a 6.5-foot by 4-foot oil painting, depicts in
 Picasso started the work soon after the 13-day crisis, referencing a fabled abduction of Sabine women by ancient Romans . Picasso was inspired by the fabled abductions of a Sabine woman .
 Legend has it that Rome faced a shortage of marriageable women after it was founded or perhaps sought an alliance with a nearby warlike tribe, the Sabines . Rome was founded in the Roman city of Rome in 466 .
 Roman leaders invited the Sabines to a feast, only to capture dozens of virgins . Roman leaders captured dozens to hundreds of Sabine virgins and captured dozens of them .
 The Sabines later tried to rescue the women, who reminded them the Romans were now the men's relatives by marriage and brokered a truce . The Sabine women were later rescued by the Romans, who were now Romanists .
 On the back of a flatbed trailer, the deactivated missile -which may once have carried a nuclear warhead -is due to pass through the area on Interstate 95 before dawn Thursday . The missile is due to arrive at the George T Baker Aviation School in Miami .
 The missile will be returned to the barn at the Nike Missile Base in Everglades National Park in time for the 50th anniversary of the Cuban missile crisis in October . Then it will be back at the base in time to celebrate the Cuban Missile Crisis 50 years ago .
 Park ranger: "We were preparing for World War III" Park ranger who oversees the Nike site says it was preparing for "World War III."
 Charles D Carter has worked to locate a surplus missile to bring to the site where he was stationed as a 17-year-old Army private . Carter was stationed in the U.S. as a private in the Army .
 Carter, who nows lives in Palm Desert, Calif., became the site's unofficial historian after the 9/11 terror attacks . Carter became the Nike site's official historian after September 11, 2001 .
 He visited the Nike site, found it in good condition, and with the cooperation of the National Park Service, began to hunt for a missile . He found the missile in a good condition .
 Through the Army's Center of Military History, he found it in the Anniston, Ala., Army Depot . The depot is a former Army depot .
 Carter was instrumental in getting the Nike base listed on the U.S. Department of the Interior's National Register of Historic Places in 2004 . The 40-acre Nike base was also listed as a site with important cultural significance .
 The base includes 22 buildings, including three missile barns, a missile assembly building, a guard dog kennel and a barracks . The base is within Everglades National Park, Florida .
 The Army stopped using the base, home of the 52nd Air Defense Artillery, in 1979 . The base was home to the Army's 52nd air defense artillery .
 It opened to the public in 2009, with tours available from December through April . Tourists can tour the site from December to April .
 The $10,000 cost of transporting and restoring the missile is being picked up by the South Florida National Parks Trust, said Meyer .
 Once unloaded, the missile will be positioned beside two aircraft parked on school grounds . It may be visible to motorists passing by on Lejeune Road, east of Miami International Airport .
 Sometime in October, the missile will be trucked to Homestead and displayed in a launch position . The park resumes tours of the Nike base in December when tours resume .
 The addition of the missile will rachet up the impact for visitors, says Meyer . Meyer says the addition of a missile will help ease the impact of visitors .
 Nike Missile Base within Everglades National Park will be announced once the missile is installed in November . Tours of the base will be available once the missiles are installed . The Nike missile will be installed at the base in November in Florida .
 Daily guided tours will resume in December and resume through April . Regular daily guided tours are available through April 2015 .
 Soviet soldiers secretly set up nucleararmed missiles 90 miles from Florida . They showed Soviet soldiers hurriedly and secretly setting up nucleararm missiles .
 The 45th anniversary of the beginning of the Cuban missile crisis is this week . The crisis began 45 years ago this week in Cuba .
 The Soviets had been sending defensive weaponry to Cuba, including ant-missile missiles . The Soviets were also sending anti-aircraft missiles to the island .
 Cuban leaders became convinced the U.S. was planning to attack the island . But they secretly supplied missile installations that could be used offensively .
 Kennedy demanded their removal and dismantling of the bases . Once the presence of a ballistic missile was confirmed, Kennedy demanded the removal . Kennedy demanded that the bases be dismantled .
 Kennedy ordered a naval quarantine of Cuba to stop further shipments . Kennedy declared that any missile launched from Cuba would warrant a full-scale retaliatory attack against the Soviet Union .
 After sharp exchanges, the Soviet Union agreed to withdraw its missiles in return for a U.S. pledge that it would not invade Cuba . The Soviet Union eventually agreed to pull missiles in exchange for an agreement that would not be invaded .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev also made a private agreement to remove U.S. missiles from Turkey, which shared borders with the Soviet Union . The deal was part of a deal to remove missiles from the country .
 The two leaders completed the agreement and the crisis ended as suddenly as it had begun . On Oct. 31, Obama and Putin agreed to a deal to end the crisis .
 The crisis was one of the most serious incidents of the Cold War . The crisis occurred during intense U.S.-Soviet rivalry that began after World War II ended .
 Most experts believe that for 14 days the fate of millions of people rested upon the ability of Kennedy and Khrushchev to reach a compromise and avoid nuclear war . Armed forces on both sides at their highest state of readiness, most experts believe .
 The agreement between Kennedy and Khrushchev was kept secret because many, both in Europe and the United States, would have opposed it . The agreement kept it secret because of the opposition to it .
 Almost all Americans thought Kennedy had forced the Soviet Union to remove the missiles simply by threatening war . Almost all thought that Kennedy forced the Soviets to remove missiles by threatening to war .
 U.S. foreign policy used greater toughness and more threats of force after the crisis, experts say . Some experts believe that, as a result, the United States used greater . toughness and greater . force .
 Some think this led to U.S. military opposition to communist forces in Vietnam War . Some think it led to United States military opposition .
 Moscow-Washington phone led to a direct communications link between Moscow and Washington . The so-called red phone was used in the Cold War era .
 For Fidel Castro, although the Russians shut him out of negotiations, Cuba continued to be protected from invasion . Fidel Castro's Cuba was protected by the Soviet Union in the 1950s and 1960s .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev were eyeball to eyeball, and Khrrushchev blinked . Kennedy was eyeballing to . eyeball . Khrushchev blinked. Kennedy was looking at the world for the first time since 1964 .
 Robert Kennedy's account of the crisis, ""Thirteen Days," was published after his death, in 1969 . Robert Kennedy: "Th13 Days" was published in 1969.
 The missile crisis began on Oct., 1962, when President Kennedy learned from analysis of U.S. reconnaissance flights that the Soviet Union had secretly placed nuclear missiles in Cuba . The crisis began in October 1962 .
 Within the Kennedy administration there was strong support for an immediate U.S. military attack . The Kennedy administration was strongly opposed to an immediate attack .
 Kennedy decided to see, first, whether there was some way to get the missiles removed without a war that might lead to escalating nuclear exchanges . Kennedy: "There was no way of getting rid of the missiles without war"
 On Saturday, Oct. 31, a U-2 reconnaissance plane was shot down over Cuba by a SAM missile . The plane was the first U.2 to be shot down by a missile in Cuba .
 Almost all of Kennedy's advisers agreed that U.S. bombers should go in the next morning and destroy the SAM sites .
 The president and Secretary of State Rusk asked Robert Kennedy to meet with the Soviet ambassador, Anatoly Dobrynin . Robert Kennedy met with the ambassador to the Soviet Union at the time .
 Robert Kennedy told the ambassador that we had to have a commitment by tomorrow that those bases would be removed . When they met that evening, Robert Kennedy . Robert Kennedy said that we ""had to have . a commitment that we would remove those bases from the United States"
 He was told about a letter, sent to Khrushchev, proposing removal of the bases and missiles, under international inspection . In return, the U.S. would not invade Cuba, he said .
 The ambassador then raised the question of American nuclear missiles in Turkey, on the Soviet border . The ambassador also raised the issue of U.S. nuclear weapons in Turkey .
 The next day, Sunday, Oct. 31, Dobrynin asked to see Robert Kennedy again . The next morning, Robert Kennedy died in a car crash in New York City .
 The truth is that a secret American undertaking -to remove missiles from Turkey -made the solution possible . The truth, then, is that the solution was made possible .
 If President Kennedy had undertaken publicly to remove missiles from Turkey in return for removal of Soviet missiles from Cuba, hawks would have denounced him as weak . Kennedy would have been denounced as weak by hawks if he had taken action .
 History is worth recalling as another crisis threatens war in the Persian Gulf . The history of the Gulf crisis is worth remembering as a reminder of its history .
 President Kennedy maintained the attitude that he maintained during the missile crisis . So is the attitude he maintains during the crisis .
 He had read Barbara Tuchman's book on the bungling that led to World War I, ""The Guns of August,"" and it made a deep impression on him .
 "If anybody is around to write after this, they will understand that we made every effort to find peace and give our adversary room to move," he says .
 Perhaps only those who lived through the 13 days can appreciate how scary that time was, how close nuclear war seemed . The 13-day stand-off was the longest nuclear war in history .
 It is as important now as it was then to understand, before acting, what the consequences of war may be . It is important now, as it is then, to understand what a war may have caused, before intervening .
 Cuban leader Fidel Castro urges Moscow to launch a nuclear attack on the U.S. Also, Fidel Castro urged Moscow to attack the United States, ABC News reports .
 The revelations came during a review of the Cuban missile crisis at a conference at a weekend conference .
 Former Kennedy press secretary Pierre Salinger, a conference participant and now an ABC correspondent, quoted a top Soviet source as saying that on Oct. 1962, Castro urged Khrushchev to fire the missiles at the United States to head off an invasion .
 Nikita Khrushchev eventually withdrew the missiles in exchange for President John Kennedy's pledge not to invade Cuba . The missiles were eventually withdrawn by the Soviet Premier in return for President Kennedy's promise not to attack Cuba .
 McNamara said the figures were provided by Jorge Risquet, a member of Cuba's ruling Politburo . McNamara was speaking at the end of the conference .
 Cubans had said the casualty count could have reached 800,000, U.S. officials said . Other American officials said privately that the Cubans said the death toll could have been 800-000 . Cubans have said the number of Cubans killed in the conflict could reach 800
 McNamara said 40,000 of the troops were Soviet, four times higher than U.S. intelligence estimates at the time . McNamara: "40,000" of the Soviet troops are Soviet .
 20 Soviet nuclear warheads were on Cuba at the time of the crisis . Dmitri A Volkogonov, director of the Soviet Defense Ministry's Institute of Military History, said Saturday that 20 warheads were there .
 American officials have said they never knew whether any Soviet nuclear warheads had reached Cuba . They assumed they had . U.S. officials say they were never sure if any Soviet warheads had been sent .
 Soviet visitors at Tuesday's Harvard conference had surprising observations and memories . Soviet visitors to Harvard conference were surprised by their experiences .
 Khruschev installed missiles because he was sure the U.S. would invade Cuba again, son of Khrushchev aide says . Sergei Mikoyan says Khruschchev started installing missiles because of the threat of an invasion by the United States .
 Mikoyan said he'd believed rumors of an imminent U.S. landing until the Harvard discussions . He said he believed rumors had been true until he learned of the discussions .
 Washington Post story suggests rogue elements of Cuban military shot down U.S. U-2 plane during the crisis .
 Mikoyan was in Cuba with his father at the end of the crisis . He said he "absolutely excluded any possibility'' of armed conflict with the Soviets .
 Fedor Burlatsky, a former Khrushchev speech writer, said many Soviet leaders had believed the U.S. would allow the missiles to stay in Cuba .
 The author of a play about the crisis, Burlatsky recalled the tension of ''Black Saturday,'' the day before the crisis ended . The author said the tension was high during the tense period .
 Public opinion later changed, Burlatsky said, and a ''myth ... a mystery'' grew around the slain leader . Public opinion eventually changed and a mystery grew around his death .
 He joked with Robert McNamara, who complained after viewing the TV film The Missiles of October, that the actor playing him was too fat .
 Fedor Buriatsky, Former Khrushchev speech writer, says he was one of Marilyn Monroe, one of John Kennedy's . One of Marilyn Marilyn Monroe's eyes, he says .
 Intelligence analysts in Washington discounted their reports of seeing huge missile-like tubes . But intelligence analysts said they discounted their claims of seeing missiles in the area .
 They believed the Soviet military buildup in Cuba was purely defensive . They believed it was a purely defensive move .
 Studeman said Monday during an unprecedented seminar at CIA headquarters . Studeman was speaking at a seminar at the CIA headquarters in Washington, D.C.
 The compilation of documents includes notes taken by the director of the CIA at the time, John McCone, during White House crisis meetings . The documents were compiled by the White House during the Nixon administration .
 It includes estimates by the intelligence community, reports from Cuban agents and memorandums coded Ironbark . It was based on information from one of the most valuable Soviet spies of the Cold War .
 If the CIA could do it over, Studeman says, it would pay more attention to the informers reporting sightings of Soviet missiles in Cuba . Studeman: The CIA would analyze better how the Soviets viewed deployment of missiles outside their borders .
 The deployment only became known when a U-2 spy plane photographed the launching pads on the western third of Cuba on Oct. at least one month after the first batch arrived .
 Much of the reporting by Cuban agents was collected in Miami at what became the largest CIA station in the world . Warren Frank, then with the agency's foreign intelligence branch, said much of the Cuban agents were collected .
 The CIA received hundreds of thousands of such reports, many of which its agents deemed credible . Frank: CIA agents in Miami deemed the reports credible . The agency received hundreds if not thousands of reports .
 Analysts say they could not understand why the Soviets would want to deploy medium-range missiles in Cuba . Analysts said part of the problem was that they couldn't understand why they wanted to do so .
 A landmark analysis also declassified Monday said the Soviets were deploying antiaircraft missiles in Cuba only to deter a U.S. invasion effort in the wake of the botched Bay of Pigs landing the year before .
 Analysts at CIA headquarters were skeptical of the Cuban agents . They cabled Miami, telling the station to stop submitting reports by Cuban agents, Frank says .
 CIA headquarters dismissed a Cuban agent report of a tube as long as a palm tree, saying palm trees come in different sizes . In another cable, CIA headquarters dismisses a report that a tube is long enough to fit palm trees .
 At the same time, U-2 reconnaissance planes and lower-flying spy aircraft were providing photographs of Soviet ships laden with crates of military material .
 The CIA did not discover for sure that the Soviets had nuclear warheads until the crisis was defused at the end of November . The crisis ended when the Soviets began loading missiles back onto their ships for return to the Soviet Union .
 In October 1962, the world probably came closer to nuclear war than it has anytime before or since . Letters From Castro to Khrushchev were letters from the two world leaders .
 The impression one gets in reading these fascinating documents is quite the opposite . But the impression is that the documents are not about what they are about .
 Castro recommended to Khrushchev, in a letter dated Oct., 1962, that he launch a nuclear strike against the United States if the U.S. military attempted to invade the island to neutralize the nuclear missiles the Soviets were installing . The letter was dated Oct. 1962 .
 Castro says he expects an American operation within the coming three days . Castro did not even consider the possibility that the Soviet leader might give in to President John F Kennedy's demands .
 Kennedy seemed unlikely to remain satisfied with naval blockade he had announced October 22 . Several missiles had reached Cuba, and Kennedy seemed to be unhappy with blockade .
 Khrushchev realized he had lost the high-risk wager he undertook by sending the missiles to Cuba . He did not resist the American pressure long .
 Khrushchev agreed to withdraw his weapons in exchange for a U.S. commitment not to invade Cuba . Though he said nothing to Castro, fearing the Cuban might scuttle an agreement, he agreed to pull weapons .
 Despite his heated rhetoric, Khrushchev knew that there would be no winners in a nuclear war simply a devastated planet . Despite his rhetoric, there would have been no winners .
 Castro's frenetic ideology and visceral anti-Americanism was such that he was ready to ""heroically accept the possibility of apocalypse for his people, and many others . Castro's troops had repulsed the U.S.-supported invasion at the Bay of Pigs a year before his
 The interest of these letters which provides a fascinating inside look at the most dangerous crisis of the cold war is more than just historical . The interest is the interest of the letters .
 The East-West balance of power was built on the superpowers' belief in dissuasion and their notions of responsibility and self-interest were badly shaken . It is of immense importance today, with the East-W.E. balancing of power built on dissuasion .
 Letters raise the delicate problem of the spread of nuclear weapons to nations beyond the great powers . These letters raise the issue of the nuclear weapons' reach beyond the world's great powers.
 Castro's letters show where we would be today in the Middle East if Saddam Hussein had nuclear arms . Iraq, India, Pakistan and other nations possess nuclear arsenals and the blind hatred to use them means collective suicide .
 The Cuban missile crisis began on Oct., 1962, when American intelligence services presented Kennedy with aerial photos taken from more than 65,000 feet by the famous U-2 spy planes . The Cuban missiles were installed in Cuban territory by Soviet forces .
 Pictures also showed missiles, which had a range of about 1,150 miles . The pictures also showed the missiles, also known as the SIX missiles .
 Khrushchev sent a secret message to Kennedy in October . He suggested that the missiles might be withdrawn in exchange for a U.S. commitment not to invade Cuba .
 Castro was unaware of Khrushchev's approach to the White House . Castro wrote the letter to the Kremlin leader . Castro was not aware of the approach .
 I realize that the latter, to be carried out, would require the use of considerable forces, and that it is the most repugnant form of aggression, which might rule it out . The latter would require use of significant forces, but might rule out it .
 The morale of the Cuban people is extremely high and they will face the aggressor heroically, says Cuban President Vladimir Putin . "They will face [the aggressor] heroically," says Putin .
 "I believe that the aggressivity of the imperialists is making them extremely dangerous," says President Obama . "If they undertook such a brutal and illegal act as the invasion of Cuba, it would be the moment to eliminate such a danger forever," says Obama .
 It would be an act of pure self-defense, as harsh and terrible as the solution may be, for there is no other . "It would be self-defence," says John Sutter .
 "I understand how bitter these hours must be for you, with the results of your superhuman efforts so seriously threatened," says the author of the book .
 "We see as very real and very near. But at the same time, we are calmly preparing to confront a situation that we see as real and near," he says .
 Khrushchev offered to remove the missiles from Cuba in exchange for a U.S. promise not to invade . He also demanded the withdrawal of the American missiles in Turkey from Turkey . The message spread confusion in Washington .
 Kennedy chose to ignore this message, but responded positively to the earlier message, promising not to invade Cuba if the missiles were removed . Kennedy chose not to ignore the message .
 President Obama had to explain his decision to Castro to whom he clearly had not consulted . But in this letter, he had to tell Castro: "I'm not sure what I'm going to do with this decision"
 By now you will have heard the text, which is being broadcast on radio . I won't go into it here because by now you've heard it, but you'll have heard it all .
 At a time when an agreement is in sight, the Pentagon is looking for a pretext to sabotage it . The Pentagon is trying to sabotage an agreement, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Yesterday you shot one of them down, whereas in the past you did not shoot them down when they flew over your territory . Yesterday you shoot one of these down, while yesterday you shot it down, rather than yesterday you did .
 Of course, if there is an invasion, it will have to be repelled using all means . Of course there is a war to be fought against by the British government .
 Castro was deeply irritated in principle by the agreement reached by Kennedy and Khrushchev . He had not been consulted by the two leaders .
 The decision to shoot down the U.S. spy plane was made with the agreement of Soviet military advisers in Cuba, writes Kremlin boss . He explains his feelings in this letter .
 I would like to clarify something concerning the anti-aircraft measures we have taken. I would also clarify that the measures have been taken. The measures have not been taken in any of the country’s most recent incidents.
 There was a danger of a surprise attack on specific military installations, he said . There was also a danger there was a risk of surprise attack, he added .
 "We decided not to simply stand idly by because a surprise attack . . could have completely destroyed these targets," says President Obama . "We are not going to let it happen," says Obama .
 The commander of the Soviet forces can provide you with additional information on the plane that was shot down . The Soviet forces were involved in the shooting down of the plane .
 Khrushchev reproaches Castro for having called for a nuclear attack on U.S. territory . In this long letter, Khrushchchev reproached Castro for calling for an attack on American territory .
 He also tries to explain his failure to consult with the Cuban leader during the peak of the crisis . He also attempts to explain why he didn't consult with Cuban leader .
 U.S. made promise to withdraw missile base from Cuba, Cuba, in exchange for an invasion of Cuba . President Obama also pledged to end the "quarantine," otherwise known as the blockade of Cuba.
 Heads of state: "We are the leaders of the people, and the people do not know everything. But we, as political figures and heads of state, are the . People do not always know everything," he said .
 Some are saying that we did not conduct the necessary consultations with you before reaching the decision you are aware of . Some say that we should have consulted with you more before making the decision . The decision will be made public on Friday .
 Had we continued consultations in such conditions, knowing that the U.S. military wanted to take advantage of the situation to attack Cuba, we would have lost time and they might have succeeded . But had we . continued consultations, knowing . that . the unrestrained warriors of the American military
 In your cable of October 27, you proposed that we should strike the first nuclear blow against enemy territory . You proposed striking the first strike on enemy territory in a cable interview .
 This would not be a simple blow but the beginning of global thermonuclear war . This would be the start of global nuclear war, says the author of the book .
 No doubt the Cuban people would have struggled courageously heroically, as well but no doubt they would have perished . The Cuban people, however, would have died if they had perished, says Cuban president .
 Castro continues to complain about Khrushchev's decision to withdraw missiles . In this letter, Castro says he continues to be critical of the decision . Castro: "I'm not satisfied with his failure to consult with Havana"
 You say we were consulted before the decision was reached to withdraw the strategic projectiles . You say that you were consulted about the decision to withdraw .
 I merely told you that the morale of our people was very high and that we would have resisted an attack heroically. I merely said that . I merely . told you . that morale of the people were very high, and that . we would ... resist heroically .
 We know, don't think we didn't, that we would have been exterminated, as you imply in your letter, if a thermonuclear war had begun . We know that we wouldn't have been able to be exterminated if war had started, says the author .
 "We did not lead us to ask you to withdraw the missiles, to give in. But that did not mean that we asked you to pull them in," says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 You yourself said in the current conditions, a war would very quickly, inevitably, become a thermonuclear war . You yourself yourself said that in the . current . conditions, he said . "In the current ... conditions, you yourself said ... that in . current conditions ... would very
 The destructive power of these weapons is so great, the speed of launching is such that the side that is first to use a nuclear weapon can enjoy a considerable advantage . The nuclear weapons are so destructive they can be launched at great speed .
 The weeklong confrontation between President John F Kennedy and Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev brought the world closer than at any time in history to triggering a nuclear war . All agreed that the world would not go to war, all agreed .
 At the time of the crisis, Gorbachev said in the message, ""it became clear that general human principles must be considered"" in superpower relations . At the same time, the message said that "general human principles" were considered .
 The Cubans had never before met their American counterparts from the days of the missile crisis . The Cuban government had never met their U.S. counterparts before the crisis .
 The document, which was circulated to only 12 people, including Kennedy, was dated Feb. 22, 1962 . The document was circulated only to 12 people including Kennedy .
 At the U.S.-Soviet meeting in Cambridge, McNamara denied that the United States had any plan or ""intent"" to invade Cuba, according to a book-length account .
 Walters interview with Castro will air at 10m on Friday night . Walters interview will be broadcast at 10pm on BBC One .
 The taped interview is the first lengthy televised exchange with Castro since Walters last spoke with him in 1977 . Walters last talked with Castro in 1977, when he was in prison .
 Walters peppers Castro with a variety of questions that begin with Cuba's alleged involvement with terrorism and ends with a synopsis of the Elian Gonzalez saga and its effect on U.S.-Cuba relations .
 Castro responds in a friendly, though sometimes terse tone, using Walters' first name for effect . Castro responds to Walters with a friendly tone . Castro says Walters is "a good guy"
 Castro also briefly discusses the Varela Project, an initiative that calls for a referendum on sweeping democratic reforms . Castro also discusses the initiative, which calls for sweeping reforms, in the interview .
 Castro acknowledged that the Cuban Constitution guarantees citizens a right to gather signatures . But he stopped short of legitimizing the unprecedented effort . Castro acknowledges that citizens have right to collect signatures .
 Cuban President Fidel Castro expected to talk about feeling betrayed by the Soviets . Former U.S. Defense Secretary Robert McNamara expected to hold Cuba partly responsible for tensions . Russians expected to provide details of nuclear missile sites so closely guarded that not even the Cubans had free access to them .
 An intriguing moment should be the meeting of McNamara and Castro, who both have ""hurricane force personalities,"" Blight said .
 McNamara is expected to propose that Cuba assume some of the blame for the missile crisis . McNamara will make the opening presentation for the U.S.
 The U.S. has been honest about the Kennedy administration's secret missions to topple the Castro government, Blight says . But Cuba has stonewalled about its activities shipping weapons and exporting revolution to other countries, he says .
 Kennedy ordered a naval blockade and demanded the removal of the Soviet Union's nuclear missiles in Cuba . Kennedy also ordered a blockade of Cuba after learning of the nuclear missiles .
 Tensions escalated after the shooting down of a U.S. plane over Cuba . Castro ordered his country to prepare for war . Castro: "I'm going to go to war with the United States"
 Khrushchev gave the order to begin dismantling the missiles -virtually ignoring Castro and Cuban concerns . On Oct. 1962, the former Soviet leader ordered the dismantling of the missiles .
 The Havana symposium is the culmination of more than five years of work by the U.S.-Russia-Cuba project . It is the fifth in a series of meetings that have probed decision-making during the missile crisis .
 The first three-way meeting between Soviets, Cubans and Americans took place in Antigua in January 1991 . The meeting paved the way for the high-level Havana meeting .
 McNamara and former Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko participated in one of the conferences, in Moscow, in 1989 . McNamara: "It's a good time for all of us to get back together"
 The United States and Cuba are still frozen in a relationship of mutual mistrust . Although the world context is now completely different -one of the two superpowers involved, the Soviet Union, no longer exists - the U.S. and Cuba still have mutual mistrust.
 The conference begins today with a visit to the spot along the Havana coastline where a solitary Soviet missile stands as a reminder of the October crisis . The conference, which runs through Sunday, begins today .
 Three Russian generals will field questions about nuclear warheads and missile deployment . Three generals will answer questions on nuclear warheads, missile deployment and nuclear weapons .
 The action prompted the United States to begin preparing for an invasion of the island . The U.S. has been preparing for a possible invasion .
 U.S. conference organizers say they detect a lot of repressed anger against the Russians over the missile crisis . Organizers say they expect this will bubble to the surface during the meeting .
 After Castro's presentation, the three sides will have a day and a half to query each other . The three sides are expected to have a long time to come up with questions about each other's answers .
 On Saturday, Castro is expected to return to the meeting for a discussion of the future of U.S.-Russian-Cuban relations . Castro is also expected to discuss future of Cuba-Russia relations .
 Hemingway's home in Cuba from 1939 until shortly before his death in 1961 . The symposium will conclude Sunday at Finca Vigia, Hemingwy's home from 1939 to 1961 . Hemingways' home was his home in Havana, Cuba, until he died
 Former Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara and Arthur Schlesinger, aide to President Kennedy; Gen. Gen. John S. Eisenhower, Gen. Robert S. Robert H. Eisenhower and Gen. Edward Kennedy .
 William Y Smith, Ray S Cline, Edwin M Martin and Raymond L Garthoff are among those named . Former CIA deputy director Ray Cline and former assistant secretary of state for inter-American affairs Edwin Martin .
 Cuba - President Fidel Castro, Defense Minister Raul Castro, Vice President Carlos Rafael Rodriguez; Gen. Gen. Rafael Rodriguez, Gen. Carlos Rafael Rodrado . Cuba - Cuba . Cuba . Castro . Castro. Castro .
 Fabian Escalante, vice minister of the interior; Carlos Lechuga, former ambassador to the U.N. Ex-Ambassador to the United Nations. Fabian E. Escalantes is the vice-deputy minister of interior . Carlos Lchuga is the
 Georgy Shakhnazarov, aide to Mikhail Gorbachev; Oleg Darusenkov, deputy chief of mission in Havana during missile crisis . Oleg Troyanovksy, Khrushchev's special assistant; Alexander Alekseev, former ambassador to
 Gen. Leonid S Garbuz, former deputy commander of all Soviet forces in Cuba, was the Soviet Union's deputy commander in Cuba . Gen. Gen. G. Garbz is a former Soviet commander of Cuban forces .
 Gen. Gribkov, former chief of staff of the Joint Command of the Warsaw Pact, is interviewed by Gen. Vladimir Putin in Moscow . He will appear in a panel of experts from Russia, Ukraine, Russia and the United States .
 Georgy Voronkov is former commander of Soviet forces in Oriente Province . He is the current commander of the Soviet Union's anti-Russian forces in the region of Oriente .