 On October 14, 1962, a U.S. Air Pressure U-2 plane on the photoreconnaissance mission came back with convincing data and evidence that there were Soviet missile bases being built within Cuba .
 The U.S. stated on a global front that it wouldn't permit offensive weapons to be shipped to Cuba and required the Soviets disengage the construction of any and all missile bases already being built or in the process of being built within Cuba .
 Kennedy administration held only a slim hope that their requirements and demands would be met, and expected a more aggressive or even a military response . Kennedy administration expected more aggressive response .
 Premier Nikita Khrushchev authorized a personal telegram to Kennedy that his blockade of navigation in global air space and seas merely instigated an aggressive response . The blockade instigated a response that will most likely channel mankind in the chasm of nuclear-missile war .
 The Soviets openly gave in to the U.S. demands on the forefront . Behind the scenes communications started to present offers and strategies to solve the crisis .
 President Kennedy and UN Secretary-General arrived at a public and secret contract with Khrushchev . This was when President Kennedy . President Kennedy. and UN secretary-general arrived at secret contract . This .
 The Russians agreed to disengage in all construction and use of their offensive weaponry extension in Cuba and send them back towards the U.S. territory, susceptible to UN verification, in return for an American public statement and contract not to invade Cuba . On the global front, the Russians agreed
 The United States agreed it would also disengage all U.S.-built Jupiter IRBMs used in Poultry and Italia . Privately, the United States also agreed to disengage the U.N. built Jupiter IRBs .
 A couple of weeks following the agreement, the Soviets had transported a majority of the missile systems within Cuba as well as their support gear . The Soviets transported the majority of their missile systems .
 It took a total of eight Soviet ships and the transportation started out on November 5th and ended by the 9th . The transportation of the Soviet Union ships took place on November 6th and 11th .
 Russian ships also transported the Soviet Il-28 bombers back to Russia in December . Almost a month later in the first week of December the Russian ships were also transported .
 Poor precision, use and toughness for these missiles elevated serious doubts regarding their effectiveness . Poor precision and toughness of these missiles have raised serious doubts about effectiveness .
 These medium and intermediate-range ballistic missiles could strike the American alliances from various Soviet territories, although not from an area close to America itself . The missiles are believed to be capable of striking the U.S. alliances .
 To meet the threat it faced in 1962, 1963, and 1964, it had few options . But to meet the threats it faced, the government faced few options.
 Khrushchev wanted to unite access the West Berlin region with the Soviet expansee . He wanted full access within the American/British/French-administered democratic territory inside Communist East Germany .
 The East Spanish people and Soviets considered western treatments for some of Berlin a dire risk to the sovereignty of East Germany . East Spain and the Soviet Union considered west treatments a threat to their sovereignty .
 Khrushchev made West Berlin the central battleground for this particular section of the Cold War . Because of this, amongst others, this was a central battleground in West Berlin .
 Khrushchev thought when the Americans didn't do anything within the missile disengagements in Cuba, he could potentially break free into the air space from Berlin using stated missiles like a restraint to western counter-measures in Berlin .
 Khrushchev could demand buying and selling the missiles for and from West Berlin . The U.S. democracy attempted to bargain using the Soviets after realizing the extent and expanse of the missiles .
 Berlin was smartly more essential to penetrate geographically than Cuba, the trade will be a win for Khrushchev . Since Berlin was more essential than Cuba to penetrate, the deal was a big win .
 All the planning and preparation for moving and implementing the use and engagement of missiles were completed within the utmost mysterious approach . All the preparation and preparation was completed in the utmost secrecy .
 Operation Anadyr is the title of the river flowing in to the Bering Ocean, as well as the title for the capital of Chukotsky District, along with a bomber base within the Asian region . The Soviet code title was also a title for Chukotky District
 At the beginning of 1962, several members of the Soviet forces and missile engagement experts travelled with a farming delegation to Havana .
 They attended a conference with another influential Cuban leader Fidel Castro . They attended the conference with other influential Cuban leaders .
 Cuban leadership were built with a strong expectation that the U.S. would aim to take-over Cuba again . The Cuban leadership approved the thought of setting up nuclear missiles in Cuba .