 The bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki with atomic weapons opened a new chapter in warfare . The bombings were the result of the atomic bombs in 1945 .
 Most people in the world hold onto the hope that nuclear weapons will never be used in the future . Most people still believe that the use of nuclear weapons has never been used .
 He knew that the U.S. was trying to oust him from office from the time he began . Obama knew that he was being targeted from the start of his presidency, he said .
 He led a Communist government that the United States didn't particularly want just 90 miles from the country's mainland . The U.S. didn't want his government 90 miles away from the mainland .
 The weak attempt by American-backed Cuban refugees had been an embarrassing defeat . U.S. backed Cuban refugees were defeated in a humiliating defeat .
 Castro knew this would not be the last attempt that the U.S. would make . Castro knew that the United States would make an attempt to take advantage of Cuba .
 He was intent on finding a strong country to ally himself with for protection . He was determined to find a strong nation to ally with for his protection .
 They were not able to create as many nuclear weapons as the U.S. was. The U.N. was able to make as many as the United States was. They were able to .
 The Soviets feared the U.S. had set up nuclear missiles in Turkey . Even more disturbing to the Soviets was the concern that the United States had set them up . The Soviets were concerned about the possibility of setting up nuclear missile bases in Turkey.
 The United States' missiles were capable of reaching across oceans to anywhere in the world . The U.S. missiles were able to reach across oceans . They were also capable of sending missiles over oceans to the world.
 John F Kennedy met with the leader of the Soviet Union, Premier Nikita Khrushchev . Kennedy was President of the U.S. at the time of his presidency . Kennedy met the Soviet leader just after he became President .
 They discussed the possibility of resolving their differences and slowing down the production of nuclear weapons . They also discussed slowing down production of nukes .
 Khrushchev informed members of his government that he believed President Kennedy was going to be a weak president . After this meeting he told members of the government he believed Kennedy would be weak President Kennedy .
 He didn't believe Kennedy was capable of making the decisions that would have to be made to keep America strong . He said he didn't think Kennedy would make the decisions necessary .
 Based on these conclusions, the Soviets decided to form an alliance with the Cubans . The Soviets decided on the basis of these conclusions .
 Cuba would provide the land the Soviets needed to build a nuclear missile base . Cuba provided the land for the Soviets to use as a nuclear base .
 In return, the Soviets would provide the protection and security Castro believed Cuba needed . Castro wanted the Soviets to give him the protection he needed . The Soviets provided the security and protection Castro believed needed .
 By mid-summer of 1962, the Soviets were well on their way to completing a lethal missile system all around the island of Cuba . The Soviet Union was well on its way to complete the system .
 On October 15, a plane flying reconnaissance for the U.S. spotted the construction . Plane flying reconnaissance saw the construction on October 15 .
 The U.S. would not tolerate the missiles in Cuba, President Obama said . After meeting with his top advisors, he contacted the Soviet foreign minister . He contacted him and told him that the United States wouldn't tolerate the missile .
 President Kennedy would prove Khrushchev wrong in his assessment of the president's ability . Now was the time for President Kennedy to prove his ability, Kennedy said .
 President Obama could invade Cuba with military forces and try to defeat the Cubans and Soviets . He could invade the island nation and defeat the Cuban and Soviet Union .
 He announced the discovery of the missiles and his plan to deal with them . He said the missiles will be used to attack the country's enemies .
 He said that he was preparing to set up a blockade around the island of Cuba . He said he was also preparing to establish a blockade .
 If any missile fired from Cuba, it would be taken as an attack upon the U.S. President Barack Obama has said that if any missile was fired from the island, it was taken as a threat .
 People around the world prayed for clear minds to decide the fate of the world . People pray that clear minds decide the future of the planet .
 On October 28, Khrushchev announced that his government would take the missiles apart and bring them back to the Soviet Union . The missiles were taken apart and returned to Russia .
 The United States agreed not to invade Cuba, and the world breathed a sigh of relief . The U.S. agreed to a cease-fire in Cuba .
 Government officials share their fears that a nuclear war had been just minutes away from happening . Government officials later shared their fears of a possible nuclear war .
 Nikita Khrushchev B John F Kennedy C Fidel Castro D Robert Kennedy 3 . Robert Kennedy . Fidel Castro 3. JFK 3. Kennedy .
 Khrushchev was wrong to believe President Kennedy was a weak president . Kennedy was right to think he was weak president, but he wasn't a weak leader .