 It is worth reflecting, however, why the crisis occurred and whether the results should be reconsidered . It's worth reflecting on why it occurred and why the results were reconsidered.
 Nikita Khrushchev was a volatile and unpredictable personality who by 1962 had already encountered serious domestic opposition to his reforms in agriculture and the Soviet bureaucracy .
 In March 1962, during a visit to Bulgaria, he decided to install nuclear missiles on Cuba . The missiles were installed with launch pads, launch pads and almost obsolete IL-28 bombers .
 From Khrushchev's perspective, little had gone right during the three years leading up to the Cuban missile crisis . Little had gone wrong in the years leading to the crisis .
 Khrushchev failed to remove the Americans and their allies from the divided city of Berlin in 1959 and 1961 . He finally gave in to the request of his East German allies to build a wall to prevent a further exodus to the West .
 He had tried to browbeat the young U.S. president at a summit in Vienna in June 1961 . He had also browsed the young United States president .
 U.S. missiles could reach Soviet cities from Turkey, Italy and West Germany . United States territory was not under threat from Soviet weapons . The United States was not threatened by Soviet weapons.
 Soviet missile downed the plane of Gary Powers on May 1, 1960, over Sverdlovsk . U2 planes had violated Soviet airspace and carried out spying missions .
 President Dwight Eisenhower refused to issue an apology for the incident . Even then, Dwight Eisenhower had refused to apologize .
 Khrushchev sought revenge after Fidel Castro led rebels in overthrowing the pro-United States regime of Fulgencio Batista in 1959 . The former Soviet Union leader wanted to exact some revenge .
 Castro's political affiliations were not immediately evident . His brother Raul was a Communist, as was the Argentine revolutionary Che Guevara, who had played a prominent role in the Cuban revolution .
 The abortive Bay of Pigs invasion by Cuban exiles in April 1961, backed by the CIA, was perhaps the turning point for Castro, who adopted the Communist cause . Castro adopted a Communist cause after the CIA backed the invasion .
 He believed that if the Soviets could present the U.S. with a fait accompli, then there could be little reaction, he said .
 The Soviet side succumbed to pressure once it was clear that the Americans intended to respond . Seemingly, the Soviet side had succumbed to the pressure .
 First, he said Kennedy was desperate, claiming that he may well have been overthrown by the U.S. military if the crisis was not overcome . Second, he claimed that the crisis may have been overcome by the crisis .
 General Maxwell Taylor advocated countering any Soviet nuclear response with U.S. nuclear attacks on Cuban military targets . Taylor advocated attacking any Soviet response with United States nuclear attacks .
 President's brother Robert, the attorney general, averted the crisis through talks with Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin . Second, the two leaders acted coolly, while the president's younger brother Robert avoided the crisis by talking with the ambassador .
 Their discussions ignored warmongering official rhetoric and exchanges of notes . They ignored official rhetoric . The discussions ignored official statements and exchanged notes .
 Third, the Soviet side made a collective decision to remove the missiles only with a public guarantee that there would be no U.S. invasion of Cuba . The decision was made with a guarantee that the United States would not invade Cuba .
 The Soviet leader believed that if Soviet blood were shed in Cuba, retaliatory steps would be taken in Berlin . The Soviets believed that the Americans understood that if the U.S. killed Soviet blood was shed, it would be in retaliation .
 Khrushchev ""saved"" Cuba, scoring a significant foreign policy victory for the Soviet Union . In this way, Khrushchev "saved" Cuba . In the 1960s, Cuba was a major ally of the West .
 The international community, as well as the Soviet Presidium, however, saw the crisis somewhat differently . The crisis was centered around the collapse of Yugoslavia in 1991 .
 The threat had come from the Soviet Union, which had turned back its ships once the U.S. imposed the quarantine .
 Cuba was outraged by the Soviets' implicit cowardice . Cuba, as even Khrushchev acknowledges, was outraged . The Soviets were outraged by their cowardice, even though it was not their own .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev did not make this link public . Neither Cuba nor the world made any links between the ships' turnaround and the removal of U.S. Jupiter missiles in Turkey . Kennedy — and, surprisingly, as well, did not reveal this link .
 Within two years, Khrushchev was removed from office in a KGB-led coup . The former Soviet Union leader was removed in a coup by the KGB .
 The Soviet leadership wanted to end the dangerous adventurism of a reckless, irresponsible leader, says Soviet leader . The Soviet leader wanted an end to the 'reckless adventurist' leader, he says .
 Khrushchev was replaced by the bland party leader Leonid Brezhnev and Alexei Kosygin as head of government in 1964 . In 1964, he was replaced with the bland leader of the Soviet Union .
 Perhaps, then, we should simply dismiss Khrushchev's version of the Cuban missile crisis as wishful thinking . Perhaps, perhaps, perhaps we should dismiss the idea of a nuclear missile crisis .
 Cuba's communist leadership has already outlasted the Soviet Union by more than 20 years . Yet 60 years on, the Castros still rule Cuba . The Castros are still ruling the tiny island .
 Because of the success of low-level diplomacy and the terms of the agreement, it was not possible to publicize Soviet gains . The agreement was not publicizing Soviet gains.
 Communism would make significant progress in coming years, partly through decolonization and partly through the U.S. quagmire in Vietnam . The Communist Party would make progress through decolonialization and the United States .
 Soviet prestige and that of its leader,had suffered the most . In the end, Soviet prestige . had suffered most . The Soviet Union suffered most.
 The prevailing image was of a young U.S. president standing up to a crude bully . "The prevailing image is that a young United States president stands up to the crude bully," she said .
 The image of a Soviet moral defeat has prevailed and will always be equated with the ill-fated Khrushchev . It was far from the truth, but the image of the Soviet moral victory has prevailed . The image has prevailed, but it will be never the truth .
 At least 10 independent media outlets have been blocked or closed down over their coverage of the war in Ukraine . At least ten independent media have been closed down or blocked in Ukraine over the conflict .
 Moscow Times needs your help more than ever as we cover the devastating invasion of Russia . The Moscow Times is relying on the help of the Moscow Times to help cover the events in Russia .