 Cuban leader Fidel Castro established the first communist state in the Western Hemisphere in 1959 . Castro led the overthrow of the military dictatorship of Fulgencio Batista in Cuba . Castro's government overthrew the Batista regime in 1959 and ruled Cuba for decades .
 He ruled Cuba for nearly five decades, until handing off power to his younger brother Raúl in 2008 . He ruled over Cuba for almost five decades until handing over power to younger brother .
 Castro's regime was widely criticized for stifling economic and political freedoms . Castro’s regime was successful in reducing illiteracy, stamping out racism and improving public health care .
 The two nations officially normalized relations in July 2015, ending a trade embargo that had been in place since 1960 . U.S.-owned businesses in Cuba were nationalized without compensation .
 Castro was born on August 13, 1926, in Birán, a small town in eastern Cuba . He was born in 1926 . Castro is one of Cuba's most prominent leaders .
 His mother was a domestic servant for his father’s family who bore him out of wedlock . He was born into a family of domestic servants . His father's family bore him to a woman who was a servant .
 Two years later, he ran for election to the Cuban House of Representatives . He ran for office in the Cuban Senate .
 The election never happened, however, because Batista seized power that March . Batista took control of Cuba in 1959 . The election was never held .
 Castro was captured and sentenced to 15 years in prison, many of his men were killed . The assault failed and Castro was sentenced to a 15-year prison sentence .
 The U.S.-backed Batista, looking to counter his authoritarian image, subsequently released Castro in 1955 . Castro was released as part of a general amnesty by the Batista government .
 Castro ended up in Mexico, where he met fellow revolutionary Ernesto "Che" Guevara and plotted his return . The following year, Castro and 81 other men sailed on the yacht “Granma” to the eastern coast of Cuba, where government forces immediately amb
 The estimated 19 survivors, including Castro, his brother Raúl and Guevara, fled deep into the Sierra Maestra Mountains in southeastern Cuba with virtually no weapons or supplies . The small band of survivors rearmed itself by launching raids on small army posts .
 By early 1957 they were already attracting recruits and winning small battles against Rural Guard patrols . The Rural Guard was losing small battles with Rural Guards .
 In 1958, Batista tried to snuff out the uprising with a massive offensive, complete with air force bombers and naval offshore units . Batista also tried to kill off the uprising in 1958, but was defeated .
 The guerrillas held ground, launched a counterattack and wrested control from Batista on January 1, 1959 . Batista was overthrown by the guerillas on New Year's Day .
 Castro arrived in Havana a week later and soon took over as prime minister . Castro arrived a week after arriving in Havana and took over the Cuban government .
 In 1960, Castro nationalized all U.S.-owned businesses, including oil refineries, factories and casinos . At the same time, revolutionary tribunals began trying and executing members of the old regime .
 This prompted the United States to end diplomatic relations and impose a trade embargo that still stands today . The U.S. ended diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union and imposed an embargo .
 In April 1961, about 1,400 Cuban exiles trained and funded by the CIA landed near the Bay of Pigs with the intent of overthrowing Castro . Meanwhile, in May 1961, the CIA funded the operation to overthrow Castro .
 A first wave of bombers missed their targets and a second air strike was called off . Their plans ended in disaster, however, partially because of a first wave missing their targets . Second air strike called off after a second wave of bombing missed targets .
 Castro freed them in exchange for medical supplies and baby food worth about $52 million . Castro publicly declared himself a Marxist-Leninist in late 1961 . In December 1962, Castro freed the freed prisoners in exchange of medical supplies .
 Cuba was becoming increasingly dependent on the Soviet Union for economic and military support . Ostracized by the United States, Cuba was dependent on Soviet support . Cuba was forced to rely on the USSR for economic, military support in the 1980s .
 After 13-day standoff, Khrushchev agreed to remove nukes against the wishes of Castro . Castro was left out of the negotiations .
 Castro abolished legal discrimination, brought electricity to the countryside, provided for full employment and advanced the causes of education and health care . In return, U.S. President John F Kennedy publicly consented not to reinvade Cuba .
 He closed down opposition newspapers, jailed thousands of political opponents and made no move toward elections . But he also closed down newspapers, closed down thousands of opposition newspapers .
 He limited the amount of land a person could own, abolished private business and presided over housing and consumer goods shortages . He also abolished private businesses .
 From the 1960s to the 1980s, Castro supplied military and financial aid to various leftist guerilla movements in Latin America and Africa . With political and economic options so limited, hundreds of thousands of Cubans left Cuba, often for the United States .
 Relations with many countries, with the notable exception of the United States, began to normalize . Meanwhile, relations with many nations, including the U.S., have also been normalizing .
 Cuba’s economy foundered when the Soviet Union collapsed in the early 1990s . The United States expanded sanctions even further after the collapse of Soviet Union .
 Castro was able to cling to power until 2006, when he temporarily gave control of the government to Raúl after undergoing emergency intestinal surgery . Castro, who by this time had switched his title from prime minister to president, found new trading partners .
 In 2008, Cuban President Castro permanently resigned from his post in Cuba . In 2015, U.S. and Cuban officials announced they had agreed to terms on normalization of relations .
 His death was announced on state television and later confirmed by his brother Raúl . The death of his brother was announced by state television on Monday .
 The Castro family controlled Cuba for nearly 60 years . Fidel Castro took over Cuba from the British government in 1953 . Castro was the first Cuban president .
 The island nation has been dominated by the specter of its former dictator, Fidel Castro, and his family . But in April 2018, it was announced that the island nation will get a new leader .
 The trip was part of Castro’s victory lap after toppling the dictatorship of Fulgencio Batista . John F Kennedy became one of the youngest U.S. presidents, as well as the first Roman Catholic .
 The Bay of Pigs Invasion in April 1961 was a failed attack launched by the CIA during the Kennedy administration to push Cuban leader Fidel Castro from power . He was born into one of America’s wealthiest families and parlayed an elite education .
 On January 1, 1959, a young Cuban nationalist named Fidel Castro drove his Cuban nationalist army into Havana . The United States and the Soviet Union fought together as allies against the Axis powers in World War II .
 The Bay of Pigs Invasion was a failed attack on the southwestern coast of Cuba in April 1961 by CIA-led Cuban exiles who opposed Fidel Castro's Cuban Revolution . Americans had long been wary of Soviet communism and concerned about Russian leader Joseph Stalin’s .