 Scientists and military involved with the Manhattan Project had worked nonstop to build a nuclear bomb . The blinding flash of light, intense burst of heat and deafening boom let them know they had succeeded . Celebrations after the first detonation were short-lived .
 World War II had officially ended in Europe on May 8, 1945, two months before the Trinity test . The initial goal of the secret projec­­t was to build a bomb before Germany could, but the war ended in 1945 . The Trinity test was the first to be
 The decision to use the bomb on the Japanese cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki instead confused many many . The decision was made to bomb the Japanese city of Hiroshima .
 Some believed the device saved lives by ending ground combat and air strikes . Others felt Japan was ready to surrender anyway . The Soviet Union was about to join the United States by declaring war on the Japanese .
 Many s­cientists, including Niels Bohr and Robert Oppenheimer, felt it best to allow a ""free interchange of information" of atomic knowledge . Many s-cientists felt it would be best to let the exchange of information .
 Enough was known in the world of physics for the Russians to build a bomb eventually, with or without help from the U.S. The Russians were able to build their own bomb in the 1950s .
 withholding information might upset political ties between the two countries, both were major superpowers . withholding information could upset political relations between the U.S. and Japan .
 Growing distrust of communism had already formed within many Americans by the end of the war . Some wanted to keep nuclear secrets out of Soviet hands . On the other hand, many Americans had a growing distrust of Communism .
 An American monopoly on nuclear weapons would make Russia more manageable from a political standpoint . It was this kind of tension that sparked a nuclear arms race, which several nations tested a myriad of nuclear technology .
 The Atomic Energy Commission was established in the aftermath of Hiroshima and Nagasaki . It was an attempt to disarm any and all nuclear weapons .
 Acheson-Lilienthal Report suggested an international 'Atomic Development Authority' that would control a monopoly on weapons and information .
 A subsequent revision of the report called the Baruch Plan was nearly the same, except it included harsh penalties for nations who violated the plan's rules . The Soviets rejected the plan outright, arguing that the U.S. was too far ahead in weapons development .
 Americans, according to the Soviets, would use this lead to their advantage . Americans would use the lead to lead the Soviet Union in the world .
 Soviet-American relations were already in sharp decline by 1946 . Russia suggested the complete disarmament of nuclear weapons .
 The Baruch Plan wasn't delivered until June of that year, a breakdown in relations between the two nations was well under way . The United States went right back to business with testing nuclear bombs .
 In July, the military invited a large gathering of press members, congressmen and military officers to demonstrate a nuclear bomb's effect on large fleets of Navy ships . The military invited the public to see the effects of the bomb on Navy ships in July .
 These tests were airborne and underwater attempts at Bikini Atoll in the Marshall Islands, located in the Pacific Ocean . These tests, under the name ""Operation Crossroads,"" were airborne, underwater attempts . Operation Crossroads was known as Operation Operation Crossroad .
 The first test on July 1, called Shot ABLE, performed as well as the Trinity and Nagasaki bombs, but a missed target made it less impressive . The test is the first of its kind .
 The blast destroyed or damaged 74 empty ships, shooting thousands of tons of water into the air . The blast was the largest blast known to hit the Philippines in the early 1980s .
 Third nuclear test cancelled after dangerous levels of radiation spread around the area . Third test cancelled due to radiation levels spreading around area .
 The display succeeded in demonstrating the power of the bomb to a much wider audience . It was the first time the bomb had been used in a public display in the UK .
 Klaus Fuchs was among the British scientists working at Los Alamos during the Manhattan Project . He was born in Germany and worked in Germany during the Second World War II .
 Fuchs had been passing information about nuclear bombs to the Soviet Union since 1945 . Officials didn't find out until 1948, but Fuchs passed on information to the Soviets .
 By August 1949, the Soviets detonated their own atomic bomb, nicknamed ""Joe 1"" by Americans after Russian leader Joseph Stalin, in Kazakhstan . With the Soviets successfully testing their own nuclear weapons, the race was on .
 Little more than a month after the ""Joe 1"" test, the U.S. began expanding its production of uranium and plutonium . The United States began expanding production of plutonium and uranium .
 Initially, scientists working for the Manhattan Project considered two possible designs for an atomic bomb . The Manhattan Project was based on the idea of a design for a bomb .
 They eventually chose to create a fission bomb, in which neutrons fired toward the nuclei of uranium or plutonium set off a massive chain reaction . The bomb was created by the Soviets in 1945 .
 A physicist at Los Alamos, Edward Teller, suggested a thermonuclear fusion bomb, or hydrogen bomb . A hydrogen bomb is a type of nuclear weapon that could be used in a nuclear war .
 A fusion bomb operates by forcing together deuterium and tritium, two light isotopes of hydrogen, to create a fusion bomb . The bomb is made from two light atoms of hydrogen .
 The resulting explosion would be theoretically many times more than that of a fission device, and almost without limit . It would be almost as large as a nuclear bomb .
 The U.S. detonated the world's first hydrogen bomb, code-named ""Mike," on the Enewetak Atoll of the Marshall Islands in 1952 .
 Klaus Fuchs had delivered early information on the hydrogen bomb designs along with the fission bomb information . By late 1955 the Soviets tested their own design, and by late 1955 they had tested the design .
 The satellite was the first object to be launched into space by an intercontinental ballistic missile . The achievement caused a great scare in the United States if the Soviets could put a satellite into space, they could do the same thing with a nuclear warhead .
 The 1950s also included the expansion of the nuclear ""club,"" or the group of nations with tested nuclear weapons . Now, a missile could hit a target in less than an hour .
 England and the U.S. worked together with the United States on the nuclear bomb design . Their contributions were mainly theoretical .
 The English tested their first nuclear bomb off the coast of Australia in 1952 . The real dangers didn't become evident until the next decade . This changed on Oct. 31, 1952 .
 The fi­rst half of the 1960s turned out to be one of the most trying eras of the nuclear arms race .
 France and China joined the nuclear weapons ""club"" by testing their own designs . Between 1960 and 1964, both countries tested their own nuclear weapons .
 The Soviets tested the most powerful bomb ever exploded, a 58-megaton atmospheric hydrogen ­bomb . The most powerful weapon ever exploded .
 Eisenhower warned of the dangers of the military-industrial complex . The term is a broad term that describes the large network of individuals and institutions working on weapons and military technology .
 A growing awareness of tensions between nations, especially the United States and Russia, was only adding more heat to the Cold War . The Cold War was a Cold War of Cold War.
 At one point, Americans were encouraged by President Kennedy to build or buy their very own bomb shelters to avoid a nuclear attack .
 One of the first major scares of the race began with the failed Bay of Pigs invasion in Cuba in April 1961 . People listened, and a year-long frenzy of shelter construction consumed many Americans .
 New president John F Kennedy approved a CIA plan to overthrow the Cuban government and replace the country's leader, Fidel Castro, with a non-communist government .
 The CIA trained a group of Cuban exiles to invade the country . The invasion ended quickly once bombers missed targets and the invaders were either killed or captured .
 The missiles were pointed at the U.S. and a nuclear warhead could easily reach America in a short amount of time . The missiles are pointed at a short distance from the United States, which is located in Alaska .
 The Soviets finally agreed to withdraw the weapons, but this marked the closest the world had come to nuclear war . The United States and the Soviet Union recognized the concept known as mutual assured destruction .
 As the '60s ended, more efforts were made toward slowing or stopping the nuclear arms race . This was the only thing that kept both nations from attacking each other .
 The two rivals installed a ""hot line"" to facilitate discussion in the event of another close call . The two teams have installed a 'hot line' to discuss the outcome of a close-call .
 In July 1968, the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons was signed in Washington, D.C., Moscow and London . It was signed with the aim of preventing any nation without nuclear weapons from acquiring them .
 The first Strategic Arms Limitation Talks between the U.S. and Soviet Union began in November 1969 . By May 1972 President Nixon and Leonid Brezhnev signed a series of treaties, including the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty .
 The limitation of ABMs became an important step - although they were defense systems, an excess of anti-ballistic missiles actually encouraged offense . The limitation was an important move -although they were . Although they were a defense system, they were also encouraging offense .
 If one country knew it had a better chance of stopping attacks than the other, it would have less to lose in a nuclear war . A nuclear war would be more likely to break out if the two countries were at risk of each other .
 With the ABM Treaty, the United States and the Soviet Union agreed to maintain just two ABM sites each . Despite perceived improvements in international relations, everything wasn't exactly rosy .
 A United States development in nuclear weapon technology during this era was multiple independently targetable reentry vehicles - single missiles that could target multiple cities with several nuclear warheads . The U.S. development of nuclear weapons technology during the era was .
 MIRVs could easily overcome a limited defense system comprised of only two ABMs . Only two of the two MIRV systems could be capable of intercepting only two of these missiles .
 The ABM Treaty never addressed this innovation, and during the '70s America and the Soviets would add more than 12,000 nuclear weapons to their stocks .
 By the end of the '70s, tensions between the U.S. and Soviet Union began to rise once again .
 A second series of talks ended in 1979 with the signing of the SALT II treaty, which recognized MIRVs . The treaty set limits on the number of weapons a country could have and the rate at which technology could move forward .
 The decade also ended with a scare when the nuclear power plant at Three Mile Island suffered a partial meltdown in 1979 . President Jimmy Carter, who originally signed the treaty, pulled out of the agreement in January 1980 .
 The accident, located near Harrisburg, Penn., caused 140,000 residents to flee the ­area . 140,500 residents fled the area after hearing news of the first major nuclear power accident .
 Two more countries joined the nuclear ""club"" in the '70s . No one was injured or killed during the accident, but the event heightened fears of nuclear power .
 The test still received negative international attention as yet another country emerged with nuclear capabilities . Pakistan, India's longtime rival, responded with their own tests soon after .
 With the election of President Ronald Reagan in 1981, military spending became a top priority for the U.S. military .
 Reagan referred to the Soviet Union as an ""evil empire" by Reagan . Cold War rhetoric increased dramatically during the Cold War .
 The controversial program was eventually­ abandoned because it was too complicated and expensive . Also known as ""Star Wars,"" the plan hoped to design a complex anti-ballistic missile system .
 Despite this, the Americans were still far ahead of the Soviets in technology and funds . Mikhail Gorbachev, Russia's leader at the time, was pushing more for peace .
 As Soviet-American relations began to improve by the late '80s, the Soviet economy was on the verge of a collapse .
 The wall was a longtime symbol of the tensions between the Soviets and the U.S. The Cold War effectively ended two years later when the Soviet Union ceased to exist .
 The Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty was quickly reintroduced for consideration . The plan had begun during the Reagan administration, but disagreements led to a standstill on its ratification .
 Nations made gradual improvements after the Cold War to­ward disarm­ament . But complications continued to emerge during the '90s and into the 21st century .
 Nations including China and India continued to test weapons on and off despite a general movement toward the end of such acts . Nations including India and China and China tested weapons in the past year .
 The U.S., Russia, Britain, France, China, India and Pakistan are suspected to have nuclear programs or have actively pursued weapons . Other nations are suspected or actively pursuing nuclear weapons .
 Please copy/paste the following text to properly cite this HowStuffWorks.com article . Copy John Fuller ""How the Nuclear Arms Race Works"" 24 January 2008 .