 Photographs taken by an American U-2 spy plane over western Cuba on 14 October revealed a missile launching ramp under construction . U.S. spy plane captured the images .
 Khrushchev's assurances that Soviet military aid to Cuba was only for defence against any U.S. invasion . This was contrary to his assurances that the aid was only to defend against any United States invasion .
 Kennedy imposed a naval blockade to stop Soviet ships carrying missiles from reaching Cuba, and prepared to invade the island . The blockade was imposed by the President of the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev ordered his ships and their submarine escorts to sail straight through the American fleet . He told Soviet forces to resist any U.S. landing . The Soviet leader ordered the ships and escorts sail through the United States .
 Within weeks all missile sites on Cuba were demolished . Khrushchev backed down, the Soviet ships reversed course, and within weeks were all sites were destroyed .
 The free world hailed President Kennedy as a hero who, in an eyeball-toeyeball confrontation with the Communists, had made Khrushchev blink . President Kennedy was hailed a hero by the free world .
 Leaders who took part in the Cuban missile crisis who are still alive now agree that at the time they greatly underestimated the danger . The truth is even more terrifying, writes David Frum .
 The fact is that all the leaders and their advisers during the missile crisis were guilty of misconstruing each other's beliefs, intentions, determination and military strength .
 The crisis developed its own momentum until the danger that all-out nuclear war might be started by a second lieutenant became very real . The crisis became more and more serious in the 1980s .
 Soviet nuclear missiles had already arrived in Cuba at the time of the crisis . The Soviet Union had already sent nuclear missiles to Cuba .
 One theory is that the Cuban revolution aroused a powerful sentiment in die-hard Bolshevik leaders . The Cuban revolution is thought to have aroused a strong sentiment .
 Khrushchev's son, Sergei, says that when the Cubans crushed the CIA-sponsored invasion at the Bay of Pigs in April 1961, 'not only the government but the people viewed them as heroes, being next door to the huge neighbour'
 General Boris Surikov, a missile expert, told us the story . Khrushchev and his Defence Minister, Rodion Malinovsky, were at Khrushchchev's estate on the Black Sea .
 The best witness on Khrushchev's motives is probably Alexander Alexeyev, the Soviet ambassador in Cuba at the time and a personal friend of Castro . The best testimony is probably from the Russian ambassador to Cuba in 1959 .
 I said Fidel's strategy to defend the revolution was based on the growing solidarity of world public opinion for Cuba . Fidel Castro's strategy is based on growing solidarity with the Cuban people, I said .
 Devised by General Simeon Ivanov, deputy chief of the Soviet general staff, it was only recently emerged . Details of the document have not been revealed .
 The U.S. deployed mediumrange R-12 missiles and long range R-14 missiles in various locations scattered around the island . It deployed medium and long-range missiles and medium range missiles .
 By the time of the crisis, 36 nuclear warheads were available for these missiles . This was sufficient to destroy all important American military targets and East Coast cities, along with their inhabitants .
 Khrushchev briefed the man who was to be commander of the Soviet forces in Cuba, General Issa Pliyev, a famous battle-front officer in the Second World War . The question arose over who could order the firing of these missiles .
 The strategic missiles those capable of reaching the U.S. would remain under the control of the commander-in-chief, Khrushchev . The strategic missile system would be controlled by the commander in-chief .
 Khrushchev gave Pliyev permission to employ nine tactical Luna missiles for the immediate defence of Cuba in the event of a U.S. invasion .
 If the Soviets fired nuclear missiles at U.S. troops then America would have replied with an attack on the Soviet Union and a full-scale nuclear war would have followed . No one we spoke to doubts doubts that if the Soviets had fired . missiles at United States troops .
 The first freighter, the Maria Ulianov, arrived in Cuba on 26 July, followed by nine others during the next four days .
 Weapons and equipment that looked like agricultural goods were unloaded around the clock . The operation was dubbed Operation Operation Unite .
 Tanks, missiles and special military equipment were only unloaded only at night . Tanks and missiles were unloaded only during the night . Special military equipment was only unloaded in the dark .
 Soviet troops were sent to their designated areas wearing Cuban army uniforms . All commands were spoken in Spanish during the operation .
 The use of so many ships from the Soviet merchant fleet meant that there were not enough for normal trade . The Soviet government had to go to the international charter market to make up the shortfall .
 Philippe de Vosjoli, the Washington station chief for the French intelligence service, visited Cuba in August . In the close-knit shipping world this did not go unnoticed, but it did not come until August .
 Although they wore civilian clothing in public, most seemed to have chosen identical check shirts .
 De Vosjoli collected several reports of missiles being unloaded and transported . He passed on this information to the director of the CIA, John McCone . McCone put together a list of the movements of Soviet cargo ships to Cuba .
 He concluded that Moscow was up to something new and different in Cuba . The Kremlin was up for something new in Cuba, he said .
 At a meeting on 22 August the president brought up McCone's memorandum . Over the objections of his senior officers, he wrote to the Kennedy the same day voicing his suspicions .
 Kennedy did not believe Khrushchev would take such a risk, since the U.S. had 5,000 ballistic missiles to the Soviet Union's 300 . Kennedy believed that the United States would not be willing to take a risk . The United States did not want to take risk,
 Defence chiefs had to draw up a contingency plan to deal with a situation in Cuba . Soviet nuclear missiles were deployed in Cuba in the 1950s .
 Soviet troops could not cope with the heat, humidity and mosquitoes . Attempts to speed up the construction of the launch pads failed because of the heat .
 Moscow then decided to send an eight-man delegation from the Defence Ministry to supervise the work . Moscow then sent a delegation of senior officers from the defence Ministry to oversee it .
 The missile divisions must only be used with the personal approval of Khrushchev . The missile division must also be approved by the president of the Soviet Union . The division must be approved with the approval of the president .
 The delegation's trip to Cuba could be seen as an omen for the whole of Operation Anadyr . The trip is expected to take place in the next few weeks .
 It left Moscow on 14 October on an Aeroflot TU-114 for Havana with a refuelling stop at Dakar in Senegal . The plane left Moscow in October on a flight from Moscow to Havana .
 Over the Mediterranean one of the aircraft's engines fell off and the group had to start all over again . The plane was flying over the Mediterranean when the engine fell off during the flight .
 On approach to Havana we were repeatedly circled by U.S. Air Force planes . One even made a mock attack run on the Cuban capital .
 Moscow, meanwhile, was putting out a barrage of lies to mislead the U.S. Americans . Moscow put out a series of lies, including the lies of the Russian president, Vladimir Putin .
 On 4 September, the Soviet ambassador in Washington, who knew nothing about the missiles, told Robert Kennedy that Khrushchev had asked him to assure him that he would not place any offensive missiles in Cuba . Dobrynin repeated this promise to Theodore Sorensen, the president's
 In response to these false assurances, Kennedy now made two major mistakes . Kennedy now makes false assurances about the future of the country .
 New orders for the pre-positioning of troops, aircraft, ships, and other equipment and supplies were brought to a state of readiness . Kennedy later insisted he had no intention of implementing them .
 Castro failed to consider how these preparations would appear to Castro, Castro says . Castro says he didn't consider how it would appear in Castro's Cuba .
 CIA experts in a National Photographic Interpretation Centre laboratory, hidden over a car dealer's showroom not far from Capitol Hill, began to examine the film . The film was flown to Washington, and on the morning of Monday 15 October 15 October a team of CIA experts examined it .
 Oleg Penkovsky brought to the West was a Soviet military manual dealing with the construction of missile sites . But to an expert, the photograph was a revelation .
 CIA had been able to identify what its experts called 'the foot-print' for each type of missile site . Like all military machines, the Soviet one did things strictly according to the manual .
 McGEORGE BUNDY, the national security adviser, went to the White House the next morning, Tuesday 16 October, and broke the news to the president while he was having breakfast .
 At 11.50am the president chaired a meeting in the Cabinet room at the White House . The president chaired the meeting in a meeting at 11.51am .
 Those present, the civilian and military leaders of the US, were to become 'ExComm', the executive committee of the National Security Council . Those present were to be part of the 'exComm', an executive committee that was to become the 'National Security Council'
 The dominant feeling at the meeting was shocked surprise. They were to meet mostly in a windowless conference room at the State Department almost continuously throughout the crisis .
 The intelligence community, in its national estimate of the future course of events, had advised the president on four occasions that the Russians would not make offensive weapons available to Cuba .
 The feeling of the meeting was that some form of action was required and that a surprise air strike against the missiles would be the only course . A surprise strike is the only way to deal with the missile threat, the source said .