 Authors of Strategic Studies Institute publications enjoy full academic freedom, provided they do not disclose classified information, jeopardize operations security, or misrepresent official United States policy .
 Academic freedom empowers them to offer new and sometimes controversial perspectives in the interest of furthering debate on key issues . Such academic freedom is important for academic freedom in the world, says Simon Tisdall .
 Army War College,Strategic Studies Institute,122 Forbes Avenue,Carlisle,PA,17013-5244 9.0101 . Army War War College is based at the Strategic Studies Institute .
 Ambassador to NATO, for his interest in the importance of identifying and understanding the role of mindsets in the analysis of foreign intelligence and the formation and implementation of foreign policy .
 As the first Research Fellow with the Scowcroft Institute at the George Bush School of Government and Public Service, I am indebted to Brent Scoucroft for the privilege of serving in his institute .
 Sherman Kent for the privilege of serving in the Office of National Estimates during this historic crisis of the Cold War .
 Each newsletter contains a strategic commentary by one of our research analysts . Each newsletter also provides a strategic analysis by one research analyst .
 Kenneth Absher argues that the U.S. should not hesitate to undertake risky intelligence collection operations, including espionage, to penetrate our adversary’s deceptions . He argues that, when our national security is at stake, the United States should engage in risky operations .
 The U.S. must also understand that our adversary may not believe the gravity of our policy warnings or may not allow its own agenda to be influenced by United States diplomatic pressure . At the same time, the United States must understand that .
 The author provides in-depth analysis of the failures and successes of the national intelligence community and executive leadership during the buildup to the confrontation . The author is a student of and key participant in the events of the crisis .
 From his analysis, the author suggests considerations relevant to the collection, analysis, and use of intelligence which have continuing application . The author suggests that the author of this article should use his analysis of intelligence to make his point .
 The author was assigned to Sherman Kent’s Office of National Estimates after completing his Central Intelligence Agency Junior Officer Training Program in June 1962 . The author has worked for the CIA since 1962 .
 He was a participant in drafting of every National Intelligence Estimate on Cuba and the Soviet military build-up from June 1962 to February 1963 . He was one of the architects of the U.S. intelligence community in Cuba .
 This paper describes how the crisis unfolded using the author’s personal recollection, declassified documents, and many memoirs written by senior CIA officers and others who were participants .
 Lessons learned include the need to avoid having our political, analytical and intelligence mind-sets prevent us from acquiring and accurately analyzing intelligence about our adversaries true plans and intentions .
 When our national security is at stake, we should not hesitate to undertake risky intelligence collection operations including espionage, to penetrate our adversary’s deceptions, says the U.S. President .
 "We must also understand that our adversaries may not believe the gravity of our policy warnings or allow their own agendas to be influenced"
 The U.S. Intelligence Community issued a failed SNIE on September 19, 1962, stating Khrushchev would not place offensive missiles in Cuba . Lacking hard intelligence to the contrary, the American Intelligence Community also issued a SNIE .
 The Soviets had never before placed such missiles outside the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the Warsaw Pact . The IC believed that Khrushchev would not run the risk of a U.S. military response to such a provocation .
 U-2 flights directly over Cuba risked being shot down by Soviet surface-to-air missiles . The U.S. overcame a political mind-set against scheduling flights over Cuba to avoid Soviet missile attacks .
 Intelligence from an espionage agent was used by the historic U-2 flight to photograph the SS-4 medium range missiles being installed in western Cuba . The flight was the first flight to fly over Cuba from Cuba to Cuba .
 The IC told the President how much time he had before each missile site became operational . An analysis of this and subsequent U-2 photography enabled the IC to tell the President about the President's time to prepare for each missile .
 Nikita Khrushchev agreed to withdraw missiles, bombers, and nuclear weapons after being convinced that the U.S. was preparing to launch a massive bombing and invasion of Cuba . The Soviet leader agreed to pull the missiles and bombers from Cuba .
 There was a last minute understanding that Jupiter missiles would probably be withdrawn later from Turkey if Soviet missiles were first withdrawn from Cuba . Jupiter missiles were probably withdrawn later in Turkey .
 This monograph will discuss and analyze the different mind-sets, or fixed mental attitudes, which policymakers and other officials brought to the task of analyzing intelligence and making foreign policy decisions . It will also discuss the different minds-sets and attitudes of policymakers .
 Kennedy’s perceived lack of confidence during the failed Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba in April 1961, was one reason Khrushchev thought he could get away with placing the offensive missiles in Cuba .
 Khrushchev believed history was on the side of socialism and communism . He believed capitalism and constitutional democracy were weak and would be defeated by communism .
 In Khrushchev’s mind-set, the extra-human forces of “history” were major drivers of political, economic, and foreign policy decisions . He demonstrated that he was prepared to be an obedient agent of these forces, regardless of the risk of war and
 As an agent of forces that promote violent change, he realized the utility of engaging in diplomacy as a means of possibly buying time to prepare for violent change . He also realized that diplomacy could be used to acquire allies .
 Khrushchev would not place such missiles in Cuba because the Soviets had never before placed such offensive missiles outside the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the Warsaw Pact . For its part, the American Intelligence Community had a status quo mind-set .
 American Intelligence also thought that Khrushchev would not risk provoking the strong U.S. reaction which would certainly be generated by placing such missiles (with their nuclear warheads) in Cuba . American Intelligence thought that . would not . risk provoking a strong United States reaction .
 Khrushchev, however, did not see it the way we thought he would, or the way he should . Khrushchevski was not the president of the Soviet Union, but he was the prime minister of the time .
 Kennedy was unsuccessful in the 16-month aftermath of the failed June 1961 Vienna Summit in efforts to disabuse Khrushchev of his erroneous mind-set .
 Khrushchev remained convinced that Kennedy was weak, and the U.S. was doomed by history to be defeated by socialism and ultimately by communism, he said . Khrushchevski was convinced that the United States, as a capitalist state, was doomed to defeat .
 Khrushchev stepped back from the brink of general nuclear war . Only when confronted by the growing certainty of a U.S. bombing and invasion of Cuba, he did he choose not to go nuclear .
 There was also a mind-set of American intelligence and policy officials that favored intelligence from technical sources, while downgrading information from human sources such as clandestine espionage agents .
 This mind-set was formed in part by the larger volume and greater familiarity with intelligence collected from overt technical platforms such as vehicles, ships, aircraft, and satellites .
 U.S. Air Force used inflated assessments of Soviet nuclear and missile strength to defend its budget . Air Force's inflated assessment of Soviet strength was part of a mind-set, author says .
 Oleg Penkovsky, a Soviet Military Intelligence officer jointly run by the Central Intelligence Agency and British intelligence . This information was not given the credibility it deserved until it was confirmed by satellite reconnaissance .
 There was also a delay in authorizing critical U-2 flights over the interior of Cuba . The U.S. policy mind-set was also behind the delay in approving the flights .
 This mind-set was fearful of the political and diplomatic consequences of Soviet surface to air missiles shooting down a U-2 on the eve of the 1962 U.S. mid-term elections . The U.2 was shot down by Soviet missiles in 1962 .
 Director of Central Intelligence John McCone insisted on resuming flights in time to discover the missiles before they had become operational . This mindset was finally overcome at the insistence of Director of . Intelligence John . McCone .
 Using earlier Corona photography of missiles inside the USSR and the top secret operating manuals of the SS-4 and SS-5 missiles which had been clandestinely photographed by Penkovsky, the CIA and MI-6 were able to identify the missiles being installed and determine when each missile site would
 President knew how much time he had to formulate a policy to convince Khrushchev to remove 3 missiles before having to take direct military action .
 There was also a U.S. policy mind-set which sought revenge for the April 1961 defeat of the Bay of Pigs operation aimed at overthrowing Castro .
 This operation was pursued vigorously despite intelligence indicating that efforts to create an internal opposition strong enough to overthrow Castro were just not working . This operation is pursued vigorously, despite intelligence that it was not working, according to sources .
 Once the missiles were discovered, President Kennedy was unwavering in his policy commitment to remove the missiles from Cuba . The author and others in the Office of National Estimates say he was clear to the author that the U.S. needed to remove them .
 The President announced this policy to the world in a remarkable crisis speech on October 22, 1962 . The speech was made by President Richard Nixon .
 White House briefings from intelligence officials indicated missiles must be removed, officials say . One staff says the missiles were removed from the White House .
 A U.S. bombardment and airborne invasion of Cuba were within 48 to 72 hours of being launched, author says . Khrushchev announced publicly on October 28, 1962, that he would remove the missiles .
 On November 20, 1962, he also announced that he would withdraw the Soviet IL-28 bombers and the tactical nuclear weapons that had also been sent to Cuba . The decision was made in 1962 .
 At the insistence of the DCI, U-2 reconnaissance flights resumed over the interior of Cuba . In the end, faulty intelligence assessments and erroneous policies were overcome .
 The U-2 photographed the first SS-4 missile site on October 14 . Using intelligence provided clandestinely by an on-island espionage agent, the U.2 photographed it . The site was photographed by a U.S. Navy ship .
 The year 1961 was not a good year for the U.S. in the Cold War . The seeds of this year's crisis were planted in the United States .
 On April 12, Soviet Cosmonaut Major Yuri Gagarin was the first person to orbit the earth in outer space . The first time he was in space was April 12 .
 This event fueled speculation that the Soviets were ahead of the U.S. in the development of ballistic missiles . The Soviets were believed to have been developing ballistic missiles at the time .
 Counterintelligence failure came to light when British intelligence officer George Blake was arrested for espionage on April 4 . A counterintelligence failure was revealed after Blake's arrest for espionage was revealed .
 He had been working for the Soviet Committee for State Security since 1953 . He had worked for the committee since 1953.
 CIA-trained and equipped Cuban exiles invaded Cuba in an attempt to overthrow Castro . There was also the tragic failure at the Bay of Pigs, as CIA trained and equipped exiles tried to overthrow the Castro regime .
 Planning for the operation began in 1960, with President Eisenhower’s concurrence, and President Kennedy approved it . Planning for this operation began with the approval of President Kennedy .
 Khrushchev’s unilateral resumption of nuclear testing in the atmosphere in early September contrary to the promise he made to Kennedy at the Vienna summit . Other threatening events included the building of the Berlin Wall on August 13, 1961; the threat to turn over access to West Berlin to
 Colonel Oleg Penkovsky was a Soviet army officer . He was assigned to the Glavnoe Razvedyvatelnoe Upravlenie . He served in the Soviet Army .
 On April 20, 1961, he arrived in London as the head of a sixman Soviet delegation from the State Committee for the Coordination of Scientific Research Work . He was a member of the Soviet delegation to London .
 This committee served as a cover for KGB and GRU officers who were conducting espionage to steal Western technology . This committee was used to spy on Western technology in the Soviet Union .
 Penkovsky had the intent of volunteering his services to the CIA and MI-6 . He was successful with the help of his host, British businessman Greville Wynne, who was cooperating with British Intelligence .
 There is no evidence that either Attorney General Robert Kennedy or the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs knew about Penkovsky or the importance of his information .
 DCI Allen Dulles showed the President copies of Penkovsky’s information, including verbatim transcripts of clandestine meetings with him .
 An estimated 10,000 pages or more of intelligence reports were produced from his intelligence reports . The top secret operating manuals for the SS-4 and SS-5 missiles were among his top secret documents .
 The 6 manuals had been clandestinely photographed by Penkovsky in Moscow . They were passed to the CIA and MI-6 in clandestine meetings in London in 1961 . The manuals were photographed in Moscow and passed to CIA in secret .
 By comparing the U-2 photography with information in the manuals provided by Penkovsky, analysts were able to identify positively the specific missiles being placed in Cuba and to determine the stage of construction .
 They were able to tell President Kennedy when each site would become operational . President Kennedy was able to see each site's location .
 This information was critical in enabling the President to know how much time he had to determine and apply a policy of diplomatic and military pressure against Khrushchev before taking direct military action .
 Penkovsky was one of the most important espionage agents of the Cold War . He worked for the KGB in the Soviet Union in the 1950s and 1960s .
 During his brief yet remarkable career, he was run jointly by the CIA and the British MI-6 . He was run by both CIA and British intelligence agencies .
 Wynne served as a principal agent in contacting Penkovsky on behalf of both agencies . Wynne was contacted by both the FBI and the Russian government .
 He arranged clandestine meetings with Penkovsky in both London and Paris in 1961 . He was used to pass and receive information from the Kremlin during visits to Moscow .
 Brush contacts for exchanging messages with Penkovsky in Moscow were also arranged by the wife of an MI-6 officer stationed in Moscow . The wife of a Russian intelligence officer was also involved in the scheme .
 Penkovsky came under suspicion by the KGB in about January 1962 . He was never allowed to visit the West again . He is believed to have visited the West in the past .
 He also lost his access to high level Soviet military and political leaders .
 The KGB would later claim that the actual date of his arrest was October 22, 1962 . He was arrested in 1962 . The KGB later claimed that he was arrested on October 23, 1962.
 After a show trial in Moscow, Penkovsky’s execution was announced on May 17, 1963 . The execution took place in 1963 .
 American journalist introduced Georgi Nikitovich Bolshakov to Attorney General Robert Kennedy in May 1961 . Bolshavakov was the first Russian to be introduced to the Kennedy administration .
 Bolshakov was, in fact, a Soviet GRU officer in Washington under cover as information counselor and editor of the magazine, Soviet Life . Bolshakakov was actually an information counselor in Washington .
 There is evidence of at least 51 meetings between Kennedy and Bolshakov between May 1961 and December 1962 . Kennedy ignored warnings from the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the CIA . He thought that he had an authentic friendship with Bolshkov .
 He regarded Bolshakov as Khrushchev’s representative but didn’t realize that he was being used to pass disinformation to the President . The President was using the information as a tool to pass misinformation to him .
 President was led to believe Khrushchev would make concessions on nuclear testing and on Laos if Kennedy were to agree to a summit meeting . Kennedy was led by the Bolshakov channel, the President was told by Bolshkov that Khrushchevitch would be willing to make concessions
 Khrushchev and Kennedy agreed to make a cease-fire in Laos a priority in Vienna . Nothing else was resolved in Vienna, but nothing else was .
 Khrushchev promised to end testing of nuclear weapons in the atmosphere . He violated this pledge by unilaterally resuming atmospheric testing in early September 1961 . The tests began in September 1961 and ended in September 1962 .
 The Vienna Summit failed when Khrushchev threatened to sign a separate peace treaty with East Germany . The treaty would cancel all existing 8 commitments among the four Allied powers of World War II, including occupation rights, administrative institutions, and rights to East and West Berlin .
 Western troops would be acceptable in West Berlin under certain conditions, says author . West Berlin would have to include Soviet troops, too, he says .
 Kennedy looked straight at Khrushchev and said, “Then, Mr Chairman, there will be war.” Kennedy . Kennedy looked . straight at him and said “Mr Chairman’s Mr Chairman” He then said ‘Mr Chairman, There . will be
 "I think he thought that anyone who was so young and inexperienced as to get into that mess could be taken," she says . "Anyone who got into it and didn't see it through had no guts," she adds . "He thought anyone who got in that mess and didn�
 Reston did not publish Kennedy’s remarks until well after the missile crisis . Reston published Reston's remarks in the wake of the crisis. Reston was published by Reston until after the crisis .
 Kennedy's personal assessment of Khrushchev’s behavior was published or disseminated 9 to the American IC sooner . The IC might have gotten an early sense of the dangerous mind-set which led to the decision to place offensive missiles in Cuba without triggering a U.S. military
 Former President Eisenhower tried to warn Kennedy during a conversation after the Bay of Pigs . Kennedy was warned by Eisenhower about the dangers of the Cuban invasion .
 Eisenhower asked Kennedy why he had failed to provide air cover for the landing of the CIA-trained Cuban exile force in Cuba . Eisenhower asked him why he hadn't provided air cover .
 Kennedy responded that he had been worried the Soviets would make trouble in Berlin . Kennedy said he was worried about the Soviets making trouble there .
 Eisenhower replied, “That is exactly the opposite of what would really happen.” Eisenhower replied . ‘That would actually happen,’ he said .
 Fyodor Burlatsky, one of Khrushchev’s assistants, was present at the debriefing after the Vienna Summit . He was one of the assistants at the time of the Soviet-Krushchev summit .
 Burlatsky thought that Kennedy seemed to Khrushchev more like “an adviser, not a political decisionmaker or president” Burlatky thought Kennedy seemed like ‘an adviser’
 Kennedy thought Khrushchev looked down on Kennedy as a self-made man looks down on a rich man to whom all has been handed . Kennedy thought he was being compared to a rich person to whom he had all been given .
 Construction had already begun on SS-5 intermediate range ballistic missile sites in Guanajay, Cuba . Construction of the missile sites was secretly begun on the island .
 Khrushchev’s assessment of Kennedy and the West was at least partially formed by communist ideology . Kennedy was at the center of his views on the West and the world .
 The statement that the Western democracies are too liberal to fight is a communist tenet derived from the belief that history is on the side of socialism and communism . The noncommunist capitalist West was weak and decadent, according to the communist West .
 Khrushchev was a true believer, and this mind-set influenced his assessment of events and other political leaders . He was a "true believer" of the Soviet Union, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Some of the people close to Kennedy had the same understanding of Khrushchev’s assessment of Kennedy . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 Khrushchev’s personal mind-set toward Kennedy and his ideological superiority mind-setting toward the U.S. was not changed . Khrushchchev's actions failed to change his ideological mindset toward Kennedy or the United States .
 The IC issued a Special National Intelligence Estimate on September 19, 1962, which concluded that Khrushchev would not run the risk of placing offensive missiles in Cuba . This “would be incompatible with Soviet practice to date and with Soviet policy as we presently estimate it.” The
 Khrushchev had already increased the level of risk in U.S. relations by his conduct at the June 1961 summit in Vienna . His threat to turn over the administration of Berlin to East Germany; erecting the Berlin Wall, testing nuclear weapons in the atmosphere .
 CIA chief of ad hoc Guided Missile Task Force in the the the CIA’s Directorate 12 of Intelligence, prepared a June 2, 1961, memorandum . The previous NIE should be withdrawn and its conclusions reversed, he wrote .
 Proctor’s memorandum was based on information Penkovsky had clandestinely provided to the CIA and MI-6 . Proctor's memorandum is based on the information he provided to Proctor .
 CIA decision was made against revealing further details that might point to the source of the report . Decision was made after serious consideration by Dick Helms, CIA Chief of Operations for the Directorate of Plans, Jack Maury .
 Penkovsky’s information was included in the information given to the U.S. Intelligence Board for its June 1961 update . Only a brief mention was made of the report in a footnote .
 The sub-source was unknown to consumers and was given no evaluation in the dissemination . USIB member told Jack Maury that no matter how good the source was, consumers were not given any evaluation .
 The sub-source from whom Penkovsky acquired the information was Marshal Sergei Sergeyevitch Varentsov, Chief Marshal of Artillery and a mentor of Penkovsksky .
 A member of the USIB also recalled that “nobody wanted to accept it because it was so contrary to their established views and political positions, especially the Air Force,’s Air Force . The USIB says ‘nobody’ wanted it because “it
 This is a good example of how the power of government budgets can create and sustain status quo mind-sets . This is one of many examples of how government budgets create status quo mindsets, says author .
 It also illustrates how a budgetary mind-set then worked to downgrade intelligence that contradicted and threatened the basis for the budget . The budget was then used to downgrade information that contradicted the basis of the budget.
 The Penkovsky information was the only piece of inside information that I can recall about Soviet thinking and planning about intercontinental missiles . It was only the information I can remember about the Soviet thinking .
 His information said the Soviet Union did have a big program—like our other information indicated— 14 but that it was proceeding much more slowly than we had forecast . The Soviet Union was proceeding slowly, according to his information .
 Stoertz said that the CIA had told him that the source and material were authentic . The CIA said the source of the material and material was authentic .
 "I could never talk to this source and could never find out anything about who he was," she says of her source . She says she could not find out who her source was .
 "That was protecting his life, but to that extent it somewhat diminished the utility of it to me," he said . "That's not the case," he added .
 Stoertz is an excellent illustration of the analytic mind-set that favors intelligence collected by technical means versus intelligence acquired from human espionage sources . This explanation is an example of an analytic mind set that favors technical means .
 Even if the source and sub-source had been revealed to Stoertz and other analysts, it is doubtful that the espionage of Penkovsky would have changed the mind-set that produced the June 1961 NIE .
 All U-2 flights over the USSR had ceased following the shoot-down on May 1, 1960, of the U.2 flown by Francis Gary Powers . Powers was the only person to shoot down U.S. aircraft .
 The CIA Discoverer Satellite Reconnaissance Program, also known as Corona, had begun in 1958 . Corona was the CIA's first satellite reconnaissance program . Corona began in 1958, but the program began in 1957 .
 After a series of failures, it began to produce photos of the USSR in August 1960 . It began producing photos of Soviet Russia in August 1961 .
 Penkovsky’s intelligence was correct but accepted only after confirmation by satellite photography . The Russian scientist's intelligence was confirmed only after satellite photography confirmed it .
 This again illustrates the dilemma of how to assess and evaluate limited, albeit likely accurate, intelligence from espionage sources, when other sources including technical collection is not yet available to confirm it .
 Penkovsky provided the information that enabled the photographs to be evaluated in detail . The precise capability of the SS-5 MRBMs and other missiles to be made known to the President .
 Without this information, the President would not have known how much time he had to negotiate before taking military action to destroy the missiles . President would have known if he had time to negotiate .
 "The information that Penkovsky provided on film and in written and oral form was consistently highly evaluated up to and including the last material received from him on August 27, 1962 . The information was consistent highly evaluated .
 Authors Schecter and Deriabin: 30 years later, that judgment still holds . 30 years after the book, they say, the book is still relevant today .
 The purpose of espionage is to recruit foreign agents who have access to and report highly sensitive and protected intelligence, often prior to such information being available from other sources . Spies are often recruited by foreign agents .
 Espionage information might be high level such as the missile manuals provided by Penkovsky or critical order of battle of battle . Information provided by our espionage agent in Cuba who provided the location of an SS-4 missile site .
 It is important to find ways to share with senior analysts additional information about espionage sources and sub-sources to strengthen their credibility .
 Such information is now being shared extensively with analysts, including 16 within the National Intelligence Council and the National Counterterrorism Center .
 Analysts must still understand that information from espionage agents with significant access may not be as abundant as intelligence from technical sources, but may well be acquired first and be just as accurate .
 The challenge for analysts and policymakers is to overcome previous mind-sets, experts say . Analysts and policymakers must overcome previous mindsets, they say . The challenge will be overcome by the challenge of overcoming previous mindsets .
 They must be prepared to assess accurately and utilize espionage intelligence to preempt or mitigate crisis or disaster prior to receiving additional information from technical sources . The U.S. should be prepared for a crisis, disaster or disaster, officials say .
 President Kennedy outlined a significant increase in American nuclear forces in a major speech on July 25, 1961 . Kennedy outlined an increase in conventional forces in West Germany, and a call-up of military reservists in the United States .
 Dean Acheson recommended by former Secretary of State at a National Security Council meeting on June 29, 1961 . These steps had been recommended by a former secretary of state at a meeting .
 Kennedy had to act to correct Khrushchev’s assessment of him at the Vienna Summit . They were also in line with Kennedy's recognition that he had to . act . Kennedy's actions were in response to his assessment of himself at the summit .
 The Berlin Wall went up on August 13, 1961 . The construction of the Berlin Wall was an intelligence failure .
 Penkovsky told the CIA and MI-6 officers during a clandestine meeting in Paris in September 1961 that he had learned of plans to erect the wall 4 days before it went up . He had no secure way of communicating this information to us in Moscow .
 If President Kennedy had known 17 of Khrushchev’s intentions, he could have exposed the plan and possibly forced the Soviets to abort the mission . President Kennedy could have prevented the mission being aborted .
 Once the wall went up, the U.S. and its allies accepted it as a fait accompli . The wall was built in order to protect Americans from the Mexican border .
 Khrushchev’s mind-set that Western democracies were “too liberal to fight,” as he was to state to Robert Frost over a year later . This lack of action certainly played into Khrushche's mind set that Western democracy was ‘too liberal�
 Khrushchev unilaterally resumed nuclear testing in the atmosphere on September 1, 1961 . The tests resumed on September 4, 1961, following a series of high-profile tests .
 This violated the commitment Khrushchev made to Kennedy at the Vienna Summit that he would not be the first to resume such nuclear testing . This violated his commitment to Kennedy to not resume such testing .
 A new NIE issued on September 21, 1961, based on Penkovsky’s intelligence and photographs from the first generation Corona satellite, projected that the Soviets had fewer than 35 ICBMs .
 Deputy Secretary of Defense Roswell Gilpatric gave a speech to the Business Council at White Sulfur Springs, West Virginia, October 21, 1961 . The speech was delivered while Congress was still in session .
 The speech was coordinated by McGeorge Bundy, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs, and approved by President Kennedy . President Kennedy approved of the speech .
 It called Khrushchev’s bluff concerning alleged Soviet nuclear superiority . It called it a bluff about alleged Soviet superiority .
 Gilpatric said, “In short, we have a second-strike capability which is at least as extensive as what the Soviets can deliver by striking first”
 Khrushchev did back down from his threat to Kennedy at the Vienna Summit, to sign “one way or another before this year is out,” a separate peace treaty with East Germany . Kennedy did sign a separate treaty with the East German state .
 Malinovsky made it clear that because nuclear missiles were now central to Soviet doctrine, all other services had to be shaped to prepare for nuclear war . The Soviet Union had to shape up all services to prepare to nuclear war, he said .
 Khrushchev’s 1960 speech said the Soviet Union was prepared to fight a nuclear war, to survive the inevitable heavy casualties, and to win . The Soviet Union is prepared to survive heavy casualties and win, he said . The U.S. was prepared for a war,
 In Khrushchev’s mind, the end of capitalism and the victory of socialism were inevitable, he said . The end of the capitalism was inevitable, and the triumph of socialism was inevitable .
 This 1960 speech was to be the beginning of a new era for Soviet policy, which favored nuclear missiles . The speech was intended to be a beginning of the Soviet policy of the 1960s . The Soviet Union favored nuclear missile technology .
 Khrushchev announced a plan to reduce Soviet troops by 1. million men . Khruschev announced the plan at the same time as the plan to cut troops .
 The head of operations for MONGOOSE, General Edward Lansdale, reported to a new Special Group 5412 under the direction of Attorney General 19 Robert Kennedy . General Lansdale was the head of operation for MONGOSE .
 President Kennedy constantly pushed the CIA to devise new schemes for undermining the Castro regime . President Kennedy pushed for new schemes to undermine Castro's regime .
 Governmentwide operation involved almost all executive branch agencies . It was a governmentwide operation involving almost all . agencies .
 CIA officers assumed that the President knew of the assassination plans, but there is no surviving documentary proof of this .
 The Special Group was initially conceived to provide authorization for every significant CIA covert action operation . National Security Directive 5412/2 was created by the CIA to authorize covert action .
 Robert Kennedy added himself to the list of Cuba policy makers . The Cuban government is now the center of all policy and operational activity concerning Cuba .
 Helms, then the acting Deputy Director for Plans for Plans, was subsequently fully appointed the DDP in February 1962 . Helms was the first person to be appointed DDP . He was appointed in 1962 .
 Helms placed all Cuban operations in Task Force W under the command of Bill Harvey . Harvey reported directly to Helms . Helms ordered the operation under the direction of Harvey .
 In January 1962, Robert Kennedy informed the senior representatives of the various agencies supporting MONGOOSE that Castro’s removal from office and a change in government in Cuba were then the primary foreign policy objectives of the Kennedy administration . The government of Cuba was then the Cuban government .
 Repeated blunt references to “eliminating” Castro raised the question of political assassination in peace time . Repeated references to "eliminate’s" Castro raise the possibility of political 20 assassination in peacetime .
 CIA activity ranged from establishing a refugee interrogation center to a variety of sabotage and collection operations . The CIA was involved in the CIA's efforts to establish refugee interrogation centers and collect information .
 The steady flow of intelligence showed that Castro’s military and internal security and foreign intelligence services continued to gain strength, but did not lessen the determination of President and Robert Kennedy to even the score with Castro .
 Helms: "However ambitious, our sabotage efforts never amounted to more than pinpricks" Helms says the group's sabotage efforts amounted to 'pinpricks' According to Helms, however, their sabotage efforts were "more than pin pricks"
 At the annual review of MONGOOSE by Robert Kennedy on October 15, 1962, he expressed his general dissatisfaction with the operation .
 There had been no successful acts of sabotage, and one such effort had failed twice . One such effort failed twice. There was no successful act of sabotage .
 The following day, October 16, 1962, the President was briefed on the U-2 photography of Sunday, October 14, which showed that the Soviets were placing MRBMs known as SS-4s at three different sites in western Cuba . The next day the President of Cuba was
 Khrushchev decided to place offensive missiles in Cuba in the spring of 1962 . Shortly thereafter, the Soviet Union decided to put offensive missiles there .
 Former Chief of Staff of the Warsaw Pact Armed Forces General Anatoly Gribkov said he received orders in Moscow on May 18, 1962, to prepare a document proposing the placement of MRBMs in Cuba .
 On May 20, 1962, Khrushchev returned to Moscow, and the Soviet Politburo and Soviet Defense Council met and approved the proposal in principle . The proposal was approved in principle on May 24, 1962 . On May 25, 1963, the proposal was OK'd by the Soviet
 In May of 1962, two advisors warned Khrushchev against putting offensive missiles in Cuba . The warning was made in response to a threat from the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev told Anastas Mikoyan that he would secretly install missiles in September and October . He would not reveal this until after the November 1962 United States elections .
 At that time, Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin would deliver a letter to 22 President Kennedy announcing the existence of the missiles in Cuba . President Kennedy would not have known about the missile program .
 He expected Kennedy to accept the situation, as the Soviets had accepted U.S. missiles in Turkey, he said .
 Mikoyan doubted the operation could be kept secret . He doubted that Castro would agree, and he doubted that the Americans would accept missiles . The operation would have to be secret, he said .
 Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko told Khrushchev that “putting missiles into Cuba would cause a political explosion in the U.S.” Gropropropko said ‘putting missile missiles into Cuban territory would cause political explosion’ in the United States
 Khrushchev decided to place offensive missiles in Cuba not only in spite of Kennedy’s actions since the June 1961 Vienna summit, but also despite warnings from two senior advisors . Kennedy's actions since June 1961 summit, as well as the June 1962 Vienna summit .
 In retrospect, it's difficult to imagine what the U.S. could have done to cause Khrushchev to change his mind . The U.K. could not have done so much to change its mind .
 His mind-set embraced the supremacy of communist ideology, supported by the perceived weakness of Kennedy to such an extent that he even ignored the blunt advice of both his Foreign Minister and his First Deputy Prime Minister .
 On May 29, 1962, a high-level Soviet delegation arrived in Cuba posing as agricultural specialists to discuss the decision with Castro . The Soviet delegation posed as agricultural experts to meet with Castro and Castro .
 The delegation included Commander of Soviet Strategic Rocket Forces Marshal Sergei S Biryuzov . The delegation was led by the Commander of the Soviet Strategic Space Rocket Forces .
 According to intelligence provided by Penkovsky, these tactical nuclear warheads were always kept in special storage depots guarded by elite KGB troops . They could be distributed only after a decision by the Military Council headed by Khrushchev .
 Castro refused to say whether he agreed with Khrushchev’s offer to place missiles in Cuba . At first, Castro said he would not say whether or not he agreed .
 Castro agreed with the plan as a gesture to improve the position of the Socialist Camp in the international arena, not as a desperate ploy to prevent a U.S. attack . Castro agreed to the plan after consulting with his inner circle the next day .
 Castro did not want the Cuban people or the world to believe that Cuba could not defend itself . Castro wanted Cuba to be able to defend itself, he said . Castro was assassinated in 1961 in Cuba .
 Final Soviet approval was given at a meeting of the Soviet Presidium on June 10, 1962 . The Soviet Union approved the project in 1962 .
 Khrushchev worried that “if we lose Cuba . . would be a terrible blow to Marxism-Leninism.” He said it would be “a terrible blow’ to Marxism, Leninism’s theory of Marxism .
 Khrushchev wanted to close the missile gap with the U.S. by installing missiles in Cuba only 90 miles from it . The author believes that the prospect of closing the missile gaps with the United States was the overriding strategic consideration for the Soviets .
 Khrushchev: "I'm not saying we had any documentary proof that the Americans were preparing a second invasion; we didn’t need documentary proof" Khrushchev says he didn't have documentary proof of the invasion of the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev’s own words reveal his ideological mind-set, which even dismissed the need for intelligence and “documentary proof” about actual U.S. plans and intentions . This is an excellent example of how Khrush .
 The only “second invasion,” however, was the U.S. plan to bomb and invade Cuba to remove the missiles Khrushchev had installed there in the first place . The author acquired any knowledge during his assignment in ONE and his work on missile crisis .
 Some historians have written that “frightened by United States belligerency,” Castro asked Khrushchev for military help in 1962 . The Castro government responded by sending a large amount of sophisticated weaponry to Cuba .
 Khrushchev makes it very clear that the decision to put missiles in Cuba was his and his alone . The decision was made by the Soviet Union in 1959 .
 Khrushchev recounts how he had arguments with Castro over this plan, but in the end Castro agreed to go along with placing missiles in Cuba . In the end, he says, "I'm not going to let him down"
 The Soviet military viewed the Cuban operation as much an opportunity to project Soviet power into the Western Hemisphere as a rescue mission for Castro . Soviet Defense Minister Rodion Malinovsky’s presentation to the Presidium on June 10, 1962, made it clear .
 Presidium voted unanimously to accept the plan as put forth by Malinovsky . Presidium votes unanimously to approve the plan .
 Under the plan, the Soviets would deploy 24 MRBMs and 16 IRBMs . The Soviets would put half that many of each in reserve .
 The 40 missiles would be taken from units in the Ukraine and European Russia . The missiles would take place in Ukraine and Europe Russia .
 Once installed in Cuba, they would double the number of Soviet nuclear missiles that could reach the U.S. mainland . The missiles could be deployed in Cuba .
 The Soviets would also send two cruise missile regiments which also carried nuclear warheads . The Soviets also sent two regiments with nuclear warheads and two cruise missiles .
 80 missiles were planned to defend the Cuban shoreline and the region neighboring the U.S. naval base at Guantanamo . They planned to send 80 of these missiles (16 launchers with five rockets each) to defend Cuba .
 Each motorized regiment had 2,500 men, and the two battalions would be outfitted with the T-55, the 26 newest Soviet tank .
 The plan envisaged sending a total of 50,874 military personnel to Cuba . The plan was intended to send 50,000 military personnel .
 The Soviet military had never before included ballistic missiles in an army group . This structure would be an innovation for the Soviet military, which had never previously included ballistic missile launchers .
 The Soviet navy would also build a submarine base in Cuba, complete with facilities for the new Soviet ballistic missile submarine . The base would also have facilities for a new Soviet missile submarine.
 To defend Cuba’s shores, the Soviets would send two cruisers, four destroyers, and 12 Komar patrol boats each with two conventional R-15 missiles with a range of 10 miles . The Soviet Union would also send two destroyers and four cruisers .
 The U.S. would send 11 submarines, including seven that carried missiles, to patrol the East Coast of the United States . They would include seven submarines that carried nucleartipped missiles . The plan would also send seven submarines with nuclear missiles .
 In July 1962, the KGB broke out recorded conversations between Penkovsky and Wynne in a Moscow hotel room . The KGB Second Chief Directorate broke out the conversations in July 1962 .
 Wynne had been operating as a cutout and courier between Penkovsky and his CIA and MI-6 case officers . Wynne was operating as an agent for the CIA and case officers in the case of the case .
 The hotel room conversation revealed that Penkovsky was an espionage agent for the West . The conversation was overheard in a Russian hotel room .
 A pinhead camera was placed in the apartment above his flat . A camera was secretly placed in an adjacent apartment, and a camera was also placed in a nearby apartment .
 The KGB placed poison on his chair to create a medical reason for sending Penkovsky and family away for medical recuperation . The KGB then placed poison in his chair and sent him and his family away .
 The KGB searched his apartment and found spy gear; however, the KGB did not arrest Penkovsky . The KGB was unable to arrest him .
 27 kept him under surveillance in an effort to identify other persons who might be involved in the case .
 Penkovsky also lost his access to senior Soviet military officials such as Varentsov just when the U.S. most needed that access and intelligence it could have produced . He also lost access to the United States just when it was most needed .
 Soviet merchant shipping came under close scrutiny after it became increasingly clear that Soviet-supplied arms were flowing into Cuba .
 The Soviets attempted to conceal and protect these shipments by covering the weapons with packing crates or by placing them in shipping containers . The Soviets tried to conceal the shipments by placing the weapons in packing crates .
 All of this photography was sent to the National Photographic Interpretation Center for analysis .
 SA-2 SAM sites in Matanzas, Havana, Mariel, Bahia Honda, Santa Lucia, San Julian, and La Coloma . Then from August 1-5, construction began on SA-1 SAM sites . Construction began on August 1 to August 5 .
 Soviets traveled to Cuba posing as machine operators, irrigation specialists, and agricultural specialists . Soviets posed as machine operator, irrigation specialist, agricultural specialists, in Cuba .
 There was such secrecy surrounding the shipment of equipment concealed in crates and the movement at night of Soviet personnel and equipment from Cuban ports . No one in the ONE ever believed that the buildup was only agricultural .
 Maskirovka may have been effective in fooling persons in the Soviet government, including many of those actually involved in the shipment of the weapons . The weapons may have fooled many of the people involved in their shipment .
 No one in ONE ever doubted that a military build-up was underway . But no one whom the author knew in ONE doubted that the military build up was underway.
 The agricultural specialist cover of the Soviets streaming into Cuba was irretrievably blown . Once we detected the installation of the SA-2 SAM sites in early August, the government said . Once detected, the SAM sites were in place in Cuba, the military said .
 The claim that the CIA paid no attention to the build-up that was allowed by the Cuban Government to flood Miami exile circles or that was obtained from debriefing Cuban refugees was just not true .
 "Some of the best human intelligence reports we received were from exile and refugee sources," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 But what we did not know from the beginning was just how extensive the military build-up would eventually become . It is not known from the start of the build up to the beginning of this year's conflict .
 The key question which one debated from the beginning was whether the build-up eventually would include offensive missiles that would pose a threat to our national security . One of the key questions is whether the building-up could include offensive missile attacks .
 On August 1, 1962, President Kennedy announced that the United States was willing to agree to a system of national control posts, subject to international supervision, for monitoring a nuclear test ban . This was a significant U.S. concession .
 Khrushchev resumed testing nuclear weapons in the atmosphere by detonating a 40-megaton explosion in the Arctic in August 1962 . Then 4 days later, on August 5, 1962, a 40 megaton explosion was detonated in Arctic .
 On August 10, McCone attended a meeting with Secretary of State Rusk, Secretary of Defense McNamara, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Taylor .
 McCone speculated that the influx of military equipment into Cuba could be used as support for the MRBMs . McCone speculates that the equipment could also be used in support of the MRBs .
 McCone again argued that the Soviets must be placing surface-tosurface missiles in Cuba . McCone: The Soviets must have placed surface-to-ground missiles in the country .
 Rusk and McNamara expressed the view that the buildup was purely defensive, McCone said . Rusk, McNamara and Rusk said the buildup to the game was 'purely defensive', according to McCone . McNamara: "We're not going to be able to play
 DCI McCone attended another meeting with the same group that attended the August 10 meeting . On August 21, 1962, the DCI met with the group again .
 He again speculated on the probability of MRBMs being installed in Cuba . He also speculated about the possibility of the existence of an MRBM .
 McCone gave this same information to President Kennedy the following day . McCone also gave this information in memo form to Kennedy the next day .
 On August 23, 1962, in a meeting with President Kennedy, Rusk, McNamara, General Taylor, Bundy, and others, McCone again reviewed the situation . He questioned the need for the extensive SAM installations unless they were to “conceal” MRBMs
 He had no hard intelligence on Soviet placement of offensive missiles in Cuba . No hard intelligence had been received on the Soviet missile program .
 Penkovsky had told his case officers in London in 1961 about Soviet plans to send 30 SAMs to Cuba . He had provided a detailed manual on the capabilities of the SA-2 .
 McCone deduced that there had to be strategic offensive missiles in Cuba . McCone asked himself what the SAMs were protecting because they were not protecting airfields, he said .
 The obvious purpose of the SAMs was to blind us so we could not see what was going on there, he says . He says the obvious purpose is to blind people so they can't see what's going on .
 There they were with 16,000 men with all their ordnance equipment and then came the ships . There were 16,500 men with . all their . ordnance equipment and then came . ships .
 Other reporting was received from clandestine agents and debriefing of refugees .
 McCone: "We didn’t see the offensive missiles. We didn't see the ... offensive missiles" McCone said in 1988 .
 We really didn’t know what was on the ships, but some things you can deduce . Some things were not known, including the names of the ships .
 He did not return to Washington until after his honeymoon in southern France on September 23 . U-2 photography on the wedding date confirmed extensive Soviet military deliveries to Cuba .
 PT-like boats carry two missile launchers each, with the radar-guided missile effective against surface targets at ranges of between 15 and 17 miles .
 A more detailed readout of the August 29 photography revealed the existence of another kind of missile site at Banes . The August 29 photo was taken by a team of Russian scientists .
 It was concluded that the Banes site was a facility for launching cruise missiles against ship targets at fairly close range . The site was used to launch cruise missiles at very close range of targets .
 At a press conference, reporters asked President Kennedy for a comment on this announcement . President Kennedy was not available for comment .
 The U.S. will use "whatever means may be necessary" to prevent aggression by Cuba against any part of the Western Hemisphere, Obama says .
 Robert Kennedy informed Dobrynin “of President Kennedy’s deep concern about what was happening” in Cuba . Robert Kennedy was president of the Cuban government in 1961 .
 Dobrynin informed the attorney general that he should not be concerned . The attorney general was told not to be concerned about the situation . He said he was not worried about the safety of the public .
 Dobrynin said he had been instructed by Khrushchev to assure President Kennedy that there would be no ground-to-ground missiles or offensive weapons placed in Cuba . He said he was instructed to assure Kennedy that no offensive weapons would be placed there .
 Kennedy replied that it “would be of the gravest consequence if the Soviet Union placed missiles in Cuba’s Cuba . Kennedy said it would be “of the graver consequence” if the Soviets placed missiles there . Kennedy replied: “It would be the grav
 The President issued a public statement that there was no evidence of “offensive ground-to-ground missiles” or “other significant offensive capability” in Cuba . That same day, the President, after being briefed by his brother, issued a statement that the President had been
 One MiG-21 was spotted at Santa Clara airfield along with crates for an additional 19 MiGs-21s . One of the planes was spotted in Santa Clara .
 The MiG-21 is a 1,000 32 mile per hour jet with an altitude capability of 60,000 feet . It is equipped with two air-to-air infrared missiles, as well as standard rockets and cannons .
 Penkovsky’s letter to the CIA described surveillance of himself and of Wynne . The letter was sent to the U.S. by the Russian government .
 Wynne alleged he invited Soviet boy and girl to his Moscow hotel room . Wynne alleged that he invited them to his hotel room in Moscow . He alleged that Wynne invited the Soviet boys and girls .
 He also complained that Wynne never exchanged British pounds for rubles as a normal businessman would . He also said that Wynne actually took rubles from him .
 Penkovsky then asked for a bigger resettlement bonus and promised to continue to work for the CIA and MI6 . Penkovsksky then said he wanted to continue his work for MI6 and CIA .
 The package he received from the CIA contained a false Soviet internal passport with his photo, but in the name of Vladimir Grigoryevich Butov . The package contained a fake Soviet passport .
 Penkovsky appeared at an American embassy reception on September 5, 1962 . He appeared at a reception at the U.S. Embassy in Moscow .
 The next day, Penkovsky appeared at the British Science and Cultural Attaché offices for a film showing . He appeared at a British science and cultural attaché for the film showing.
 The Soviets had planned to put only one kind of tactical nuclear missile in Cuba . The FKR cruise missile was intended for coastal defense . The Soviets planned to use the missile to protect Cuba's coastal areas .
 Soviet military leaders gave Khrushchev a list of additional battlefield nuclear weapons . The weapons could be used to counter a U.S. military invasion of Cuba . The list of weapons was released in 1962 .
 On September 7, 1962, Khrushchev authorized sending six atomic bombs for IL-28 bombers and three detachments of LUNA tactical missiles . The bombs were part of a plan to arm the Soviet Union with Soviet Russia .
 Of the 36 LUNA missiles to be sent to Cuba, 24 had conventional warheads . The LUNA missile system was designed to carry conventional warheads.
 The next day, September 8, 1962, the Ministry of Defense drafted an order delegating the Soviet commander in Cuba, General Issa Pliyev, the authority to use these tactical battlefield nuclear weapons if communications with Moscow be cut and a U.S.-led invasion be underway . The
 Khrushchev had already given Pliyev this authority orally during a meeting in July . However, he had already agreed to do so orally .
 Malinovsky decided not to sign or send the instructions to Pliyev in writing . The instructions were not in writing, Malinov decided to send them to the Kremlin .
 Kennedy told Pliyev to use "all the power of the Soviet forces" to repel an invasion, except nuclear weapons, Gribkov says . Even this oral authority was later withdrawn by Moscow in a cable sent by Moscow .
 From September 1-5, 1962, construction secretly began on SS-5 IRBM sites in Guanajay . Construction secretly began at the time of the year .
 Construction began at San Cristobal on the SS-4 MRBM sites in September 1520 . Construction began on September 1521 .
 Another Soviet armored group also arrived at Holguin during this same time period . Another Soviet tankers also arrived during this period .
 Construction began at the Sagua La Grande MRBM sites . Construction began in the next 5 days, construction began .
 Construction also began on SAM sites at Manati, Senado, and Manzanillo . SAM sites also began construction in Manatillo .
 On September 6, 1962, McCone met with McGeorge Bundy and Roswell Gilpatric in Paris to warn them that he believed the Soviets would place offensive missiles in Cuba . The DCI warned the Soviets that they would be placing offensive missiles there .
 McCone continued to warn about the possibility that the Soviets would place offensive missiles in Cuba . McCone's warning became known as the honeymoon cables in which he warned about the threat .
 In a cable dated September 7, 1962, McCone urged “frequent repeat missions of recent reconnaissance operations” The cable was sent from McCone's office in New York .
 The CIA had to get approval of the Committee on Overhead Reconnaissance for U-2 overflights . The committee on overhead reconnaissance approved the overflights of U.2 .
 In September 1962 inclement weather delayed some of the scheduled U-2 missions . Later, in its post crisis review of intelligence, the President’s Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board noted that .
 The next successful U-2 mission was not flown until September 26, 1962 . The PFIAB report noted that the next successful mission was flown in September .
 The CIA and others thought there was a policy against such flights over Cuba when proposals for such overflights were continually opposed by these two senior-level foreign policy officials . One can understand how the CIA and other . officials thought such flights were banned .
 In the wake of this shoot down, a Special Group meeting was scheduled on September 10 in the Bundy’s office to discuss aerial reconnaissance over Cuba . The meeting will be held in Bundy's office .
 At that meeting, both Rusk and Bundy questioned the need to overfly Cuba . Bundy and Rusk were at the meeting to discuss the issue .
 Rusk was concerned that a U-2 being shot down over Cuba would generate a crisis similar to the Francis Gary Powers shoot down over the Soviet Union in May 1960 . Rusk feared a crisis would be similar to that of the shoot-down of Powers in 1960 .
 Rusk, supported by Bundy, said that the Kennedy administration faced a number of problems concerning the continued use of the U-2 . Rusk supported Bundy, supported the decision to continue to use the aircraft .
 The United Nations had convened in September, and congressional elections were coming up in November 1962 . The U.N. was coming up with the November 1962 election .
 The reconnaissance experts at this meeting tried to point out that 37 slant photography to avoid SAMs would produce poor results . Rusk: "Photography is not a matter of concern"
 During the missile crisis, Brugioni was the chief of a unit responsible for providing all-source collateral information to photo interpreters . During the crisis, he was chief of the unit responsible .
 Lundahl would inform his staff chiefs, who included Brugioni, of the recipients’ reactions and their continuing intelligence needs, Lundahl said . Lundahl's staff chiefs would inform Lundahl of their intelligence needs .
 Lundahl was an astute observer . Brugioni made detailed notes of what Lundahl had seen and heard . The NPIC might better respond to the concerns of policymakers .
 The CIA photo-exploitation shop was founded in the early 1950s and invited other organizations to join . It was founded by the CIA in 1950s .
 NPIC continued as a joint CIA-military organization until the late 1990s . NPIC was a joint military and CIA-CIA organization until late '90s .
 Robert Kennedy supported a CIA proposal to conduct a single high level U-2 flight to cover the Banes cruise missile area as well as the areas not covered during the August 29 and September 5 missions . The proposal was supported by Robert Kennedy .
 It was doubtful that U-2 overflights would ever be resumed if pilots had to be non-Americans . Given the need to provide at least 6 months training to OAS pilots, it was doubtful they would ever resume .
 The transfer of U-2 flights would not be legally permissible either under the UN or OAS charters . The DoD General Counsel then responded to Rusk on September 12 .
 On September 17, a U-2 peripheral mission was authorized by the President . The mission is the first of its kind .
 By the time the U-2 reached the Cuban coast, the weather forced the abortion of the mission . The mission was aborted due to the weather .
 All reconnaissance aircraft were to fly no closer than 25 miles from the Cuban shore, the slant range of the SA-2 SAMs . Under the new rules for peripheral flights, all reconnaissance aircraft are to fly 25 miles .
 Peripheral flights by aircraft other than the U-2 produced photography that was not usable . The U.2 aircraft were not able to take pictures using other aircraft .
 The first successful U-2 peripheral flight was flown on September 26, 1962 . The U.2 was the first flight of the first U.1 peripheral flight .
 The second successful peripheral U-2 mission was flown on September 29 and covered the Isle of Pines and the Bay of Pigs area . The mission was the first of its kind .
 Their photography revealed more SA-2 SAM sites, but no offensive strategic missiles . They also found no offensive missiles, despite the presence of several SAM sites .
 On September 19, this SNIE was approved by the USIB and sent to the President . This SNIE has been sent to Washington .
 As between the two, the establishment of a submarine base would be the more likely, it would be more likely .
 It would indicate a far greater willingness to increase the level of risk in US-Soviet relations than the USSR has displayed thus far, and consequently would have important policy implications with respect to other areas and other problems in East-West relations .
 Sherman Kent called a meeting of his entire staff and all members of the Board of National Estimates . The estimate was forwarded to the USIB for final approval .
 He doesn't have any information we don't have, but he is convinced that the Soviets will or are doing so . He doesn’t have any other information, he says, but is convinced .
 The estimate at hand says that we think they aren't and that they won’t . The estimate is that they are not and not likely to be the same thing .
 There are no overhead photography proving that they are. Most importantly there is no overhead photos proving that are they are .
 Kent wanted to know who supported the DCI’s view, who did not, and why . Kent asked for the public to respond to the question . He wanted to find out who supported his view .
 The author supported the view of one of the Board Members who thought that the Soviets were certainly willing and able to place offensive missiles in Cuba, but would take a “salami slice” approach before doing so .
 According to this view, the Soviets would first place a submarine base in Cuba . This view is based on a view that the Soviets wanted to establish a base there .
 The U.S. would move to place offensive missiles in Cuba, depending on the reaction, they would then move to put them there . The Cuban government would then decide whether to launch offensive missiles into Cuba, sources say .
 The author recalls that no one at the meeting took or supported the DCI’s position . The author says no one in the meeting at the time was supportive of the position .
 The consensus was that there was not enough convincing information or evidence to support the DCI’s view .
 Sherman Kent: “We can’t just tell the President that we think the Soviets will put missiles in Cuba because Khrushchev is a son-of-a-bitch.” As Sherman Kent put it with characteristic exasperation and flair, ‘We can
 He added that as an intelligence organization, we are supposed to have the necessary evidence . He said that as a government agency, we should have evidence .
 With the stakes so high, great emphasis was placed on aerial reconnaissance . The stakes were so high that the mission was carried out by the CIA .
 A few recent reports from human sources indicated that offensive missiles were being placed in Cuba, but the reports were not enough in quantity or detail to overcome doubts which arose in the absence of photographic proof . A few reports had indicated that . offensive missiles had been placed in Havana .
 There had been no successful U-2 flights over or even around the periphery of Cuba from September 5 until September 26 .
 The author does not recall this fact being mentioned at all during that critical all-hands meeting of the staff and Board Members just prior to the release of the 41 estimate on September 19 .
 Brugioni had personally informed Kent that there had been no U-2 coverage of Cuba’s interior since the September 5 mission . The mission was part of a mission to cover the interior of Cuba .
 He was probably thinking about Rusk and Bundy’s continuing opposition to overhead coverage of the interior .
 In an essay entitled “A Crucial Estimate Relived” written in 1964 and declassified and published in 1994 by the Center for the Study of Intelligence, Kerman Kent recounts the lack of human source reporting that had been received by the SNIE .
 Several excellent reports were acquired during the first week of September, but not received by clandestine means or acquired by debriefings until after September 19 . Reports acquired during September 19 were acquired in clandestine means .
 Kent also pointed out that “nor did the aerial photography of September dissipate the uncertainty.”
 There were no flights of any kind, even peripheral, from September 5 until September 26 .
 There was, therefore, no way aerial photography could have played a role in proving or disproving human source reporting during that critical time prior to the SNIE being disseminated .
 It would appear that Kent simply did not know the full extent of the lack of reconnaissance flights .
 The author recalls that among the ONE staff, there was the assumption, even mind-set, that the lack of reconnaissance intelligence meant that the U-2 had flown but not found any missile sites . One staff believed that the aircraft had flown, not found missile sites, had flown .
 Kent reviewed five reports which indicated that the Soviets might be placing offensive missiles in Cuba . Kent had reviewed the five reports . The Soviets might have placed offensive missiles on Cuba .
 Sidney Graybeal, the CIA offensive missile expert, reviewed these same reports and concluded that there were errors in them . Sidney GrayBeal: "There are errors in these reports"
 Graybeal affirmed that all of the reported information and sites had been checked against aerial photography . Graybeals said aerial photography had been used to check out aerial photos .
 There simply was no aerial photography against which these reports could be checked . But there simply was not enough aerial photography to check .
 There were no flights over the interior of Cuba from September 5 until October 14 . The Cuban government spent 39 days in total, including 39 days .
 The peripheral flight scheduled for September 17 was cancelled due to bad weather . The flight was scheduled to take off on September 17 .
 The peripheral flights that were made on September 26 and 29 and October 5 and 7 revealed more SAM sites but no offensive missiles . The flights were made by peripheral flights .
 There were no flights of any kind, peripheral or over the interior, from September 5 until September 26—7 days after the estimate was released .
 Graybeal, like Kent, may not have fully understood this absence of reconnaissance photography . It would appear he may have been unaware of this .
 There was also an overreliance on the credibility and effectiveness of U.S. policy in convincing Khrushchev not to place offensive missiles in Cuba, author says .
 Those in ONE knew how determined the President and his administration were to prevent the Soviets from placing offensive missiles in Cuba .
 Khrushchev must have understood the strength of the President’s policy resolve the way we did. Underlying our deliberations, therefore, was our own mind-set that Khrushvic must have . surely have understood his policy .
 By September 19, it is doubtful that Khrushchev could have convinced the Presidium that it was necessary to reverse the gears of Operation ANADYR based solely on President Kennedy’s public warnings .
 Strategic warning is the most important element of effective intelligence, according to DIA Director Lieutenant General Joseph F Carroll during the missile crisis . According to John T Hughes, . Special Assistant to . DIA director Lieutenant General . Joseph F . Carroll .
 The map showed that outside of coastal areas, very little information about Cuba’s interior had been obtained . The map also showed that little information was obtained .
 McCone called 44 for a special meeting of the Special Group for October 3, at which he took Secretaries Rusk and McNamara to task . McCone then called for a meeting of 44 for the meeting .
 He was very concerned with statements being made by spokesmen from the Departments of State and Defense to the effect that there were no offensive missiles in Cuba . He said he was concerned about statements made by State and defense spokesmen .
 McCone points out that there had been no aerial reconnaissance over Cuba for over a month . McCone: All flights since September 5 had been of limited penetration or peripheral .
 McCone said that as the President’s leader of the American IC, he could make no definitive statement that there were no offensive missiles in Cuba . McCone: "As the President's leader, he cannot make a definitive statement"
 Rusk objected to overflights because a U-2 shot down over Cuba would be difficult for the administration to explain . Rusk still objected to the overflights . The overflights would have been difficult to explain, he says .
 Bundy also still insisted that the U.S. should try to achieve its reconnaissance objectives by flying peripheral missions . Bundy still insisted he still wants to fly peripheral missions to achieve his reconnaissance objectives . Bundy also said that the United States should still try to get reconnaissance objectives with peripheral missions.
 McCone provided information clearly showing that peripheral missions could not confirm or deny the presence of offensive missiles . McCone then provided information .
 McCone said he would seek permission for a number of short flights over Cuba to cover the entire island based on intelligence priorities . McCone: I would seek to cover Cuba based on targets with intelligence priorities.
 COMOR Committee agreed to conduct U-2 overflights from south to north . These plans would be presented to the Special Group on October 9.85
 Highest priority was the western portion of the island, especially over the trapezoidal area reported in secret writing by an espionage agent as being located near San Cristobal in Pinar Del Rio Province .
 COMOR recommendation 45 for four U-2 south-to-north overflights that would cover most of Cuba . That same day the Special Group approved the COMOR proposal 45 for 4 overflights . COMOR also approved a recommendation for four overflights in Cuba .
 The SA-2 sites were by then mostly operational, and further overflights had to be considered dangerous . Further overflights were considered too dangerous for the SA2 sites .
 The President approved the four overflights, and the stage was finally set for the fateful October 14 U-2 mission #3101 . The mission was scheduled to take place on October 14 .
 Soviet SS-4 MRBMs were being installed in Cuba by Soviet troops . This was the first flight over western Cuba that first discovered the weapons . The mission over Cuba was a mission to find out what was being done .
 The insistence of the DCI on overflights as opposed to continued peripheral flights was a critical factor in obtaining the President’s approval for the October 14 flight . The DCI insisted that overflights were not allowed to continue .
 The SA-2 had been effective in a way that possibly even McCone had not anticipated . But ironically, the South African government had been able to use it in a different way .
 Rusk and Bundy flew anti-U-2 flights over the interior of the Chinese Nationalist U-2 . Their discovery combined with the fear caused by the shoot-down of the U.2, led Rusk to undertake self-induced blindness by opposing flights .
 McCone deserves the major credit for pushing the administration out of what was a politically “safe” mind-set of peripheral flights . U-2 coverage of the interior of Cuba is overdue, he says .
 Bolshakov was invited to lunch by American journalist Charles Bartlett . Bartlett invited Bolshkov to lunch to ask for his message in writing on behalf of President Kennedy . The following day, Bartlett met Bolshakakov for lunch in Moscow .
 Kennedy had come to rely on Bolshakov channel for direct private information from Khrushchev . Sorensen later recalled that “President Kennedy felt personally deceived.”
 These crates were presumably carrying IL-28 Soviet medium range bombers . The crates were probably carrying Soviet medium-range bombers .
 President Kennedy requested that such information be withheld until after the U.S. elections . Kennedy requested such information was withheld from the public .
 This information had been disseminated to the IC and several military commands, says the IC . This information was disseminated by the IC, says CNN.com .
 President Kennedy asked that the report state the probability that the crates contained the bombers because no bomber had yet been seen . President Kennedy then asked for the report to state the likelihood of the crates containing the bombers being found .
 The President then asked that all future information be suppressed to which McCone replied that this would be dangerous . McCone then said that the President should not be allowed to speak out .
 It was agreed that such information would be disseminated to members of the USIB . Only those responsible for giving the President advice will be given the information .
 DCI instructed CIA analysts in May 1962 to check any report with NPIC that was susceptible to photographic verification . In its post-crisis report, the PFIAB stated that the DCI . instructed analysts in . May 1962 . to check reports with . NPIC .
 CIA analysts interpreted the instruction as a restriction against publishing anything that could not be verified by the NPIC from aerial reconnaissance . The NPIC was meant to establish by all available means the authenticity of refugee reports .
 An incorrect interpretation of the DCI’s instructions delayed the dissemination of human source information pending the receipt of U-2 photography . Although this analytical mind-set was formed by an incorrect interpretation, it did result in delaying the dissemination .
 The President also contributed to the delay in disseminating intelligence concerning possible Soviet missiles by instituting the tightest possible control .
 He wanted such information collected, analyzed, and reported to officials with a real need to know . He said he wanted such data collected and analyzed .
 The USIB interpreted this instruction as an injunction against printing any information on offensive weapons in Cuba in any intelligence publication . The USI interpreted this as a ban on publishing offensive weapons .
 A U-2 took the first photos of a SS-4 MRBM site at San Cristobal, Cuba, in October 1962 . The site was discovered by U.S. Navy on October 14 1962 .
 The U-2 photos, plus copies of the top secret Soviet manuals for the SS-4 and SS-5 missiles, were photographed by Penkovsky during 1961 in Moscow . The photos would enable the Guided Missile and Astronautics Intelligence Committee and the Joint Atomic Energy Intelligence Committee
 The author remembers receiving and disseminating within ONE, three very specific reports that have since been declassified and which led to the fateful U-2 flight on October 14 . The author also remembers receiving three specific reports from the U.S. Air Force One .
 One report was from an espionage agent in Cuba who reported a conversation with Fidel Castro's personal pilot of Fidel Castro . Another was a report from a spy agent who reported that Fidel Castro had a personal conversation with a pilot .
 The pilot confided on September 9, 1962, that “we have 40-mile range guided missiles, both surface-to-surface and surface to-air, and we have a radar system which covers, sector by sector, all of the Cuban air space and as far as
 This report was not disseminated to the IC until September 20, the day after the Special National Intelligence Estimate was disseminated . But this report was published on September 20 . The IC didn't receive the report until September 21 .
 The delay was most likely due to the time required for the agent to securely transmit the information to the CIA case officers . This delay was probably due to a time spent transmitting the information .
 The author recalls quickly passing this report to the ONE staff and board . The author of this report quickly passed it to the One ONE board .
 The source was directly quoting Castro’s pilot, who would have been in a position to have acquired the information from traveling with and being in the presence of Castro, and overhearing privileged conversations .
 It was this access to Castro, and the source’s directly quoting the pilot, that gave this intelligence report particular significance .
 This report was enough to convince the author that the Soviets were placing offensive missiles in Cuba . The report convinced him that the Soviet Union had placed offensive missiles on Cuba .
 The refugee saw 20 trucks with long trailers driven by Soviets during the night of September 12, 1962, in the Mariano district of Havana . The refugee says the trucks were driven by the Soviets .
 The refugee described a long object under wood and canvas extending beyond the end of the trailers . The refugee describes the object as 'a long object'
 The source described the fins of the object and even drew a picture of the missile silhouette and tail fin silhouette . The source said the object was a missile .
 Using photographs, he identified the object as a Soviet SS-4 SHYSTER MRBM missile . He identified the missile using photographs of the missile .
 This report was disseminated until September 27, eight days after the SNIE was published . The SNIE report was published on September 27 .
 This was an excellent detailed debriefing that contained information which appeared to be accurate . This was the best debrief I've ever seen, and it was a great debrief .
 Another important agent report was distributed on September 18, 1962, the day before the SNIE was disseminated . The SNIE is published by the National Institute of Standards and Enforcement .
 As of September 7, there was a large restricted military zone in Pinar del Rio Province, CNN reported .
 The report provided the coordinates of the four cities that bounded this restricted area . The area was bounded by the cities of four cities .
 These cities were San Cristobal, San Diego de los Banos, Consolacion del Norte, and Las Pozas . The cities were included in the list of cities .
 The report also described strict security to prevent access to the finca of a Dr. Dr. Juan Cuadrado .
 A refugee also separately reported seeing a convoy of Soviet flat-bed trailers carrying large tubes extending over the end of the trailers . The convoy was headed toward Pinar del Rio province on September 17 .
 The above agent report contained the coordinates in Pinar del Rio Province, was never adequately credited for helping find the missiles . This report was distributed on October 1 .
 On September 15, the agent conveyed the information in secret writing in a letter mailed from Cuba via international mail to an accommodation address in a foreign city . The letter was sent to a foreign address .
 The trapezoid formed by these four cities became the photographic target of the U-2 flight on October 14 that first photographed the Soviet SS-4 missiles . It was the trapezoids formed by the four cities that became the target .
 The area of Cuba described by the agent had not been photographed by a U-2 flight since August 29 .
 Operational control of the U-2 flights over Cuba was officially transferred from the CIA to the Joint Chiefs of Staff/SAC on October 12, 1962 .
 On October 13, the CIA U-2 detachment at Edwards Air Force Base in Orlando, Florida, was transferred to McCoy Air Force base . McCoy is now the U.2 operating base in Orlando .
 Former DCI Richard Helms, in his memoir, A Look Over My Shoulder, stated that it was the agent report concerning the large restricted zone in Pinar del Rio province that convinced the White House to request a U-2 flight over the area .
 U.S. Air Force Major Richard S Heyser took off from Edwards Air Force base in California and headed for San Cristobal, Cuba . It was 4 days before the weather cooperated, but just before midnight on October 13, a U-2 took off .
 This flight first photographed the construction of MRBM sites near San Cristobal . This flight was the first of its kind to photograph MRBM construction .
 He described it as a “milk run,” but it might also be counted as one of the most significant reconnaissance missions in history .
 Photo-analysts identified an SS-4 MRBM launching site, and two SS-5 intermediate range missile sites under construction . The photo-analysisists identified two of the sites .
 The latter weapons had a range of over 2,000 miles and could reach many major U.S. cities, much of eastern Canada and northern South America .
 The value of an agent's information is determined by his or her access to priority intelligence, not necessarily the agent's rank in a government hierarchy . In the world of espionage, an agent’s information can be valued more by his access to intelligence and his reliability .
 If the priority collection requirement is order of battle information, as it was in Cuba during the Soviet military build-up, then a reliable observer on the ground who has visual access to important military activity can be just as important as a senior espionage agent .
 This ‘observer agent’ was actually even more important than our Soviet espionage agent Penkovsky, who by then had come under suspicion by the Soviets and had lost his access . This “observer” agent was actually more important .
 The above human source reports, two from espionage agents and one from a refugee, were not received in time to have any effect on the SNIE of September 19 .
 One should have issued a brief statement summarizing this new information and the reliability of the three sources, he says . The White House and IC should have been alerted to the possibility that the estimate was wrong .
 ONE generally was to react to new human source intelligence by simply waiting and assuming that U-2 aerial reconnaissance would follow-up and prove or disprove it . If anything, the tendency in ONE was not to react by reacting to new source intelligence .
 Domestic political concerns of the administration would prevent meaningful overflight coverage of Cuba until the DCI returned from his honeymoon and insisted that such coverage be reinstated . But unknown to the author, and presumably other ONE and the CIA analysts, the author .
 This would be an example of a political mind-set which prevented overhead U-2 reconnaissance, while a separate mindset simultaneously required such technical intelligence before believing and disseminating important human source intelligence . This would, therefore, turn out to be a . example of . a political . mind-
 The perennial challenge for intelligence analysts and policymakers will remain how to analyze and evaluate correctly espionage and other human source intelligence in the absence of technical confirmation . Analysts and policymakers need to be able to identify and evaluate intelligence correctly .
 On October 15, 1962, Bundy was briefed on the discovery of the missiles by Ray Cline, the CIA Deputy Director of Intelligence . Bundy says he was briefed by Cline on the night of the discovery .
 He thought a hastily-called meeting that same evening could give away the secret of the missile discovery . He thought that a hastily called meeting that night could reveal the secret .
 On Tuesday morning, October 16, 1962, President Kennedy was briefed on the discovery . He thought that the best course for the President was for him to get a good night's sleep after a strenuous campaign weekend .
 Attorney General Robert Kennedy, Secretary of State Dean Rusk, Defense Robert McNamara . Secretary of the Treasury Douglas Dillon, National Security Advisor McGeorge Bundy, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Maxwell Taylor . President’s Special Counsel Theodore Sorensen, . Under Secretary of
 Former Secretary of State Dean Acheson, John McCloy, Robert Lovett, and others consulted . Former President George W. Bush and President Richard Nixon consulted .
 Alexis Johnson, Roswell Gilpatric, Paul H Nitze, Kenneth O’Donnell, Adlai Stevenson, and U.S. Information Agency Deputy Director Donald Wilson attended the ceremony .
 Dean Rusk recommended that Dean Acheson become a member of the EXCOM because of his quick grasp of complex issues . Rusk also recommended that he become an EXCOM member because he had a 'quick grasp of issues'
 Vice President Johnson was not present for EXCOM meetings during the first week of the crisis . The President approved of the move .
 President said he wanted the whole island covered, he didn't care how many missions it took . According to Lundahl, the President wanted to cover the entire island . Lundahl said he didn’t care how long missions took .
 Both SAC and the CIA U-2 pilots would cover all of Cuba . It was decided that SAC would cover the entire Cuba .
 The CIA pilots would be recommissioned into the Air Force and given Air Force credentials . They would be used only in “extreme circumstances,” 55 and they would be re-commissioned .
 Hurricane Ella delayed additional flights over Cuba until October 17 . Six U-2 missions were flown, along with a massive electronic intelligence collection effort . On the morning of October 17, the staff of ONE was informed about the missile .
 "We had all been worried and concerned about this possibility given the espionage and refugee source reporting that had been received," says President Obama .
 EXCOM met three times during the day to discuss what action the U.S. should take . The EXCOM also met to discuss the United States' response to the situation .
 Different views and alternatives were discussed but in the end, there was a firm agreement that the missiles had to be removed from Cuba .
 DCI McCone went to Gettysburg to brief former President Eisenhower and to get his views on what to do . The author recalls no retreat from that unshakable policy commitment .
 Eisenhower leaned toward military action which would cut off Havana and therefore take over the heart of the government . Eisenhower was wary of military action .
 Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko made a previously planned visit to the White House on Thursday, October 18, accompanied by Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin . He thought this might be done by airborne divisions, but was not familiar with the size of the Cuban forces in the immediate area or their equipment
 Gromyko assured President Kennedy that offensive missiles would not be placed in Cuba . President Kennedy was assured that the missiles would be not placed in the country .
 President Kennedy again pointed out the serious consequences if the Soviet Union placed missiles or offensive weapons in Cuba . Kennedy repeated his public warning .
 Gromyko assured him this would never be done, and that the U.S. should not be concerned . The United States should not worry, he says .
 Kennedy displayed a remarkable calm during the TV and photo coverage of that White House visit, as he listened to the Soviets lie to him 2 days after he received the photos of the MRBM site .
 SNIE was written to evaluate the probable Soviet reactions to certain U.S. courses of action in Cuba . SNIE also considered the possible Soviet reaction to certain United States course of action . The SNIE is a SNIE of the same day .
 The Soviet Union would not attack the U.S., either from Soviet bases or with its missiles in Cuba, the report says . It concluded that, if the United States takes direct military action against Cuba, it would not be attacked by the Soviet Union . The report concludes that if the
 This evaluation of the MRBM (NATO designation SS-4) and the IRBM missile sites drew heavily on Penkovsky’s information . This evaluation was based on the information of the Russian scientist .
 Based on U-2 photography and this documentary information from Penkovsky, one of the SS-4 regiments which has a total of eight launchers and 16 missiles was considered operational . One of the regiments was considered . operational .
 Two SS-5 sites with a total of eight launchers were under construction near Havana . Two of the launchers are being built near Havana, Cuba .
 An evaluation stated that one nuclear warhead storage facility was under construction near the SS-5 sites . It also stated “there is no evidence of currently operational nuclear storage facilities in Cuba.”
 FROG is the NATO designation for the Soviet LUNA Tactical Missile . The missile is a Soviet-made version of the LUNA tactical missile . FROG was NATO's NATO designation .
 SNIE was written on Saturday, October 20, to assess the major consequences of certain U.S. courses of action with respect to Cuba . It is interesting to note that only after U-2 photography confirmed the presence of offensive missiles in Cuba, was reporting on the Soviet military build
 The estimate stated that any naval blockade of Cuba would not place the Soviets under immediate pressure to choose a military response . The estimate said that any . naval blockade would not . place the . Soviets under pressure to . choose military response to the blockade .
 Should the U.S. use force against Cuba, the likelihood of a Soviet response by force would be greater than in the case of blockade . If the United States use force, the chances of Soviet response would be higher .
 This estimate repeated the conclusion that the Soviets would not attack the U.S. in response to military action against Cuba . The estimate said that the Soviet missiles in Cuba were operational and not put out of action .
 The estimate repeated that the USSR would almost certainly not resort to general war, but would consider retaliation outside of Cuba . While acknowledging the possibility that the Soviets might miscalculate, the estimate repeated the estimate .
 The estimate concluded that there are four MRBM and two IRBM sites under various stages of construction . The estimate concludes that there were four MR BM sites under construction in the country .
 The MRBM had a range of about 1,100 nm and the IRBM a range about 2,200 nm . The IRBM was designed to be able to reach an IRBM with a range between 1,200 and 1,000 nm .
 In addition, the inventory of other weapons then included 22 IL-28 jet light bombers, one of which was assembled and three others which were uncrated . In addition to the weapons, there was also an inventory of 22 I-28 light bombers .
 According to estimate, the inventory also included 39 MiG-21 jet fighters, 35 assembled and four still in crates . According to this estimate, there were also 62 other jet fighters of less advanced types . The inventory also includes 39 MiGs-21 jets and 62 other jets .
 There were 24 SA-2 sites, of which 16 were believed to be individually operational with some missiles on launchers . 16 of which are believed to have been individually operational . Some of the sites were thought to be individual operational .
 There 59 were three cruise missile sites for coastal defense, two of which were operational . Two of the 59 sites were operational, including two of the operational .
 There was considerable discussion within the staff and the . Board of National Estimates as to whether the IL28 should be considered an offensive weapon .
 These bombers could strike parts of the southeastern United States . They were eventually included with the missiles as offensive weapons . The missiles were removed from Cuba .
 Secretary McNamara expressed his opinion at an EXCOM meeting on October 17 that if nuclear warheads were supplied to the MRBMs, then the Soviets would also supply nuclear bombs for bombers with offensive capability . The President returned to Washington that Saturday from a campaign trip feigning a cold .
 The afternoon meeting began with an intelligence briefing by McCone and Ray Cline, the Deputy Director of Intelligence . The meeting was held in New York City .
 Cline covered the points made in the October 20 SNIE discussed previously . Cline also covered the issues discussed previously in the SNIE .
 Secretary McNamara specifically referred to this estimate and its conclusion that the Soviets would not use force to push their ships through a blockade . McNamara said the estimate was based on the fact that Soviet ships would not be pushed through the blockade .
 The President decided to implement a naval blockade or quarantine as a first step . After additional discussion, he decided to impose a quarantine or blockade .
 Air strikes and invasion could follow if the quarantine is not successful in forcing the Soviets to remove the missiles . Air strikes or invasion could be possible if the quarantines are successful .
 The President decided to delay the quarantine to permit consultation with our allies . During this critical meeting, General Taylor and National Security Advisor Bundy wanted to start with an air strike .
 Robert Kennedy argued that a surprise attack could not be undertaken if the U.S. were to maintain its moral position at home and around the globe . Robert Kennedy: "A surprise attack cannot be undertaken in order to maintain the moral position"
 Doves included McNamara, Stevenson, Rusk, and apparently Sorensen, who were against following up the blockade with an air strike .
 They preferred negotiations with the Soviets over United States missiles in Turkey, Italy, and the United States base in Guantanamo, Cuba . The U.S. preferred negotiations over negotiations with Soviets over Turkey and Italy, Italy .
 The President sharply rejected the thought of surrendering Guantanamo in the present situation . The President said the President rejected the idea of surrender .
 Robert Kennedy, Dillon, and McCone wanted the blockade to serve as an ultimatum to be followed by an air strike . The blockade was meant to serve a warning to the U.S. President George W. Bush .
 This meeting was not tape recorded because it was held in the Oval Room on the second floor of the Executive Mansion . The Oval Room is not in the West Wing of the White House and not the Oval .
 President Kennedy approved the blockade as well as actions necessary to put the U.S. in a position to undertake an air strike on the missiles and missile sites by Monday or Tuesday, participants say .
 He also said that he was prepared to authorize the military to take those preparatory actions which they would have to take in anticipation of the military invasion of Cuba .
 The President stated flatly that the Soviet bombers in Cuba did not concern him particularly . The President said he did not want to see any more of the Soviet aircraft .
 He said we must be prepared to live with the Soviet threat as represented by these bombers . He added that we must also be prepared for the threat of Soviet bombers .
 The missiles already in Cuba were an entirely different matter . They did not affect the balance of power, but the missiles already had been in Cuba .
 There was complete agreement that military action must include an invasion and occupation of Cuba . There was also agreement that a military action would include an occupation .
 Secretary McNamara and General Taylor told the President that an air strike could not provide absolute assurance that all missiles would be destroyed . President McNamara said the President could not be assured that missiles were destroyed .
 Any warning would probably cause missiles to be moved to unknown locations, they said . They also stated that any warning would cause missile missiles to move .
 General Taylor recommended that the air strike be conducted immediately, suggesting the next morning, and without 62 warning . General Taylor suggested that the strike should be carried out the next day .
 Secretary McNamara confirmed the above military appraisal but made no recommendation as to policy . McNamara made no recommendations for policy .
 The attorney general did not make an absolute recommendation about future military action . Action could be decided as the situation develops, he said .
 McCone urged the President to indicate publicly the intention to remove the missiles and other weapons by “means and at a time of his own choosing,” if surveillance proved that the Soviets and Cubans were not removing them . The DCI briefed Eisenhower a second time, at
 Eisenhower went along with the “suggested plan of initiating a blockade, conducting intense surveillance, and announcing the intention of taking military action if the Soviets and the Cubans either maintained the status quo of their missile installations .
 Prime Minister John Diefenbaker in Canada, Prime Minister Harold MacMillan in Britain, and West German Chancellor Konrad Adenauer in West Germany . West Germany's Adenauer was one of the world's leading leaders .
 French President Charles de Gaulle briefed at mid-day on Monday, October 22, by Acheson and Kent .
 Despite this rather cool start, Kent felt “delighted at the great interest de Gaulle showed in these photographs’s photographs. “I was delighted to have been able to photograph the French leader.”
 The general asked if Kennedy had considered the possibility that the Russians might move in Berlin . The general said Kennedy had been considering the possibility of the Russians moving .
 Acheson replied that it had been considered, but should the Russians move, it would mean war . He said that if the Russians moved, the risk of war would go to war .
 At a packed meeting, Kent said that he and Acheson had been prepared for a difficult meeting with the French President . Kent said: 'We are prepared for the difficult meeting'
 Kent recounted de Gaulle’s question about being consulted or informed by Acheson . Kent recounted the question . He said de Gaulles was told quite frankly that he was being informed . Kent said he was told that he would be consulted .
 Kent said he was surprised at how well the briefing of de Gaulle had gone . Kent said overall he was pleasantly surprised at the success of the briefing . But overall Kent said that he was pleased with the outcome .
 President Kennedy briefed leaders from Congress, and the American Embassy in Moscow delivered a copy of Kennedy’s speech to Khrushchev 1 hour before the President went on national television . According to Kent, de Gaulle was both satisfied and supportive of the intelligence briefing .
 This was one of the best and most powerful crisis speeches of the 20th century . This was a speech that was a powerful speech from the president of the United States .
 'We could now acknowledge and discuss the crisis with other Agency officers. We could now discuss it with other agency officers.’s decision to acknowledge the crisis.
 After the President’s speech had ended, we knew that we had successfully kept the secret . We knew that . After . the President's speech, we . knew that they had . successfully kept a secret, we said .
 On that same day, the Pentagon placed the entire United States military establishment on Defense Condition 3, an increased state of alert . "We were now ready as a government and as a people to unite in confronting this nuclear threat," President Obama said .
 SAC B-47 bombers dispersed to over 30 civilian airfields in the U.S. The bombers were dispersed to 30 civilian airports .
 At SAC bases in Spain, Morocco, and England, B-47 bombers were loaded with nuclear weapons . The bombers were later found to be carrying nuclear warheads .
 A massive airborne alert was begun by U.S.based B-52 bombers which were loaded with nuclear weapons and by KC-135 tankers . The alert was launched by B52 bombers loaded with weapons loaded with nukes .
 Most communications between headquarters and the B-52 bombers were in the clear . Most communications were between headquarters, and the bombers .
 The alert lasted for 30 days of continuous flight operations . 2,088 sorties in 48,532 continuous hours of flying time . 20,022,000 miles flown without a fatality .
 General Lemay was Chief of Staff of the U.S. Air Force . Lemay commanded bombers of the Strategic Air Command . His command responsibilities included those of the bombers .
 Khrushchev knew that the SAC had targeted specific Soviet cities for immediate destruction in the event of 66 war . “City busting” was being advocated by General Lemay to bring the USSR quickly to its knees .
 Khrushchev's fear of Lemay may have been an important factor in his decision to withdraw offensive weapons from Cuba . General Lemay's ability to listen to SAC communications which were deliberately not enciphered, may well have been a factor in the decision .
 General Lemay may well have been one of the most important and most under-rated players in the missile crisis . Secretary McNamara received word in the evening of October 22 that 91 Atlas and 41 Titan ICBMs were being readied for firing .
 Solid-fuel Minuteman ICBM would enter the inventory during the late days of the crisis . The solid-fuel ICBM entered the inventory in the late 1980s .
 Polaris submarines took up positions in the North Atlantic with enough nuclear missiles to destroy all of Russia’s principal cities . Polaris submarines were deployed in the Arctic Ocean with nuclear missiles . Polaris missiles could be used to destroy Russia's principal cities, including Moscow .
 Some elements of the division would move to southern Florida where they would bivouac at the Gulf Stream Park Race Course at Hallandale, Florida . Some elements would move into southern Florida .
 Some soldiers slept in the grandstands; others picnicked or played touch football in the infield . Some soldiers were sleeping in the Grandstands . Others were picnicking or playing touch football .
 Troops lined up along the rails to watch the thoroughbreds work out during the early morning hours . The presence and activities of the 1st Armored Division at the race course were clearly visible to the population in the area .
 This build-up of ground forces was one more method of getting the message to the Soviets that the U.S. was preparing not only to bomb, but also to invade Cuba . This was one way to get the message from the Soviets .
 President Kennedy signed the order for the naval quarantine on Tuesday, October 23, 1962 . This would add credibility to the stated U.S. policy of not allowing offensive missiles to be established in Cuba .
 Soviet Defense Minister Malinovsky placed the Soviet armed forces on a war footing on October 23 . Secretary of State Rusk obtained unanimous concurrence from the OAS to support the naval quarantine of Cuba .
 Marshal Andrei Grechko, Commander of the Warsaw Treaty Forces, increased the combat readiness of these forces . Marshal Grechka increased the readiness of the Polish forces to combat readiness .
 There were no threatening moves by the Soviet army in Berlin or the Soviet naval forces in the Mediterranean . But there were no threats from the Soviet forces in Berlin .
 According to Sam Halpern, the Soviets never called up their reserves, there were no conscript classes called up, and there was no assembling of aircraft, trains, or ships . The Soviets never assembled planes, trains or ships and planes .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff issued DEFCON 2, a maximum alert with the optimum posture to strike either Cuba or the USSR or both . NSA flashed word to CIA watch office that directionfinding efforts indicated that Soviet ships bound for Cuba that were suspected of carrying missiles, had not only changed course
 The missiles were ready for launching and one-eighth of the bombers were in the air at all times . The missiles had missiles ready for launch and were ready to be launched .
 The rest of the air crews were waiting near their bombers, ready to take off at a moment’s notice . They were waiting for their bombers to be ready for takeoff .
 President Kennedy called Secretary McNamara to confirm when our forces would be ready to invade Cuba . Other vessels still proceeded toward Cuba .
 On Wednesday, October 24, Bartlett showed the U-2 photos of missiles in Cuba to Bolshakov over lunch at the National Press Club . Bartlett also showed photos of U.2 missiles in the U.S.
 Bolshakov denied any knowledge of offensive missiles in Cuba . The official world reaction showed a generally favorable response to the U.S. action .
 On Tuesday, OAS representatives had approved a resolution endorsing the naval quarantine without opposition . The OAS had approved the resolution on Tuesday, October 23 .
 Measures to achieve a 69 degree of action readiness for Soviet and Bloc forces were not being taken on a crash basis . Measures were being taken to achieve higher degree of . action readiness . Measures to . achieve a higher degree . of action . readiness for . Soviet forces were . not being
 Aerial photography of Cuba on October 24 and 25 clearly showed that work on missile sites was moving ahead rapidly . But existing MRBM and IRBM sites in Cuba were being rapidly completed .
 DCI McCone reported that as of 6 o’clock Thursday morning, October 25, at least 14 of the 22 Soviet ships that were known to be en route to Cuba had turned back . Two IL-28 Beagle bombers had been assembled, three more were in the process
 U.S. Ambassador to the UN, Adlai Stevenson, displayed the U-2 photos to UN Security Council . The photos were a major public relations victory for the United States .
 At 7 o’clock on Friday morning, October 26, the first vessel was stopped and boarded under the quarantine . The first ship was stopped at 7 o'clock on October 26 .
 The Marucla was bound for Cuba under a Soviet charter from the Baltic port of Riga . It was the American-built liberty ship, Panamanian-owned, registered from Lebanon .
 The Marucla was carefully and personally chosen by President Kennedy to be the first ship stopped and boarded . President Kennedy personally chose the ship to be first ship to stop .
 The U.S. has demonstrated that the United States was indeed going to enforce the quarantine . The quarantine was the first of its kind in the world, and it was a success .
 Because the ship was not Soviet-owned, this action did not represent a direct threat to the Soviets requiring a response . But because the ship wasn't owned by the Soviets, it didn't represent a threat to them, it did not .
 Aleksandr Semyonovich Feklisov replaced Bolshakov as the conduit between Khrushchev and Kennedy . This gave the Soviets more time, but simultaneously demonstrated that the U.S. meant business . That same day, the KGB resident in Washington, replaced by Bol
 He asked for a meeting with John Scali of the American Broadcasting Company and asked if the U.S. would accept a deal whereby the USSR withdraws all offensive missiles under UN supervision and the United States agrees not to invade Cuba . The United States agreed to a deal with the USSR
 Khrushchev sent a long emotional message to Kennedy with the same offer as Feklisov to Scali . Also on October 26, Kennedy sent the same message to the Soviet Union leader with the offer .
 The following day, Saturday, October 27, a Soviet SA-2 missile shot down a U-2 aircraft over Cuba . The pilot, U.S. Air Force Major Rudolf Anderson, Jr. was killed by the missile .
 The U-2 was shot down using Moscow’s order dated October 22 authorizing Pliyev to use all defensive means against the U.S. except for nuclear weapons . The order was issued by Moscow on October 22 . The U.2 is shot down by Russia’
 Khrushchev sent a second message on Saturday, October 27, broadcast publicly on radio, adding the United States withdraw Jupiter missiles from Turkey . Pliyev’s deputy had authorized the downing of the U-2 by SAMs .
 Based on the suggestion of his brother Robert, and supported by Sorensen, the President decided to ignore the second message and accept the first . The President decided on the decision to accept the message .
 Saturday, October 27, 1962, was the darkest day of the crisis . The United States would agree with the rest of the Western Hemisphere not to invade Cuba . The U.S. and other Western Hemisphere agreed not to attack Cuba .
 The Soviets continued the rapid construction of missile sites and had shot down and killed U-2 pilot Major Anderson . Major Anderson was shot down by the Soviets .
 The subject was the probable reaction of governments in Central and South America to U.S. air strikes followed by an invasion of Cuba . The subject discussed was the reaction of Central and . South American governments in response to the attack .
 The OAS had previously unanimously approved a United States naval blockade of Cuba, but a bombardment and invasion of Cuba was a different matter . Cuba was invaded by the U.S. in 1941 .
 The earlier August 1, 1962, NIE on the situation and prospects in Cuba stated that there was widespread disillusionment in Latin America regarding the Cuban Revolution . The earlier NIE stated that .
 We did not think that any Latin American government was truly comfortable with the presence of Soviet strategic nuclear missiles in the Western Hemisphere . These same missiles could reach much of Latin America, as well as the United States. We thought that any . Latin American . government was not truly comfortable .
 President Kennedy in his October 22 speech placed the entire hemisphere under the protection umbrella of U.S. conventional and strategic forces . We thought that most Latin American governments were relieved that .
 Most Latin American governments would support a U.S. bombardment and invasion of Cuba, draft says . "We concluded in our draft that should diplomacy and the naval quarantine fail to force the Soviets to remove their offensive missiles from Cuba, most would support the invasion," the draft said .
 A few would probably criticize such military action publicly, but would most likely support it privately . That we had been asked on such short notice to draft this SNIE was another strong indicator that the U.S. was indeed preparing to bomb and invade Cuba .
 U-2 coverage continued to show accelerated construction of the missiles sites in Cuba . U.2 continued to report increased construction of missile sites in the country .
 This, plus the shoot-down of Major Anderson, led the two of us to speculate that military action would probably begin on or about Tuesday, October 30 . This, along with the shooting down of the U.S. warship, it led us to believe it would begin on
 This speculation was based on recent events and the policy firmness of the White House that the missiles must be withdrawn . The White House has said the missiles will be withdrawn from Syria .
 The author was not aware of the October 24 conversation between President Kennedy and Secretary McNamara in which McNamara twice assured the President that the U.S. military would be ready “in every respect” to bomb and invade Cuba in 7 days .
 The next day, Sunday, October 28, Khrushchev announced publicly that he would withdraw the missiles from Cuba . On Saturday, five of the six MRBM sites believed to have a full operational capability .
 The sixth was estimated to become operational on Sunday . It would allow the Soviets to coordinate the launching of up to 24 MRBM missiles within 6 to 8 hours .
 There would be a refire capability of up to 24 additional missiles within 4 to 6 hours . The missiles would be able to be refished within four to six hours of launch .
 The probable nuclear bunkers adjacent to the MRBM sites were not yet ready for storage, assembly, or checkout . The probable bunkers were not ready to be used for storage or assembly .
 Aerial photography from October 25 confirmed the presence of a FROG missile launcher in a vehicle park near Remedios . Robert Kennedy met with Soviet Ambassador to the United States Anatoly Dobrynin in Kennedy’s Justice Department office .
 He delivered the President's reply to Khrushchev’s message from the previous day . The President of the Soviet Union delivered the message .
 Kennedy told Dobrynin that the President must have a commitment by the following day, October 28, that the offensive missile bases would be removed . Kennedy said that the decision was made by the next day . Kennedy also ordered that the bases be removed from Russia .
 President Kennedy had wanted to remove those missiles for some time . Kennedy had hoped they would be removed within a short time after the current crisis was over .
 The President ordered 24 troop-carrier squadrons of the Air Force Reserve to active duty . That same evening, the President also ordered 24 . squadrons to be deployed to combat air force .
 No significant redeployment of major Soviet ground, air, or naval forces had been noted .
 The general posture of Soviet ground forces in forward areas was one of precautionary defensive readiness . The general post-aparture posture was a precautionary defense posture .
 Soviet spokesmen continued to play down the possibility that the Cuban crisis could lead to general war . The Cuban crisis has been dubbed the "Cuban crisis" by Soviet media .
 Khrushchev publicly agreed on Sunday, October 28, to remove the missiles in return for a United States pledge not to invade Cuba . There was only fragmentary mixed reaction .
 The Special Group called a halt to the sabotage component of Operation MONGOOSE on October 30 . There was an implicit promise to remove Jupiter missiles from Turkey later .
 Two voiceless telephone calls were made in Moscow to a telephone number given by the CIA to Penkovsky for his use to indicate that he had loaded a dead drop . The number was given to him by CIA to indicate he was loaded .
 The telephone pole had the signal of a letter X in chalk indicating the drop had been loaded . The pole had a symbol of the letter X on it that indicated the drop was loaded .
 Richard Jacob, the United States Embassy archivist, was sent to unload the drop . Richard Jacob was the U.S. embassy archivist . The drop was the largest drop ever made by an American embassy employee .
 Gribanov supervised the earlier search and arrest of Penkovsky . He also supervised the arrest of the earlier suspect .
 Jacob was declared persona non grata and departed the Soviet Union on November 6 . Wynne Wynne was also arrested in Budapest on November 2 . Jacob and Wynne were both arrested in Hungary .
 DCI McCone briefed President Kennedy on the ambush of Jacob and Penkovsky’s probable arrest . On November 20, 1962, the Soviets decided on their own to withdraw the IL-28 bombers, their six nuclear bombs, and the tactical nuclear weapons .
 The CIA published a memorandum on November 29 concerning the deployment and withdrawal of Soviet missiles and other weapons in Cuba . The CIA had hoped to keep the tactical weapons .
 The Soviet claim that they had actually delivered only 42 missiles to Cuba and had now withdrawn them was consistent with the CIA evidence . The CIA evidence is consistent with that Soviet claim .
 Available evidence indicated that the Soviets were preparing to withdraw the IL28 bombers . No more than 42 of the bombers were delivered before the quarantine began .
 The Soviets could easily ship out all of these aircraft by mid-December 1962 . The Soviets were able to do so within a few months .
 Other Soviet weapons systems in Cuba included SAMs, coastal defense missiles, Komar missile boats, and fighter aircraft .
 The equipment for four armored combat groups (including possibly 6-10,000 men) remained on the island . In addition, the equipment for 4 armored combat units (including 6 to 10,000 troops) remained .
 Nuclear warheads were not actually seen in Cuba until the post-crisis review of aerial photography taken during the crisis period . CIA had no evidence of any preparations in Cuba to withdraw these elements .
 Photo coverage from October 14 revealed a nuclear warhead processing facility at the western end of the runway at the Mariel Naval Airfield . The facility is located at the west end of a runway .
 On October 23, one of the warhead vans at the San Cristobal MRBM launch site had its rails extended . It appeared to be transferring a warhead to a truck that had parallel rails in its beds .
 The post-crisis review of 76 photography also indicated that the Soviets had fueled and mated the warheads and had practiced moving the missiles to the erectors . The Soviet Union had also practiced moving missiles to erectors, the review found .
 At a 1989 conference of American and Soviet leaders in Moscow, Soviet General Dmitri Volkogonov said 20 nuclear warheads arrived in Cuba . 20 more were aboard the Soviet merchant ship Poltava, which turned back when the blockade was announced .
 There was a surge of intelligence reporting after the crisis that the Soviets had secreted some of the offensive missiles in caves .
 McCone: "All statements alleging the presence of offensive weapons are meticulously checked" Concerning the alleged storage of missiles in caves, McCone said, “All statements ...are meticulously checked."
 On February 6, 1963, Secretary McNamara introduced an unclassified briefing in the State 77 Department auditorium . Such inspections were never agreed to or permitted by Castro .
 Questions have been raised about the presence of offensive weapons systems in Cuba, the U.S. State Department says .
 "I believe beyond any reasonable doubt that all such weapons systems have been removed from the island and none have been reintroduced," says author of the book .
 Review of U.S. foreign intelligence effort: Lessons to be learned from Cuba experience . Cuba experience disclosed by the Cuba experience, review finds .
 We directed particular attention to those areas of the intelligence process concerned with such matters as the acquisition of intelligence, the analysis of intelligence and the production and dissemination of intelligence reports and estimates in support of national policy .
 The Board reviewed the performance of our intelligence prior to the October 14, 1962, discovery of offensive missiles . The Board of Review of Intelligence Prior to the 1962 discovery of the missiles .
 There was inadequate clandestine agent coverage within Cuba, and full use was not made of aerial photographic surveillance, particularly during September and October .
 The Board concluded that there was a malfunction of the analytic process by which intelligence indicators are assessed and reported . Pointing to the failed NIE from September 19, 1962, the Board concluded .
 CIA and Army intelligence did produce valuable reports on developments in Cuba, authors say . "The absence of more effective clandestine agent coverage contributed substantially to the inability of our government to recognize at an earlier date the danger of the Soviet move in Cuba," they say .
 It would appear that over the years there has been a lack of foresight in the long-term planning for the installation of these agents . The government has not been able to find a solution to the problem of the problem .
 In September inclement weather delayed some of the scheduled U-2 missions . We recognize that in September some of those missions were delayed by weather .
 From September 8 to September 16, U-2 missions over Cuba were suspended . This was apparently because of the loss of a Chinese nationalist U.2 over China mainland on September 8 .
 There was not a corresponding intensification of the scheduling of U-2 missions over the island, the U.N. agency says . U.2 missions were not intensified during the period of increasing emergency .
 Rusk and Bundy objected to flights over the interior of the island . As we now know, “full use was not made of aerial photographic surveillance” due to the opposition of Rusk .
 The opposition was based on their concern about the political and diplomatic repercussions if a U-2 had been shot down over Cuba . The opposition to the decision to shoot down the U.2 over Cuba is based on the fact that it was shot down .
 The lack of “intensification of the scheduling of U-2 missions over the island” was due to this opposition and not to a failure of the DCI or the CIA to seek such intensification, the author says .
 DCI consistently warned about the Soviets placing offensive missiles in Cuba . DCI pushed for increased U-2 coverage over Cuba over the years .
 Delays were not only due to weather, but also to the decision of senior administration officials to fly only peripheral flights . Delays also due to decision of flying only periphery flights .
 The Special Group should have been informed of the delay in overflights and should have had a mechanism to discover automatically such reporting omissions . Bundy sent a copy of the PFIAB report and the DCI’s February 28, 1963, memo response to the President to President Kennedy
 McCone thought that unless the report was changed, the top five people in the CIA, including the DCI, would have to resign . There is one PFIAB document dated March 11, which indicated McCone wanted the report to be changed .
 We have no indication the report was changed, and there were no resignations . But McCone’s February 28 memo has been declassified .
 McCone said he thought his own study of the crisis reflected a “more reasonable judgment” of IC’s performance . In his February 28, 1963, memorandum to the President, McCone wrote that he agreed with some of the PFIAB's findings . McCone
 None significant information on offensive missiles reached the IC or policymakers until after mid-September . Concerning espionage agent reports, none that had significant information .
 A lack of adequate intelligence coverage of Cuba, the Soviet Union would not assume the risks entailed in establishing nuclear striking forces on Cuban soil, the author says . The absence of an imaginative appraisal of the intelligence indicators which were contained in reports disseminated by our intelligence agencies .
 The U.S. experienced a near-total intelligence surprise with respect to the introduction and deployment of Soviet strategic missiles in Cuba resulted in large part from a malfunction of the analytic process by which intelligence indicators are assessed and reported .
 This malfunction diminished the effectiveness of policy advisers, national intelligence estimators, and civilian and military officers having command responsibilities . The Board attached 35 examples of such indicators as an annex to its report .
 He wanted no limitation on the collection and analysis of intelligence relating to offensive weapons . All such information was to be collected, analyzed, and promptly reported to those officials who had a real need to know .
 He wanted the tightest possible control of all information concerning offensive weapons . He wanted to keep all information about offensive weapons from the public .
 The USIB interpreted the presidential instructions as an injunction not to print any information on offensive weapons in Cuba in any intelligence publication . The president ordered the USIB to print the information in Cuba .
 The Board noted that photographic evidence from the October 14 and subsequent overflights was promptly processed and submitted to the President in time for decisive action before the Soviet MRBM and IRBM systems became fully operational . After this injunction, even the President’s Intelligence Checklist .
 The IC said it would be difficult for the IC to operate with the same intensity and efficiency under less critical conditions . The IC commended the high performance achieved by foreign intelligence agencies during the post-October 14 period .
 The time that was available to the President and his advisers to work secretly, quietly, privately, developing a course of action and recommendations for the President, was essential . The time was available was essential for the Obama administration to work privately, quietly .
 Without espionage and DCI leadership, there would have been no photograph . But without espionage, DCI leaders would have had no photograph of the event .
 The U-2 photograph was the result of intelligence from an espionage agent who described probable MRBM sites in a trapezoidal area of western Cuba .
 President Kennedy reversed the previous opposition to such flights within his own administration . This combined with the unwavering insistence by the President’s leader of American Intelligence that reconnaissance flights over the interior of Cuba 84 be resumed, led President Kennedy to reverse his own opposition .
 For a brief yet momentous time in our history, DCI and Presidential leadership successfully combined to produce accurate intelligence . The CIA and the White House worked together for the first time in history .
 It may not be possible in future crises to ensure the same high quality of national security leadership . The U.S. has not been able to prevent future crises like this .
 The IC can and must always strive to improve the collection and analysis of all source intelligence, particularly intelligence from espionage . For its part, however, the American IC can always strive for better intelligence collection, analysis .
 On October 13, 1964, 2 years after the missile crisis, Khrushchev resigned all of his party and government offices . This will always be one of the keys to successful national security leadership .
 The Cuban missile crisis played a role in his downfall . The main source of discontent had been his reorganization of the party and state apparatus .
 We must realize the danger of allowing a predetermined mind-set to blind intelligence analysts and policymakers to evidence of the probable or ongoing actions of an adversary . The danger is not to let a pre-set set the expectations of the intelligence community be blind .
 Khrushchev’s conviction that the West, in general, and the young U.S. President, in particular, were weak and indecisive led him to discount how far the United States leadership would go to stop a new and dangerous threat to its security .
 Khrushchev’s ideological conviction that Communism was destined to defeat capitalism . This mind-set was further bolstered by his ideological belief that Communism would defeat capitalism. The Soviet Union was overthrown in 1968 .
 The mind-set of U.S. leaders led them to conclude that the Soviets would certainly realize the seriousness of their actions . Conversely, the U.K. leaders concluded that they would believe and heed President Kennedy’s warnings about missiles .
 The crisis illustrated that almost all forms of intelligence collection can have serious diplomatic consequences if compromised . The crisis also illustrated that all intelligence collection has serious consequences .
 Had a U-2 been shot down over Cuba without clear evidence of Soviet missiles, it would have been a major embarrassment to the U.S. Both internationally and domestically, the incident would have embarrassed the United States .
 The President must take into account the concerns of the State Department as well as the Intelligence Community in deciding how much risk is worth taking to gain the information needed to make wise policy .
 There is no silver bullet formula for use in weighing the policy options in such scenarios, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says there is no 'silver bullet formula' for weighing policy options .
 The danger to our national security of allowing Soviet missiles with nuclear warheads to be established secretly in Cuba warranted great diplomatic risks . But it was clear that the potential danger to national security was great .
 Intelligence analysts tend to give greater credence to electronic and photographic intelligence than to human source intelligence . Another sometimes dangerous mind-set illustrated by the crisis is the tendency of intelligence analysts and policymakers to give more credence .
 Intelligence leaders reluctant to release information about source of human intelligence . This tendency has been exacerbated by the need within the intelligence community to protect individuals involved in espionage .
 This, in turn, has made it difficult for analysts and policymakers to weigh the credibility of the information . This has been made difficult for policymakers and analysts to weigh it up . The information has been difficult to weigh, say analysts .
 Electronic and photographic intelligence is comparatively “hard” and thus comparatively easy to evaluate and use, whereas human intelligence is more problematic . Put simply, electronic and photographic Intelligence is comparatively "hard"
 Threats to national security can often only be fully and timely understood by conducting espionage against our adversaries . Nonetheless, threats to our national security often only can be fully understood by spying .
 Information collected by espionage and counterespionage operations is shared more widely within the intelligence community, particularly with the Director of National Intelligence and DNI analytical components .
 The objective is to help the DNI evaluate more realistically the importance and accuracy of such information, such as the importance of such data .
 "We must increase our capability to conduct all source intelligence collection operations against governments and organizations that pose a risk to our national security," says President Obama .
 Espionage has been, and always will be, an important source of information for our security . Espionage is a vital part of our national security, says the UK government .
 To support our future national defense, it is essential that our government and our nation develop a better understanding of the long-term necessity to conduct espionage and other clandestine operations, says President Obama .
 There will never be enough information from espionage agents, says Peter Bergen . Intelligence acquired from technical platforms will not be enough, he says . Bergen says .
 Analysts must look at espionage as a vital but limited means of acquiring critical intelligence . Analysts say espionage is a vital, but limited way to acquiring critical information .
 You cannot turn espionage off and 87 on like you can with technical collection assets . It is not possible to turn espionage on and off like you could with technical assets .
 We should follow through on the commitment of outgoing President George Bush to increase our capability for HUMINT/Espionage by 50 percent . We need to increase capability for intelligence and surveillance by 50% .
 The American operations officers who recruit and run these clandestine operations do so often at considerable risk to their own safety and the safety of their families overseas . The U.S. operations officers often risk their own lives and their families .
 It is essential that we as a nation develop a better appreciation for the integrity, skill, dedication, and courage of the men and women of America’s National Clandestine Service .
 It is for this purpose and to these men and women that this monograph is dedicated . The monograph will be dedicated to those who have dedicated it to them .
 In 1965, the committee was renamed the State Committee for Science and Technology . It was renamed in 1965 .
 Bolshakov was, in fact, a GRU officer, according to documentary information . Bolshavkov was a KGB officer, but he was GRU agent, a former KGB officer .
 Donald Kagan, in his 1995 book On the Origins of War, ignores the above memo from Proctor as well as the transcripts of clandestine meetings with Penkovsky . The transcripts were declassified by the CIA and published in 1992 .
 Kagan erroneously states that Penkovsky’s information supported the inflated Soviet ICBM numbers . Kagan also erroneously says Penkovski’ed information supported ICBM number .
 See Annex C for discussion of intelligence sources used by the Soviets and the U.S. during the missile crisis .
 Mr Halpern was the executive officer to the Chief of Task Force “W,” which was the CIA’s Cuban Task Force during the missile crisis .
 I am indebted to the late Mr Halpern for his editing of this paper on several subsequent occasions . He has edited this article on several occasions .
 General Anatoli I Gribkov attended a seminar at the Woodrow Wilson Center in Washington, DC, May 4, 1994, covered by C-Span .
 Khrushchev Remembers—The Last Testament, 511. Khrushchevich Remembers, 493; Khrushfeld Remembers: The Last Testament 511 . Khrushchchev, Khrushschevich: The End of the Soviet Union, The Soviet Union and The
 Central Intelligence Agency, 2002; and from the author’s personal recollection. CIA. Central Intelligence. Agency . CIA. Agency.
 Author Interview with McCone, August 28, 1988. Schecter and Deriabin, 331, 466n 13, and 466 n 13, 14 .
 McCone was the author of a series of books, including a book by McCone . McCone is credited with helping to develop a new generation of American icons .
 DCI McCone’s warnings during August 10, 17, 21, and 23 meetings and his two memoranda to the President on August 10 and 22 are also contained in a memorandum for the record from October 31, 1962 .
 Kent was the professor in full charge of the class, and he was not afraid to use salty language to make his point .
 Ivy Leaguer chewed tobacco in class, wore loud necktie with knot loosened below shirt collar . He usually wore a loud neck tie with the knot loosening below an open collar .
 During the war, he worked in the Research and Analysis Branch of the Office of Strategic Service . He was chief of the Branch’s Europe-Africa Division .
 The above two paragraphs are from author’s recollection; and Kent and Steury, Introduction, 78, 78 . The above is from author's recollection; .
 Intelligence and the Nation’s Security, 2nd Ed., James S Major, ed., Washington, DC: Joint Military Intelligence College , August 2002, 17 .
 JMIC was re-named the National Defense Intelligence College in December 2006 . JMIC is now known as the National Intelligence Intelligence College .
 A special information channel using code 95 word “Psalm’s” was established to restrict the dissemination of information concerning Soviet missiles in Cuba . The channel was set up to restrict information about Soviet missiles .
 The above three paragraphs are from the memorandum from McCone giving his account of this meeting . McCone's account of the meeting was published in a memorandum to the White House .
 Colonel Penkovsky was reportedly arrested in Moscow on the same day President Kennedy made his speech to the nation .
 His arrest was not announced publicly until Pravda did so on December 12, 1962 . He was arrested in 1962 .
 Excerpts from CIA memorandum, “The Crisis, USSR/ Cuba,” October 24 1962 . CIA memo: The crisis was the result of a rift between the USSR and Cuba .
 Schecter and Deriabin wrote a book about the Holocaust . The book was published by the author .
 He is currently president of JMIC which in December 2006 was renamed the National Defense Intelligence College . JMIC was renamed in 2006 and renamed in 2007 .
 John Mack Faragher, Mari Jo Buhle, Daniel Czitrom, and Susan H Armitage, Out of Many—A History of the American People, are published by Susan H. Armitages . The book was published by the American Historical Society .
 Douglas F Garthoff, Directors Of Central Intelligence As Leaders of the U.S. Intelligence Community, 1946-2005 . Douglas F. Garhoff, Director of Central Intelligence as Leaders of U.K. intelligence community, 1946 to 2005 .
 Sherman Kent, Donald P Steury, ed., Sherman Kent and The Board Of National Estimates, Collected Essays By Sherman Kent . Sherman Kent was a member of the Board of Estimates at the time .
 Nikita Khrushchev, Introduction, Commentary, and Notes by Edward Crankshaw, Strobe Talbott, trans. and ed., Khrushchev Remembers. Nikita . Khrushchchev Remembers . Nikita. Khrushhev . Khushchev Remem
 Nikita Khrushchev Remembers—The Last Testament . Nikita was the leader of the Soviet Union in the 1960s and early '60s .
 He retired from the Central Intelligence Agency as a member of the Senior Intelligence Service . He served over 31 years in the clandestine service .
 Absher was Chief of Station in two different field assignments, and Chief of Base in two others . Mr Absher has served in the Air Force in Iraq and Afghanistan .
 He had four tours in CIA Headquarters managing foreign intelligence operations . He was in charge of operations in the U.S.
 From January 2003 to February 2005, Mr Absher served on the Joint Terrorism Task Force in San Antonio, Texas .
 During 2005, Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice appointed Mr Absher as the DCI representative to three Accountability Review Boards to investigate terrorist attacks in Iraq .
 Langer became the head of the ONE and Chairman of the Board of National Estimates, with Kent as his deputy . Langer is now the chairman of the board of national estimates . Kent is Langer's deputy .
 After Langer returned to Harvard in 1952, Kent took over both positions . Kent retired on December 29, 1967, after more than 30 years of government service .
 He replaced it with a system of National Intelligence Officers which exists today, known as the National Intelligence Council . The council was replaced by a new system of intelligence officers .
 This was an even stronger formulation than was contained in the 1947 National Security Act . This was even stronger than the 1947 national security act .
 Allen Dulles, the DCI at the time, continued to urge and persuade rather than force management of the intelligence community . The DCI continued to push and persuade, not force management .
 Eisenhower backed off and accepted Dulles’ collegial style of management rather than replace him . Eisenhower backed up and accepted the collegialism of Dulles .
 An NIE was drafted and reviewed by the Board of National Estimates . It was submitted to the USIB which comprised of representatives from all of the members of the Intelligence Community .
 The USIB was chaired by the DCI in his role as the leader of the Intelligence Community . The DCI was chair of the USIB .
 Once an estimate was approved by the USIB, the DCI then had the responsibility to disseminate it to the White House and to the National Security Council .
 Unlike Dulles, McCone enthusiastically welcomed his role as a community leader . McCone is a former mayor of New York City, New Jersey .
 He particularly wanted to enhance the nation’s intelligence capabilities by applying modern science and technology, he said .
 DCI outranked the other intelligence chiefs, and was expected to deal directly with their superiors . This meant that the DCI would be expected to be the most senior intelligence officer in the world .
 McCone decided that he could be more impartial if he served as Chairman of the USIB with the DDCI serving as the CIA representative on the Board .
 McCone did this to emphasize his role as a broad leader of the American IC, not necessarily tied to CIA positions . McCone: "I'm not a CIA director, but I'm a leader of a broad, broad IC"
 McCone was not able to implement this additional step . This would have been in line with President Kennedy’s memorandum, McCone said .
 Soviet GRU officer who provided CIA and British MI-6 with voluminous intelligence beginning in April 1961 . But he lost his access to senior Soviet military officers in July 1962 just when we needed this access the most .
 "Our last operational contact with him was August 27, 1962, at a reception in the apartment of the American Agricultural Attaché in Moscow," he says .
 He was sighted again on September 5 at an American embassy reception; and on September 6 at a British film showing . He was also sighted at the U.S. and British film shows .
 Cuban refugee debriefings some 1,500 to 2,000 Cuban refugees were debriefed every week in Miami . Cuban refugees had to undergo debriefing every week at the time .
 The Clandestine Service within the CIA conducts espionage, counterespionage and covert action . Clandestine Services conducts espionage and covert actions .
 Espionage still not understood by many persons in government, journalism and academe . Espionage is still not known by many people in government and journalism . It is not known how much espionage is involved in espionage in the world .
 Espionage is the clandestine collection of information about the plans, intentions, and activities of foreign governments, organizations, and persons, by human or technical means . Espionage involves the collection of intelligence about foreign governments .
 Human espionage involves recruiting, training and running in place of an agent who serves and reports to us as a clandestine source . Human espionage is a form of espionage that involves recruiting and training .
 An example of espionage by technical means would be the clandestine installation of an audio device in a conference room used by senior officials of a foreign government . An audio device can be installed in the conference room of senior officials .
 Counterespionage is the clandestine collection of information by human or technical means about the plans, intentions, and activities of foreign governments, organizations, and persons to conduct espionage, sabotage, assassination, and acts of terrorism . Counting espionage is the collection of the information about foreign governments'
 Counterespionage operations may also be operations designed to counter or protect against espionage, sabotage, assassination, and terrorism . Not just collect information, they also protect against terrorism, sabotage and assassination . Counting espionage operations may be counter-espionage operations .
 It is designed to influence foreign governments, events, organizations, or persons in support of U.S. policy objectives . The U.N. policy objective is to support foreign governments .
 Covert action operations are normally conducted in a manner to conceal the identity of the sponsor, or to permit plausible denial by the sponsor . Covert actions are normally carried out under the name of a sponsor .
 Operations may include political, economic, propaganda, or paramilitary activities . Such operations may include economic, political, political or paramilitary operations .
 Joint Military Intelligence College (renamed the National Defense Intelligence College), March 2002 . National Defense intelligence College is now known as the National Intelligence College .