 Kennedy bore "a significant responsibility for these acts,"" he said on November 23, 1963 . "Among those who govern and the men who run the country," he said .
 Fidel outlined how Kennedy was being heavily attacked by the most reactionary circles with forceful campaigns, resolutions and proposed bills in Congress . Nevertheless, he continued, he said that there are elements within the United States who are defending an ultra-reactionary policy in all spheres .
 Mass media expanded the attacks by pushing the government toward war, including before, during and after the October Crisis . The mass media expanded attacks on the government before and during the October crisis .
 Cuban president spoke at length about the recent attitude Kennedy had taken with respect to civil rights in the racial context . Cuban president: Kennedy's attitude toward civil rights has changed .
 Kennedy had established a dialogue with Khrushchev on important issues, including the nuclear pact, Cuba and civil rights . Kennedy's policy on Cuba was not aggressive enough, according to the Soviets .
 Fidel Castro: The theory of the lone gunman is no less insightful . Fidel Castro says the theory is that the gunman was a lone gunman . He says it is not the first time Fidel has discussed the theory .
 Nobody at that time questioned that Oswald had acted alone, or his alleged ""pro-Castro"" sympathies . Nobody at the time questioned the fact that Oswald acted alone . Oswald's alleged sympathies with Fidel Castro were questioned .
 With that type of weapon it is really very hard to fire three shots in a row but, above all, difficult to fire in that way at a target . It is difficult to shoot three shots at a single target, says the author .
 Years later it was demonstrated with acoustic and graphic evidence that there had been more than one sniper . Years later, it was proved with acoustic evidence that the sniper had been killed .
 Even today campaigns around the event are used by elements interested in redirecting suspicions away from those really responsible for the crime and in destroying the Cuban Revolution . Even today .
 "The seriousness of the situation has been revealed little by little since then," says the BBC . The seriousness of this week's crisis has been slowly revealed, he says .
 Robert Kennedy was convinced from the beginning that his brother’s assassination was the work of a conspiracy by those he had been working closely with against Fidel Castro, elements of the Central Intelligence Agency, the Italian-American mafia and Cuban gangsters . The Hidden History of the Kennedy Years,
 Bobby Kennedy had remained silent because he understood the power he was up against . Bobby Kennedy made the mistake of admitting that if he were elected president he would reopen the case .
 Joint chiefs of staff were about to effect a coup against President Kennedy, documents reveal . Joint chiefs' close collaborators and certain previously declassified documents reveal the coup was about to take place in 1961 .
 On April 18, at midnight, a meeting took place in the White House, as the annual Congressional reception was ending . Richard Bissell, CIA assistant director, requested the meeting, as requested .
 The military men invited, General Lemnitzer and Admiral Burke, wore their dress uniforms, while the civilians, Kennedy himself, McNamara, Johnson and Dean Rusk were formally dressed .
 Bissel presented a summary of the military situation and reported that a total defeat was imminent . Bissel: "A total defeat is imminent" Bissel reported that the situation was extremely serious .
 He proposed as the only way to avoid certain defeat, in his judgment, a direct military intervention by the U.S. Armed Forces . He said it was necessary to prevent certain defeat .
 The president reminded them that he had stressed to them from the beginning that that would not happen . The president said he had publicly stated that that will not happen. The president .
 Pentagon and CIA chiefs had not taken the warning seriously seriously, says CIA chief . Pentagon, CIA chiefs did not take it seriously, officials say .
 The plot was based on a plot to assassinate Fidel Castro and on military intervention . The book was published by David Sánchez Morales and Tracy Barnes .
 Burke had sent the aircraft carrier Essex and helicopters from the Boxer in close to the Cuban beaches, in violation of orders that they should remain at a distance of 50 miles from the coast .
 Three hours later, the meeting ended without him reversing his decision . The meeting ended with him reversing the decision .
 Maine in 1898 was used as a pretext for the U.S. intervention in Cuba . Maine was used in 1898, used as an excuse for the United States intervention .
 His Operation Northwoods included terrorizing Cuban exiles with bombs in Miami and even Washington . His 'Operation Northwoods' terrorized Miami and Washington, D.C. exiles .
 The final blow would be the destruction of the Mercury spacecraft piloted by John Glenn . Glenn completed the first U.S. orbit of the Earth in 1961 .
 Another variant included the downing of a United States charter flight . Another variant of the attack occurred in the 1980s .
 Lemnitzer decided to participate in a conspiracy in which General Edwin Walker was involved . The John Birch Society and the Ku Klux Klan were involved in the conspiracy . The rejection of the plan was the last straw for Lemnitz .
 He preferred not to publicly expose the plot in exchange for the general’s resignation . General's resignation was quashed by the general, who had to resign .
 The third round came with the October 1962 Missile Crisis, during which the President found himself virtually alone facing the joint chiefs of staff .
 Even Maxwell Taylor, appointed October 1, did not support him . He did not take an aggressively offensive position, like those calling for attacks on Cuba .
 Curtis LeMay opposed the president’s plan of a naval blockade . LeMay was the most bellicose leader in the U.S.
 Talbot says Air Force chief tried to put him on the defensive by reminding him of the accusations made against his father . Talbot: "The Air Force Chief treated the president disrespectfully" Talbot said the president treated him disrespectfully .
 Historians have attributed to Joe Kennedy, U.S. ambassador in London, having counseled Chamberlain to make concessions in order to pacify Hitler, which provoked President Roosevelt to replace him . President Roosevelt had placed Kennedy in London with the idea that his ambassador, being Irish, would not
 McNamara told McNamara he was to strictly enforce the order that no U.S. forces could fire on Soviet ships without the president’s express consent . McNamara was secretary of defense to enforce order .
 Admiral Anderson snubbed him by saying that the Navy had known how to manage a naval blockade since the days of the war of independence .
 Among other challenges, on the civil rights front the situation was no less explosive . The civil rights struggle was no more explosive .
 White students, members of the Klan and neighbors had surrounded the building armed with bricks, picks and shotguns, trying to get to Meredith, yelling for his lynching . Meredith was killed by a white mob of white students and neighbors .
 Dozens of police agents were trying to prevent the crime that the crowd was ready to commit . The crowd was trying to commit a crime, police say .
 President Kennedy mobilized federal troops to protect himself from a mob of angry mobs . The mob was so large that Kennedy mobilized troops to help protect himself .
 Hours after the order, the military had yet to comply, resorting to a variety of pretexts, like difficulties involved in moving personnel from Memphis to Oxford .
 In reality, troops were being detained by the right-wing General Walter who was inciting the rioters . General Walter was in charge of the riots, but troops were actually being detained .
 President Kennedy, outraged as rarely before, had to speak by telephone directly to General Adams in order to have the forces finally arrive, past 2:00 in the morning .
 After the October Missile Crisis there was significant polarization within the country’s real economic, political and military powers, which even reached the point of Kennedy being branded a communist . Although the president retained a level of popularity, after the crisis, he remained popular .
 They feared that the Kennedy brothers would attempt to seriously challenge the military-industrial complex and other powerful forces such as the oil companies, starting by ending the war in Vietnam . The Kennedy brothers feared that they would challenge the power of the military .
 When the news of the assassination arrived, Fidel was talking with French journalist Jean Daniel who had been charged by JFK with determining the Cuban leader’s reaction to secret meetings that were taking place in Washington to discuss the possibility of normalizing relations with Cuba – another move on the part of
 The Kennedys were attacking the philosophy of war that was being projected most aggressively on Cuba and in Vietnam . The Kennedy family was in the midst of the Vietnam War and Cuba .
 According to Daniel, Fidel expressed his total condemnation of the assassination of someone who was becoming, on account of his challenges, the greatest U.S. president since Lincoln since Lincoln . Daniel: "Fidel expressed his complete condemnation of President Obama's assassination"
 Talbot’s investigation revealed that Kennedy sent a message to Soviet leaders letting them know that he and his brother Robert had been victims of an internal conspiracy . The Cuban leader's analysis was based on the motives for and methods used in the attack .
 Fidel was deciphering JFK's ideas reflected in Talbot’s book The Enemy Within . Fidel was reading Talbot's ideas in the book . JFK was reading the book when he was assassinated .
 Fidel was convinced that the military-industrial complex was the force behind the war in Vietnam, like the current occupation of Iraq, he says . Fidel believes the military industrial complex was behind the Vietnam War . Fidel says he believes that the war was the reason for the war .
 Anti-war sentiment in the U.S. is stymied now, even though the electorate has clearly demonstrated its desire to withdraw United States troops from that occupied country . The overwhelming majority of politicians are attacking the losses produced by the war, but not its ignoble motives .
 Fidel denounced the philosophy of plunder that Fidel denounced before the United Nations in 1960 . Fidel denounced plunder before the U.N. in 1960, but has not abandoned the philosophy .
 Next year will be the 45th anniversary of the assassination of Kennedy . Kennedy was assassinated 45 years ago .
 It's time to demand that U.S. authorities who replace Bush declassify secret CIA documents and reopen the investigation into this crime that was really a coup against humanity . It is time for U.N. authorities to declassify CIA documents .
 Humanity must crush philosophy of plunder, which is the philosophy of war, says David Cameron . Humanity needs to crush the 'philosophy of plunder', says Cameron .
 U.S. escalated cold war out of control under nazi misinformation, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "Cold war out-of-control" escalated under "nazi misinformation," he says .
 Everyone has a label; no one gets any help they need only “helped” into the grave slowly by new nazi budget cuts for two illegal oil wars . Everyone has been labeled as “nazi’s” by the nazi .
 Shoulda, coulda, woulda, taken another road if nazis hadn’t taken over U.S. and run it into ground a long time ago, says Obama .