 In the early morning of April 17th, 1961, a group of Cuban exiles attempted an invasion on the southwest coast of Cuba . The group attempted to invade Cuba .
 The exiles were directly financed and trained by the United States Central Intelligence Agency . The U.S. feared the expansion of communism in Latin America .
 Exiles opposed the Cuban revolution, which had nationalized many of the country’s services and centralized the press . The exiles, on the other hand, opposed the revolution, the Cuban government .
 The plan was to bomb important airfields in Cuba, then send two groups of soldiers to invade . Plan was to send troops to invade Cuba, and bomb airfields .
 On April 15, 1961, an airstrike by the US missed many of the important airfields in Cuba . The US airstrike missed many important air fields in Cuba, Cuba .
 The general public was notified, meaning a second airstrike wasn’t plausible . A second airstrike was not likely to happen again, meaning the public wasn't notified .
 The operation was a failure they were outnumbered, inexperienced, and under armed . They were outnumbered and inexperienced, they were under armed, they said . The operation failed, the operation was not successful .
 It created an everlasting hole in U.S. foreign relations, especially with Cuba . It created a lasting hole in the United States foreign relations .
 The Soviet Union wanted to deploy nuclear missiles in Cuba, just 50 miles from Florida . The situation only got worse when the Soviet Union tried to deploy missiles there .
 Both the United States and the Soviet Union had become superpowers after World War II, with both nations possessing supreme nuclear weapons .
 Nikita Khrushchev, the first secretary of the Soviet Union, was worried about the US’ “first strike capability” in which the States could destroy the USSR’s key nuclear infrastructure .
 A group of Soviet military specialists obtained a meeting with Fidel Castro in early 1962 . Fidel Castro was a member of a group of military experts .
 Cuba’s leadership believed that another invasion by the U.S. was only a matter of time, and agreed to the deployment . The Cuban government believed that the United States was going to invade .
 Castro initially objected because it would “make him appear as a Soviet puppet,” he eventually agreed . Castro was persuaded on the basis that it would help the entire Socialist camp . Castro himself initially objected .
 By July 1962, the program was fully approved, and the missiles began deployment in complete secrecy . The missiles were deployed in secrecy .
 As supplies were delivered to Cuba, the Soviet military repeatedly denied that they were offensive . The Soviet military denied that it was offensive .
 If an attack were to happen on the ships transporting supplies, it would mean war . They warned the U.S. that, if it happened, the United States would go to war .
 The United States government grew suspicious . CIA director John A McCone reasoned that it only made sense if the Soviet Union used them to shield missile bases from discovery . The U.S. government became suspicious .
 On the Senate floor, Senator Kenneth Keating warned that, “in all probability”, the Soviets were constructing a missile base in Cuba . Senator Keating: “In all probability,” the Soviets are constructing missile bases in Cuba.
 He put the blame on the Kennedy administration, and stated that they were covering up a crisis . The Kennedy administration was accused of covering up the crisis .
 US had been sending U-2 spy planes over Cuba since the Bay of Pigs invasion . U.S. had been using U.2 planes since the invasion .
 On October 15th, the CIA reviewed its photographs and identified missile bases in Cuba . The CIA has identified the bases in the country .
 John F Kennedy was notified about this, and quickly began discussing how to respond . Kennedy was contacted by the White House about the incident .
 The Soviet Union had placed nuclear missiles in Cuba, capable of striking the entirety of the U.S. The Soviets had placed the missiles on Cuba .
 On October 22nd, Kennedy delivered a speech to the nation, announcing the discovery of the missiles . Kennedy said the missiles were discovered in October .
 "I was a junior in high school in Maine, in . the middle of nowhere United States basically, up in rural Maine," he says . He says he grew up in Wilton Maine, "in the middle . of nowhere" Maine .
 "A lot of people I've talked to around here were really scared," he says . "They were really more frightened than I was," he adds . "I was really scared, they were in their early 20s," he said .
 "I was you know I was young and believing and hoping that things would be alright," she says . "But I was ... young and thinking and hoping things would go alright. But I was very young," she adds .
 At first, Kennedy was advised that an airstrike against Cuba would be the best course of action . Kennedy was initially told that a strike against Cuba was not the best option .
 President Barack Obama has decided on a naval blockade of the Strait of Black Sea . He has been in talks with his advisers to impose a blockade on the island .
 I think blockades and things like that are strong signals, that, y’know, we're taking this very seriously and we're not gonna fool with you. Blockades are a strong signal, he says, that the government is not fooling with you .
 President Obama says sanctions against Russia are 'very important' and 'important' in europe . Russia is the focus of Europe's anti-Russian sanctions .
 "Things like what’s going on right now bring back all these memories of the Cuban missile crisis and the cold war and the fall of the berlin wall, and different things like that. Y’know and things like . Things like . things like what's going on
 "I remember growing up knowing about the atom bomb and it was very scary, to think that that could be used again," says the author . "It's very scary," says author .
 Some people had drills where they went under desks and things like that . Some people went under their desks . Some of the drills were drills where people would go under desks or under desks .
 Throughout Kennedy’s short presidency, he was a controversial and flawed leader . Kennedy was a flawed leader, but he was also a flawed president .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin's decision to deal with the Soviets was the best choice of action . However, during the crisis, reasoning with the Soviet Union was not the best .
 Any option that would provoke the slightest bit of anger could mean world ending disaster . "World ending disaster" could be possible, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Debate and diplomacy between the two nations was very important during the crisis, says CNN.com's John Defterios.com .
 "I’m trying to think if there was somebody else, who was just a little bit older than me, who might have experienced it more. I’ve tried to think ... if there’s somebody else who’d experienced it, maybe it might have
 Kennedy was coming on the TV every night talking about this and people who knew how serious this was. Television was a big part of our lives, not just the newspapers, but television and television .
 It prevented the world from using nuclear weapons after seeing the devastating effects even the suggestion of nuclear war can cause .
 Russia’s invasion of Ukraine mirrors the threat of a nuclear war on a level not seen since October 1962 . The threat of nuclear war has not been seen since 1962 . Russia has invaded Ukraine .