 1966 RAND summary report posted today for the first time by the National Security Archive . Report: “The United States came fairly close to using tactical nuclear weapons” during the Taiwan Strait Crisis of 1958 .
 The U.S. contemplated this extreme response to anticipated Chinese aggression, the report says . Washington contemplated this response “despite opposition to its policy by most of its allies and many in the United States,” the report notes .
 Anastas Ivanovich Mikoyan was born on November 25, 1895, in Armenia . He is a former Soviet First Responder and Smiling Diplomat .
 Lenin was one of the most significant statesmen of the Soviet Union . He joined the Bolsheviks and later became one of its most prominent statesmen .
 On 125th anniversary of his birth, historians debate his role in Soviet domestic and foreign policy . Historians still debate the role of Soviet foreign policy in Soviet Russia .
 The current crisis with Turkey over Syria has raised questions about the security of 50 U.S. nuclear weapons stored at Incirlik Air Base . Nuclear Weapons and Turkey Since 1959 .
 These questions have been posed before, going back almost to the start of nuclear deployments in Turkey in 1959 . Turkey's first nuclear deployments began in 1959, with the first being held in Turkey .
 The Soviet Union put nuclear missiles in Cuba nearly 60 years ago . U.S. officials refused to believe that at least one Soviet motivation was the defense of Cuba .
 U.S. documents published in the Digital National Security Archive confirm a series of covert operations ordered by the Kennedy White House and run by the CIA in those years to overthrow the Castro regime . In hindsight, Moscow’s concerns about defending the island much more credible .
 The posting contains never before published translations of Russian memcons with Khrushchev and Thompson’s cables from Moscow . Never before published translation of never-before-published translations .
 A “Harsh and Terrible … Solution” is a new book by long-time colleagues of the National Security Archive, James G Blight and janet M Lang . It offers a fresh exploration of the 1962 Cuban missile crisis and plumbs its lessons .