 The story of the Cuban missiles begins in April 1962, when the Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev decided to increase very substantially the limited military support hitherto provided by the USSR to Fidel Castro in Cuba .
 U-2 reconnaissance plane spotted SA-2 missile sites on August 29, 1962, in Cuba . Kennedy went public with warning that land-to-air defensive missiles were acceptable .
 Kennedy administration had been assured, by Khrushchev and by Anatoly Dobrynin, the Soviet ambassador to the US, no such missiles were or would be placed in Cuba .
 Dobrynin reassured Robert Kennedy that he, too, knew nothing about ballistic missile emplacements . Robert Kennedy was reassured that he knew nothing of the ballistic missiles emplacement .
 The Soviet Union had never hitherto placed offensive missile bases outside its own territory, not even in neighboring countries of the Warsaw Pact . The significance of the MRBMs and IRBMs lay in their reach . The United States authorities accepted these reassurances .
 SS-4s were designed not to hit incoming aircraft but to land on targets deep inside the US . SS-5s had a range of about 1100 nautical miles, the range of an SS4 was nearly twice that . SS4s had an SS5 range of nearly twice
 A Soviet MRBM of that era, launched from Cuba, could hit Washington, D.C. An IRBM could hit almost any target in the continental US, sparing only the far Pacific Northwest .
 They were useless as defensive weapons; their only possible value was offensive . The only possible use was to be a deterrent to the offensives of others . The U.S. military says they are not only a deterrent but a deterrent .
 A U-2 flying over San Cristobal, in western Cuba, on October 14 spotted three missile sites under construction . The sites were identified in Washington as identical to known MRBM launch sites in the Soviet Union .
 The Joint Chiefs of Staff favored the most extreme strategy, but they had little civilian backing . Kennedy made his final decision on October 21, not until that day .
 The option of ignoring the build-up and continuing as before had no takers . Instead, the decision to continue as normal was made to make a decision to make the decision .
 An air strike risked missing some of the missile sites, or inviting a response from those still in place, or in some part of the world where the balance of forces favored the Soviet Union, notably Berlin .
 If nuclear warheads were not yet in Cuba, an air strike was excessive . A blockade on all incoming offensive weaponry would suffice . Conversely, if the nuclear warheads had not yet been in Cuba .
 An invasion could be kept in reserve as an option if all else failed . And since an invasion took some advance planning, it could be used as a backup .
 A naval blockade or quarantine would buy both sides time to reconsider . Meanwhile, a naval blockade would buy the U.S. time to consider the situation .
 Kennedy announced to the world the presence of offensive nuclear missiles in Cuba and the U.S. response . A limited naval quarantine until the offending weaponry had been removed was the option that Kennedy chose .
 Kennedy emphasized the threat to peace in the Western Hemisphere and the U.S. commitment to defending the West, as well as the danger now faced by Americans living under the shadow of nuclear missiles . Kennedy: "To justify his actions, Kennedy highlighted the threat of peace"
 The men sitting in the White House did not know this, however, and even those who suspected it could not be sure . Even those who knew this could not confirm it, however .
 When the quarantine went into effect at 10 AM on October 24, the crisis seemed to be approaching its climax . The quarantine was quarantined for the first time since October 24 .
 Far from expecting Khrushchev to accede to his demands, he feared a speed-up in missile-site construction, a formal threat of Soviet retaliation if the U.S. were to attack Cuba . In fact, the whole matter passed off peacefully .
 Kennedy and his colleagues took special care to seek out a harmless freighter to intercept and allow through, thus making their point without running undue risks . Kennedy and colleagues took care to find harmless freighters in order to make their point .
 Khrushchev ordered missile-carrying ships to stop and turn back, which they did on Thursday, October 25 . Kennedy had anticipated and hoped, as Kennedy had hoped, the ships would stop and return to the Soviet Union .
 The U.S. administration still had no solution to its primary concern, Soviet nuclear missiles already in Cuba . But the United States administration had no solutions to the problem .
 Mr President, we and you ought not now pull on the ends of the rope in which you have tied the knots of war, because the more the two of us pull, the tighter this knot will be tied . Mr President. Mr President .
 The knot may come so tight that even he who tied it will not have the strength to untie it . And then it will be necessary to cut that knot .
 Khrushchev’s letter was born of a growing fear in the Kremlin that Kennedy was about to attack Cuba and force a confrontation . The letter might have defused the crisis there and then .
 The Soviet proposal put Kennedy in a difficult position . Kennedy: "Well, this is unsettling now, George, because he’s got us in a pretty good spot here. This is unsettling, George"
 The complications of such an exchange , together with the shooting down of a U-2 reconnaissance plane over Cuba that same day, seemed to leave the crisis unresolved and the clock ticking . The plane was shot down by U.S. forces in Cuba .
 Kennedy’s military advisers insisted that delaying an air strike beyond Monday, October 29, was imprudent . But the President himself was more concerned than ever about the acknowledged impossibility of destroying all the missiles in one strike .
 In the end it was decided to reply to Khrushchev’s first letter and, in essence, accept it .
 Dobrynin’s report of this meeting may have exaggerated Robert Kennedy's message, but it had the desired result, he says . The president was under irresistible military pressure to commit the irreversible act .
 Radio Moscow broadcast Khrushchev’s formal acceptance of the official U.S. terms for an end to the crisis . “The Soviet Government… has given a new order to dismantle the arms which you described as offensive,” he said .
 U.S. pressed public advantage to insist that IL-28 light bombers be removed as well, even though Kennedy himself had privately recognized that they posed little threat . Much remained to be worked out, including the conditions of observation and supervision .
 On November 20 the quarantine was lifted, and on December 6 the last bomber was shipped out . Khrushchev conceded these terms, on November 20, and the last of the last bombers shipped out.
 It made no sense to install some of the Soviet Union’s most advanced military hardware seven thousand miles away on an undefendable island, in the hope that the U.S. would not notice what was happening until it was too late .
 Khrushchev was frustrated with his inability to shift the Western allies from Berlin . Potsdam accords was a source of irritation to the Soviet Union throughout the first decades of the cold war .
 A change in the Berlin situation would at most have been a side benefit of a Soviet nuclear presence in Cuba; it was not its main purpose . The main purpose was to compensate, rather desperately, for Soviet military shortcomings .
 The successful launching of Sputnik in 1957 and Khrushchev’s own exaggerated boasting had aroused American fears of a “missile gap” Kennedy successfully exploited those fears in his 1960 election campaign .
 High-level reconnaissance flights over the Soviet Union convinced the Americans that Soviet intercontinental ballistic capacity had been vastly overstated . In October 1961 Roswell Gilpatric, the U.S. assistant secretary of defense, had publicly revealed United States knowledge of Soviet strategic inferiority .
 A year later, by the time of the Cuban crisis, the Soviet Union was at a 17-1 disadvantage in intercontinental missiles . The Soviet Union knew this, and he knew that the Americans knew it .
 The temptation to place medium-range missiles just off the Florida coast seemed irresistible . The temptation was irresistible to place such a missile off the coast .
 Khrushchev complained to U.S. Ambassador Thompson in April 1961, “The USA…believes that it has the right to put military bases along the borders of the USSR’s borders”
 American experts had not fully appreciated the depth of Khrushchev’s fears for Cuban security . U.S. experts had been unaware of the depth and depth of the fears .
 With some help from Castro himself the United States had made of Cuba a pariah state . The U.S. had actively supported one abortive invasion and was known to be devising schemes to undermine and overthrow the local regime .
 Members of ExComm were old enough to remember, and invoke, the events of the Thirties and Forties .
 The errors of appeasement and the success of the Berlin airlift of 1948-1949, the lessons of the Korean War, were uppermost in their thinking . The lessons of Korea War were also uppermost .
 Kennedy was ultra-sensitive to any hint of indecision or weakness . After his criticisms of Eisenhower, his failure at the Bay of Pigs, and his poor showing at the 1961 Vienna summit, he was ultra sensitive to any hints of weakness or indecision .
 American pressure on the British and French to withdraw from Suez in 1956 led to fears among NATO countries that when it came to a war the U.S. might retreat to its hemisphere . The fears raised that the United States might abandon vulnerable and exposed European allies .
 The fiasco of the Bay of Pigs had taught Kennedy and his advisers the wisdom of observing at least the forms of legality . Conversely, the fiasco of that fiasco taught Kennedy the wisdom .
 Dean Rusk advised Kennedy not to take unannounced actions against allies . Foreign policy concerns made Kennedy simultaneously resolute and cautious .
 Domestic politics all pointed toward a need to appear uncompromising, at least in public . Domestic politics, however, all pointed .
 Republican congressmen had been warning of the growing threat from Soviet missiles in Cuba . The administration's belated public acknowledgement of the extent of the danger gave its opponents a leverage . Kennedy felt had to be offset by an appearance of granite resolve .
 Most of his nonmilitary advisers, with McNamara in the lead, were convinced that the missile emplacements had no impact on the United States’ overall strategic superiority and thus increased vulnerability .
 U.S. missile superiority kept Khrushchev from pushing too near the brink of nuclear war . As McGeorge Bundy later observed, it was not United States missile superiority but the mere risk of a nuclear war which kept him from ever pushing too far .
 President Kennedy was not much liked by his senior officers and faced a midterm election the following month . But he could hardly say this in public, even though he faced a public backlash .
 Robert Kennedy reported himself as having said to his older brother at the height of the crisis, “If you hadn’t acted you would have been impeached” The President apparently nodded agreement, according to Kennedy .
 This is characteristic hyperbole from the excitable younger Kennedy, but it certainly must have been a factor in the President’s decisions at the time .
 These background considerations had a major part in determining the U.S. response to the Cuban missile crisis . They helped define for the United States leadership just what sort of a crisis it actually was .
 Kennedy and his advisers were reluctant to play down the Soviet threat, or trade missiles in Turkey . Kennedy was reluctant to do anything else that might “let down our friends” and make them lose faith in U.S.
 The pair are the Rosencrantz and Guildenstern of the crisis plot, and their story is told in full for the first time in his book . They are the pair of the characters in a new book .
 NATO installed intermediate-range nuclear missiles in Turkey and Italy in 1957 . In December 1957 NATO decided to install the missiles in both countries . The missiles were installed in Italy and Turkey .
 Their presence fulfilled U.S. promises to provide its allies with credible defenses against the Soviet nuclear threat . Their presence provided a use for an early generation of vulnerable, ground-based, liquid-fueled American missiles that were obsolete long before the last of them was deployed .
 The Turks alone wanted them, and more than domestic political reasons than anything else else . The Turks wanted them for domestic political purposes, but not for anything else .
 The only military value of the Jupiters lay in increasing the number of targets the USSR would have to attack in the event of war . Few had any illusions about these weapons, which were provocative to the Soviets and of no help to West .
 Even Eisenhower, the president who approved their installation, thought them militarily insignificant, according to Nash . Nash: Even Eisenhower thought they were too small to be militarily significant .
 Some of the ExComm members calculated that even if an air strike on Cuba brought retaliation against the Jupiters, that would be a reasonable and tolerable risk . Khrushchev, meanwhile, was equally aware of the JUPiters’ negligible military significance, and he
 Khrushchev would later conclude, “This agreement was primarily of moral significance and had no practical consequences.” The agreement had “no practical consequences”
 Anatoly Dobrynin is to be believed to protect the future presidential ambitions of his brother, Anatoly . And partly, he is believed, to protect his brother's future .
 It is noteworthy that the Soviet leadership chose never to make it more widely known . The Soviet leadership, who might have had an interest in making it more public, chose not to .
 Two final considerations shaped and inhibited U.S. behavior in the crisis . The U.N. did not respond to the threat of a terrorist attack .
 CIA officials were ill-placed to minimize the danger in October . Having talked up the Cuban threat in public and assiduously encouraged and participated in ‘Mongoose’ schemes in 1961-1962 to destroy Castro, they were well-placed .
 The Kremlin did not fully grasp how much their preoccupations had made Cuba one of the Kremlin’s own major concerns .
 The visceral unacceptability to Americans of Soviet missiles being that close to home was itself a political element in the situation that Kennedy could hardly ignore . Once Khrushchev had decided to place offensive missiles there, there was Berlin, however .
 In retrospect it seems absurd that Kennedy and his advisers should have been so obsessed by the possibility of a Soviet move there . In retrospect, Kennedy's advisers seem to have been obsessed with the possibility .
 They were convinced that Khrushchev was engaged in a complex, Machiavellian ploy to achieve his longstanding German objectives . The Soviets were convinced he was trying to achieve their objectives .
 Hardly an hour passed during the first ten days of the crisis without ExComm reverting to the subject of West Berlin, to the need for a countermove .
 The lesson of 1948 had been learned too well, Bundy wrote . “To the Kennedy administration West Berlin was indeed a vital interest of the West,” Bundy wrote. “West Berlin was the most vulnerable, and of course the most . vulnerable”
 Kennedy and his colleagues saw in the missile emplacements in Cuba a Soviet device to blackmail a vulnerable America into giving way in Berlin . The irony is that the Berlin crisis of the early Sixties was already over .
 Khrushchev had been pressing for a "resolution" to the unfinished business of West Berlin . The former Soviet Union leader had hoped for a 'resolution' of the unfinished matter .
 On more than one occasion he had threatened to sign a separate peace treaty with the East German regime . He had also threatened to give the latter full control of access to Berlin’s western half .
 At the Vienna summit meeting with Kennedy he tried to use Soviet superiority in conventional forces as a threat to push the Americans out of West Berlin . At the time he was trying to use the Soviet superiority to push out West Berlin, he said .
 In the summer of 1961, Kennedy even increased the national defense budget specifically to buttress the U.S. presence there .
 Khrushchev had no intention of risking nuclear war for Germany . But the U.S. had sworn to defend the freedom of West Berlin by all means .
 East German authorities put up the Wall in August 1961 . Thousands of East German subjects were voting with their feet and heading west . The Wall was erected in 1961 .
 The Americans, here as elsewhere, took Soviet bluster and propaganda all too seriously . They built their understanding of US-Soviet relations around the Berlin question . Two months later he withdrew his earlier “deadline” for a peace treaty .
 This dramatically ratchets up the apparent meaning of the Cuban crisis, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "It's a sign that the U.S. is going to make it harder for the Cuban people"
 Give him an inch on Cuba, ran the general line, and he’ll take a mile on Berlin, he says . Give him a mile in Cuba, he'll take one inch on Berlin .
 The Kennedy Tapes provide the opportunity for us to think afresh about men we thought we knew, the more so since they were speaking ‘off the record’ Only the Kennedy brothers knew they were being recorded .
 Dean Acheson, a diplomat of considerable stature during his years as secretary of state under Truman, is revealed as a grumpy old statesman who has learned nothing and forgotten nothing . The film is based on the book "Acheson"
 Douglas Dillon, Kennedy’s urbane secretary of the treasury, comes across in the tapes as an unreasoning warmonger, hungry for military action . Richard Russell and William Fulbright were among the senior congressmen brought in on the secret .
 Russell declares, “A war, our destiny, will hinge on it.” Russell says Kennedy’s choices will determine the outcome of the war . Russell: “Our destiny, our future, our power, will depend on it .
 The advice Kennedy received from his service chiefs was similarly extreme . Fortunately, Kennedy was not seeking the advice of these men and their congressional colleagues, merely their support .
 From beginning to end they pressed for immediate and large-scale air strikes and an invasion . Only General Maxwell Taylor, their chairman, dissenting . Even after Khrushchev's acceptance of Kennedy’s terms they voted for military intervention nonetheless .
 Military contempt for the young president is palpable, with General LeMay’s remarks bordering on insolence . The military contempt is palpable .
 Kennedy only met with the group once, as a group, on October 19 . Kennedy's suspicion of the group was matched by his suspicion of them .
 General Wheeler: “From a military point of view, I feel that the lowest-risk course of action is the full gamut of military action by us.”
 Llewellyn Thompson, the former ambassador to Moscow, is especially impressive . Thompson is a former diplomat to Russia . Thompson was the U.S. ambassador to the Soviet Union .
 George Ball maintained a moderate attitude, always seeking the least provocative and most promising avenue out of the dilemma . Ball's later dissent from the Indochina policy of the Johnson years was not surprising to those who recall him .
 Ball reached on the first day of the crisis, that the Soviets didn’t realize what they had done . This advice was based on the insightful conclusion, which Ball reached . Ball concluded that the Soviet Union did not realize what it had done.
 Robert McNamara’s views may come as a surprise to those who recall his advocacy of bombing in Indochina . McGeorge Bundy was sharp and analytical, asking hard questions about risks of an attack .
 President Obama said the naval blockade option doesn't seem to be a very acceptable one . He acknowledged that “this alternative doesn’t seem to ... seem very ... acceptable one”
 Dean Rusk was always among the most clearheaded of the group in understanding that the crisis, and its resolution, were and must remain political . Rusk, too, comes across in these pages as a force for reason and calm .
 He spoke most emphatically on October 24 against those who wanted to capture and inspect Soviet vessels carrying arms . The point, he reminded colleagues more than once, was not to seize Soviet ships but simply to prevent missiles from reaching Cuba .
 Vice President Lyndon Johnson, too, displayed an unfamiliar side during these days . In view of his sad performance during the Vietnam War, it is worth recalling for the record that during the Cuban crisis at least he always favored negotiation .
 He spoke little and was not one of the men to whose opinion Kennedy paid very close attention to . He was not a man who spoke little .
 You know they’re working at night, and you can see them working in night . And I don’t see what you get with that photograph that’s so much more important than what you’ve got .
 Robert Kennedy’s political reputation can only suffer from the publication of these records . Robert Kennedy's political reputation will only suffer if these records are published, writes Andrew Hammond .
 He was one of those who accepted Khrushchev’s first communication and ignored the more troublesome follow-up letter . Thompson and Bundy saw the advantage of accepting the first communication, ignoring the second .
 In the early days of the crisis Robert Kennedy’s contributions were unhelpful, to say the least . Robert Kennedy's contributions to the crisis were not helpful, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 As the administration’s senior figure most intimately committed to the tactic of ‘dirty tricks,” he was angrily belligerent in response to the Soviet move . He was angry at the move .
 "Hell, if it's war that’s gonna come on this thing, or if he sticks those kinds of missiles after the warning," he said . "Then he’m gonna get into a war six months from now, or a year from now"
 This was consistent with the younger Kennedy’s personal obsession with the Cuban issue . So… So…””This was consistent . This is consistent with . The younger Kennedy was obsessed with the issue .
 He did not know the foreign policy questions in detail, but apparently thought himself to be expert in them . He said he thought himself an expert in foreign policy .
 Dobrynin, like everyone else, recognized the necessity of getting on with the younger Kennedy . He said: "I don't think it's a good thing to say goodbye to the president"
 Nothing in the recorded evidence or the recollections of the senior staff of either John Kennedy or Nikita Khrushchev suggests that Robert Kennedy’s ascension to the presidency would have been an asset to the United States .
 The most likely cause of a shooting war would have been sheer misadventure . A missile fired, a bomb dropped, a ship sunk by accident or by some unauthorized trigger-happy officer .
 The U.S. went to Defense Condition 2 on October 24 and the Soviets “unintentionally” brought down a U-2 over Cuba on October 27 . As it was, the United States went to defense Condition 2 .
 Either of these moves, or an attempt to stop a sensitive ship in the quarantine zone, could have been fatal . If only by misleading the other side into supposing that war was imminent, it would have been deadly .
 We might also ask what would have happened if Khrushchev had not accepted within twenty-four hours Kennedy’s reply/ultimatum of Saturday the 27th was not accepted .
 At the time it seemed as if the U.S. had no fallback position and would have had to begin air strikes and an invasion the following week, as ExComm had agreed it must, in view of the fact that construction of the missile sites was apparently continuing apace .
 Kennedy did have a secret reserve position . In fact, as we have only learned in recent years, Kennedy did . Kennedy did not reveal that .
 He would have authorized Rusk to encourage U Thant to propose a public missile swap which the U.S. would then have accepted, he says .
 If all else failed, Kennedy would have agreed to the terms of the second, “unacceptable” Soviet letter of September 27, proposing the removal of the Jupiters and an agreement not to invade Cuba in exchange for the dismantling of the missiles .
 Both leaders tried hard to pretend otherwise, for the sake of public appearance . Their diplomatic strategies depended upon the credibility of their nuclear threats .
 In The Glasnost Tapes, Khrushchev does suggest that precisely because the Soviet Union could not have responded to a Cuban invasion with an effective attack on the US, war might have broken out in the European theater instead .
 Khrushchev's own state of mind in the crucial ninety-six hours between the start of the quarantine and his agreement to remove the missiles is now quite clear . He was horrified at the prospect of war and decided very quickly that the game was not worth the candle .
 The whole crisis, and the degree of risk it entailed, thus hinged on a paradox . The crisis, however, was not without a paradox: It's a paradox, and it's not always possible to predict the outcome of the crisis .
 The temptation to act first and talk afterward might have proven irresistible . But had the Americans also known how many armed nuclear missiles the USSR had already installed in Cuba .
 This situation might have been made worse by Khrushchev, who, with his missiles securely in situ, could have been tempted to push his advantage well beyond what was prudent . At best he would then have suffered a reversal even more humiliating and public than the one he accepted on October 28
 Given Khrushchev’s decision to place nuclear missiles in Cuba, an international crisis of some kind was thus unavoidable . Given the decision, the international crisis was therefore unavoidable . The U.S. responded to the threat of nuclear weapons in Cuba .
 A simple American misunderstanding can stand as a metaphor for much of the early cold war . If it took the unnecessarily terrifying form that it did, this was in large measure because of a simple misunderstanding . The Cold War was largely due to a misunderstanding in the United States .
 Officials in Washington thought that their Soviet opponents were playing a complicated game of diplomatic chess . In fact, however, the Soviet leaders were not playing chess. They were subtly moving around .
 The outcome of the Cuban crisis would not have been very different if the Americans had realized sooner which game they were in . The risks encountered along the way would have been much reduced . Poker and chess have this in common: their outcome depends more on the nerve, character, and intuition of
 The more we learn of the Cuban missile crisis the more we must come to appreciate the two men who held our fate in their hands in those days . And we must also come to terms with the Cuban missiles crisis .
 Having made a major miscalculation, he resisted the temptation to raise the stakes . Having made the decision, he had to resist the temptation of raising the stakes again .
 Kennedy imposed a quarantine and demanded the removal of the missiles from Cuba . The Soviet leader could have responded by threatening nuclear retaliation if Soviet ships were intercepted or Cuban territory attacked .
 Khrushchev never even considered such a challenge . That, after all, was the logic of the missile emplacements in the first place .
 Castro: "There's no doubt that the Cuban people would have fought courageously or that they would have died heroically" Castro would have preferred an armed confrontation with the U.S.
 Khrushchev's decisions defused and resolved the Cuban crisis, and history owes him that much recognition . Khushchev's actions helped end the crisis, but he was a mistake .
 His own posturing, no less than that of Khrushchev, got the U.S. into its Cuban imbroglio in the first place . Kennedy’s need to seem strong, his concern for “credibility,” fueled the rhetoric that fueled the
 The Kennedy Tapes reveal a remarkable coolness in John Kennedy, a willingness and a capacity to listen, question, absorb, weigh, and finally adjudicate in extraordinary circumstances . He was a young president, under great pressure to do the “right” thing .
 At each turn in the proceedings, Kennedy chose the most moderate available option . Sometimes against the specialized advice pressing in upon him, Kennedy made the right decision .
 Instead of an invasion he favored an air strike on missile bases . Instead of a blanket air strike he favored selective strikes only . He insisted that no strikes, however selective, should happen until warning was given .
 He opted for a naval blockade over immediate military action, and a partial naval quarantine over a blanket blockade on all shipping . Kennedy insisted that an innocuous ship of non-Soviet registry was targeted for a symbolic exercise of the quarantine .
 He ignored suggestions that the U.S. might take advantage of the quarantine to seize Soviet ships carrying missiles in order to learn more about the Soviet weapons program .
 He rebuffed all pressure to respond aggressively when Captain Rudolf Anderson’s U-2 was shot down over Cuba on October 27 . He repeatedly postponed the confidential deadline after which the countdown to United States military intervention would begin .
 He welcomed the opportunity to use the Jupiter missiles in Turkey as a secret bargaining ploy . He authorized his secretary of state to have the United Nations urge him publicly to accept such a trade if all else failed .
 Of course Kennedy’s motives were never unmixed, and like any politician he sought to turn his management of the affair into a political asset . Like any politician, Kennedy wanted to turn it into an asset for his political gain .
 Stevenson, it was hinted, had been “soft” during the crisis . Stevenson favored negotiations and a missile “trade,” in contrast to Kennedy’s own firm, virile position . Stevenson was the president of the U.S. during the Cold War
 The implication that Stevenson had been unwilling to “stand up to” the Soviets was doubly misleading . But after Charles Bartlett and Joseph Alsop published it in their “inside’s account of the crisis in the December 8, 1962 issue of The Saturday Evening
 It is a grimly sobering exercise to insert into The Kennedy Tapes some of JFK’s recent successors and guess at their likely conduct under such pressure .
 One of the side benefits of the Cuban crisis is that none of them has ever had to face similarly trying circumstances . The Cuban crisis has never seen a similar situation in the U.S.
 Intellectual activity is a little bit like seduction, says Judt Judt . Judt: Intellectual activity should be a little more seductive than seduction .
 A History of Europe Since 1945, Ill Fares the Land, Ill . The Burden of Responsibility: Blum, Camus, Aron, and the French Twentieth Century, among other books .
 Under international law, Cuba had a right to obtain and install defensive weaponry so long as it did not threaten peace in the region . Under the Rio de Janeiro Treaty of 1947, Cuba was allowed to obtain defensive weaponry .
 Kennedy's error was crucial in sparing Kennedy that decision . He was perhaps wrong, but it was crucial to save Kennedy's life . Kennedy's mistake saved Kennedy from harm .
 The Soviet Presidium approved their removal on November 16, despite Mikoyan's prior assurance to Castro that the Soviet Union would not concede on this point . But he nonetheless instructed the Presidium to approve their removal .
 Khrushchev was obsessed by Soviet strategic vulnerability . He refused to accept any test ban agreement that required on-site inspection . The Last Testament .
 The logic of Khrushchev’s thinking was not lost on some U.S. policy-makers well before October 1962 . ‘Kirrushchev's thinking’ was not known to some policy makers .
 The Turks had no objection to exchanging Jupiters for submarine-based Polaris missiles, but since the latter would not be available until the following spring they were reluctant to agree to anything until then .
 This was one of the most serious charges against Khrushchev when he was deposed in 1964 . The charges included charges that he was not allowed to stand trial in the Soviet Union .
 The Kennedy Tapes, like Dobrynin in his memoirs, play down this cloak-and-dagger aspect of US-Soviet relations . But the editors of the tapes play down the role of privileged American journalists, Soviet secret agents, and Washington barmen .
 Khrushchev’s secrecy, the fact that he had taken none of his own messengers into his confidence over the missile emplacements, undermined their credibility . The President was most offended by the fact he had used confidential channels to lie to him .
 The shock of coming so near to the brink radically altered the rules of the game thereafter . In any case, the shock of . coming so close to . being so near . near to . the brink altered the . rules of . the game afterwards .
 A hotline was set up, Ambassador Dobrynin became the main interlocutor, and confidential “feelers” and “back channels” real or imagined, lost their significance . “Back channels,’ and ‘feelers,” or �
 Kennedy's other senior advisers were unaware of it at the time and for decades afterward . Kennedy’s other senior adviser was unaware of the affair .
 Castro was misled by Soviet nuclear posturing into believing that the strategic balance favored his Soviet protectors . Castro had been misled by posturing . Castro believed that the balance of power was favorable to the Soviet Union .
 The missiles in Cuba were always kept under exclusively Soviet command and control . But despite a certain enthusiasm for their young clients, the Kremlin leadership had taken the measure of Castro from the start .
 Once you declare war you will be compelled to invade, the President warned them, he warned them . That is just the outcome the blockade was intended to help avert, he said .
 This week's featured news stories from around the world's top 10 news stories . Share your knowledge of upcoming events in the U.S. Share your photos with iReport .