 Despite Obama’s recent “bumps in the road” gaffe, these events are serious . And despite recent ‘bumps’ in road’ gaffes, they are serious, says Obama .
 In view of the burgeoning and imminent nuclear threat from Iran, either Obama or Romney will be on the hot seat . Israel’s Benjamin Netanyahu delineated the threat at the U.N. by delineating it at the United Nations .
 The rough-and-tumble of being president means dealing with huge crises and heavy lifting . President Barack Obama has had a rough time dealing with crises, heavy lifting, but it's not always easy .
 Pushing, shoving and sharp elbows needed to get elected pale compared to making life-and-death decisions for America in the Oval Office . Pushing and shoving may pale when compared to the decisions made by the White House .
 Hillary Clinton’s biting “3m.” campaign ad in 2008 took Obama to task for his inexperience . Hillary Clinton's '3m' campaign ad featured sleeping kids .
 Whether it’s someone who already knows the world leaders and knows the military, it's someone who knows the nation's leaders, it will be someone who does so much .
 The back-and-forth of national and international politics often is the essence of such intrigue . For stone-cold political junkies such as this writer, this writer is fascinated by the back and forth of politics .
 One of the most memorable examples began 50 years ago this week and lasted 13 days–Oct.-28, 1962 . It was a 13-day stand-off that lasted between October-Oct.-Nov. 1962 .
 As a devotee of vintage films, I love those detailing political machinations . I'm a fan of vintage film, I'm fascinated by the political machination .
 As we await the Nov. election, let's look back at ‘The Missiles of October’ – one of the all-time best examples of what it means to be president .
 The tense situation came to light on Oct. 31, 1962 . It was the first time the U.S. government had been involved in the Vietnam War . The Vietnam War ended in 1968 .
 President John F Kennedy was shown U-2 spy plane photos detailing hard evidence that the Russians were installing offensive missiles with nuclear warheads on Fidel Castro’s island of Cuba . The Communist stronghold a short 90 miles from our shores .
 At that time, everyone was terrified that the Cold War between America and the Soviet Union would become hot . At the time, the U.S. and Soviet Union was at odds .
 Khrushchev’s insistence the missiles were defensive–could not be tolerated . Using Cuba as a staging area for an attack on the United States or invasion in the Western Hemisphere .
 JFK learned missiles would be ready to fire in two weeks . JFK and the executive committee of the National Security Council met many times to discuss the missile program . JFK learned the missiles would fire in just two weeks, JFK said .
 After serious and contentious debate, the president and his team voted to impose a naval blockade by warships . The blockade would prevent Soviet vessels from delivering additional weapons and other military supplies .
 He said there are Soviet nuclear weapons in Cuba, he had imposed a quarantine of offensive weapons . An attack on America would be met with a full retaliatory response against Russia, he said .
 Making "The Missiles of October" even more engrossing was casting lead roles with astounding look-alikes .
 Rudolph Anderson’s U-2 was shot down over Cuba by a Soviet surface-to-air missile, prompting an angry outburst by Khrushchev against his own military . Rudolph Anderson was killed in the attack .
 In return for Kennedy’s pledge not to invade Cuba, Khrushchev ordered that Soviet nuclear missiles, surface to-air missiles and rockets be dismantled and destroyed . In the end, the Soviet nuclear longand medium-range missiles were dismantled .
 Khrushchev's request that America’s obsolete Jupiter missiles in Turkey also be withdrawn was rejected by Kennedy . Kennedy also rejected the request for the withdrawal of U.S. Jupiter missiles from Turkey .