 In October 1962, U.S. president John F Kennedy warned his people of the amalgamation of Soviet arms in Cuba . The world watched as the world watched perilously, as U S. president Kennedy warned .
 Kennedy refused to accept ‘offensive’ Soviet artillery in such close proximity to the U.S. Khrushchev had already planned a stealthily build-up .
 The world faced the terrifying prospect of a nuclear war for several days . Two of the world's superpower’s refused to meet an agreement . The world faces the daunting prospect of nuclear war .
 With the Soviet exodus from Cuba, President Kennedy’s popularity had risen sharply as journalists labelled him the “architect of a great diplomatic victory.” President Kennedy .
 In a diametrically opposed view, conservatives assert his actions were not decisive enough in securing America’s national security . Conservatives assert he did not do enough to secure the U.S. in the world .
 It appeared at the time that the build-up of arms within Cuba was not only a confrontation to the U.S. but a direct threat to national security that was felt and feared by both the public and leading politicians . Yet, it appeared .
 Both these accounts demonstrate the extreme severity in which Congress perceived the Soviet threat . Both accounts show the severity of the threat Congress perceived .
 Congress told Congress that action needed to be taken upon the build-up of nuclear arms in Cuba . Congress told the U.S. Congress it needed to take action against Cuba's nuclear arms .
 Having missiles in Cuba allowed the Soviets to bypass the U.S. warning radars, especially the Ballistics Missile Early Warning system, which was stationed in the North Pole . Furthermore, having missiles within Cuba allowed . the U S. to bypass .
 By bypassing the U S. warning radars, it certainly amplified the risk of a surprise strike upon certain American air bases and important command posts . The U.S. warning system was used to detect a strike on American targets .
 The U.S. government was trying to protect itself from an offensive attack from the Soviet Union in order to prevent a Soviet invasion of the U. S. from being attacked by the Soviets .
 It was quite clear from these precautions that the impending nuclear threat in Cuba threatened the lives of U.S. civilians, troops, and government officials . The Cuban government was taking precautions .
 Kennedy maintained control of the situation and eventually caused the Soviet’s to retreat . Fortunately, the Cuban Mission Crisis never escalated this far .
 In the first ExComm meeting, evidence was presented of medium-range missiles in Cuba that had the potential to hit Washington, Dallas, St. Louis, Dallas and St. Charles .
 Evidence was presented to ExComm of the development of 1,000-mile medium-range ballistic missiles and 2,200-mile intermediate-range missiles .
 Experts predicted forty nuclear warheads had the capacity to hit targets as far as Wyoming and Montana . It was also predicted that forty warheads could hit targets in Montana and Wyoming .
 Robert Kennedy predicted that the arms had the power and potential to kill as many as eighty million Americans . Robert Kennedy had predicted that these arms could kill up to 80 million Americans in the coming years .
 The quarantine was a first step that involved confiscating all offensive military equipment that was being shipped to Cuba . The quarantine is the first step to stop the flow of offensive military gear into Cuba .
 If Khrushchev refused to remove Soviet missiles, John F Kennedy promised ‘further action’ would be taken . Kennedy promised to take further action in the event of the incident .
 Khrushchev agreed to ithdrawal weapons that Kennedy had deemed offensive, while Kennedy pledged not to invade Cuba . Kennedy had agreed to withdraw weapons that he deemed offensive .
 The U.S. response was a wise choice as it applied the greatest level of force upon the Soviet Union while minimizing the risk of a thermonuclear war . The U S. response, in the form of a blockade, was a smart choice . The blockade was a good choice
 Sorensen, a traditionalist who was also an advisor to Kennedy, believes Kennedy responded superbly to the crisis . Kennedy conducted himself in a responsible and composed matter throughout the confrontation .
 Kennedy had not just national interests in mind but civilians in other countries . Sorensen also noted that Kennedy had also had the interest of other nations in his decision .
 Sorensen appeared to show admiration for Kennedy’s actions, as he believed Kennedy remained in control of events, despite being provoked by Khrushchev .
 Sorensen also highlighted the Presidents' poise in the confrontation, as he refused to make a reckless decision to attack Cuba .
 McGeorge Bundy praised President Kennedy for “his personal management of the nuclear confrontation.” Bundy, another traditionalist member of Excomm, praised Kennedy for his ‘personal management’ of nuclear confrontation . Bundy also praised Kennedy’s “personal management . of the
 Kennedy demonstrated decisiveness, intelligence, and compassion while seeking to mitigate the risk of war by causing Khrushchev to compromise . Bundy, Bundy, Sorensen, and Kennedy recall their personal accounts of Kennedy .
 The Cold War saw the installation of a phone link that allowed direct communication between Russian and American leaders . The signing of a nuclear test ban treaty endorsed a harmonious coexistence between the two superpowers .
 There were a few individuals who voiced their concerns over certain decisions Kennedy made . Kennedy was praised for his dealings with the Soviets .
 U.S. policy within Cuba only consisted of diplomatic and economic means . Only until later were trade restrictions forced to be imposed on Cuba .
 Using this word “defensive”, the American President was justifying and legitimizing the build-up of arms in the backyard of the U S. The U.S. allowed Cuba to asseverate itself as the hemisphere’s third largest military authority .
 Kennedy failed to initiate an intrusion upon Cuba’s burgeoning military at an early, yet critical point . It communicated to the Soviet's that there was possibility for them to upset the balance of power within any country, as long as they were granted authorization by local governments .
 By not invading Cuba, the Soviet’s and Cubans proceeded to integrate armed forces that had the potential to cause serious damage upon Western civilization, power and influence . The Soviet-Cuban forces were integrated into one of the world's most powerful nations .
 Kennedy failed to stop the military build-up in Cuba . There was also controversy in his decision to implement a naval quarantine in Cuba.
 Kennedy’s choice to quarantine, rather than impose a full air-strike upon Cuba, had its weakness . Kennedy chose to quarantine Cuba rather than imposing an air strike on Cuba . Kennedy's decision to quarantine was a weakness .
 The moment of crisis, the threat of communism, and the risk of perhaps disruptive world peace all suggested that Kennedy could have caused a decisive answer to the problems escalating in Cuba . The risk of disruption in world peace was also a concern for Kennedy .
 Instead of quarantining Cuba from naval imports, Kennedy’s government could have forcibly demanded the departure of Russians, along with their weapons within Cuba altogether .
 S. S. could have also provided the Cuban people with a democratic republic that consisted of free elections under UN supervision . U.S. could also have provided the Cubans with free elections, but could also provide them with a democracy .
 Kennedy instead, elected for a naval blockade, which could have potentially left open a possibility for the Soviet’s to import arms via the air . Kennedy instead opted to opt out of the possibility of a possible airmailing of arms .
 The blockade failed to give the U S. any assurance or certainty that the Soviets would retreat from Cuba . In addition to this, the U.S. did not have any assurance that the Soviet Union would retreat .
 If Kennedy elected for an invasion and demanded Khrushchev to leave, it would have eliminated all doubt of a Soviet retreat . It would have ensured the protection of America’s national security, he says .
 In deciding on implementing a naval quarantine around Cuba, Kennedy avoided an airstrike and possible invasion, by giving his opponent time to reassess his actions . Kennedy avoided a possible invasion of Cuba by allowing his opponent more time .
 Kennedy stood decisive and resolute, as he resisted the temptation of gambling with the safety of the world . He continued to monitor the sea and intercept suspicious naval activity around Cuba .
 Kennedy proceeded and continued to implement the blockade, which was clearly an attempt to avoid any direct military means . The blockade provided Khrushchev with a threat of danger, yet also allowing him with the option to retreat .
 Kennedy always continued to pressure his Soviet counterpart whenever he sensed hesitation or deception . Although this was seen as “weak” from conservatives, it was important that Kennedy continued to press his .
 Kennedy forced a peaceful resolution that left his colleagues in awe of his poise and determination dealing with such a crisis . Kennedy never wielded from his objective, as he forced a peace resolution . Kennedy's colleagues were in awe .
 President Obama said if he had been in the White House, “instead of the Kremlin, would have acted like Kennedy’s.” “would’t act like Kennedy,” he said .
 Raymond Garthoff, “Memo on the Military Significance of the Soviet Missiles Bases in Cuba,” October 27, 1962. “The Cuban Missile Bases are the most important military bases in the world .
 Essay type research: Why did John Proctor decide to Rip up his signed Confession in Act 4 of the Crucible? Essay: John proctor is a good man . Essay is written in response to the question .
 Despite his confessions to the court they continue to question him and leave him with 2 choices, to Confess to witchcraft or stay true . Despite his confession to witchcraft, the court still questions him and leaves him with two choices .
 Harry Dunning writes about the night his father murdered his mother . John F Kennedy and Yellow Card Man Essay type Research .
 John F Kennedy the Space Exploration Essay type Research James Moyer Mr Sims U S History Period 3 16 May 2012 .