 History as POINTS AND LINES by Yuri Tarnopolsky and Ulf Grenander Manuscript 1998-2003 . Most of this manuscript was finished by 1998. Most of it was completed by 1998 .
 In 2001 the world entered a turbulent transition state toward an unknown future . In 2001, President George W. Bush was assassinated by the United States .
 We need to look for a scientific consensus on complexity, as opposed to divisive political, moral, and religious approaches . Facing global uncertainty from many directions: climate change, energy constraints, new forms of warfare, borderless world, incompetence of governments .
 The pattern view of the world can be an effective way to understand the developing systems of unprecedented complexity, the book says .
 The intent of this manuscript is to attract attention to Pattern Theory as the science of complex systems . Pattern Theory is a science of the art of pattern theory, rather than complex systems theory .
 The style reflects our desire to educate, stimulate, and entertain, while introducing the reader to new and little known or forgotten ideas .
 The manuscript does not reflect the recent developments in non-numerical Pattern Theory . Ulf Grenander should be mentioned in the first place .
 How Societies Choose to Fail or Succeed approaches the subject from a different angle . It is remarkably close to the spirit of Pattern Theory .
 Our manuscript is a register of questions rather than answers, but, as the history of science demonstrates, the right question is half the answer . The right question in science is the answer to the right answer .
 History is the most dangerous product developed by the chemistry of the intellect. History is most dangerous to history, says historian . "History is the only thing that can be learned from history," he says .
 History seems to be of no immediate practical value, but a dynamic society buries the dead and goes on . The dead and the dead are buried in the dead, and history is of no practical value .
 History is art, with Clio as its muse, and mathematics is notoriously dry . Clio was created by Clio, who was born in Clio in 1883 .
 Pitirim Sorokin filled four volumes of his Social and Cultural Dynamics with numbers attached to events of the past . Scores of textbooks and papers on quantitative methods in history have appeared .
 There are sites on the World Wide Web on the use of computers in history, college courses, software for historians, and scientific societies .
 This book, written by a mathematician and a chemist, is an experiment, as we hope, in fusion rather than confusion . This book is written by mathematician and chemist . We hope it will be an experiment in fusion instead of confusion .
 It is definitely neither about history of mathematics nor about chemistry nor about numbers and calculations . It is about history and chemistry, not about numbers or calculations .
 We are not going to do any historical research, for which we, due to our backgrounds, are not equipped . We will not go to the historical sites to find out what happened in the 1930s .
 Our sources on history are mostly textbooks and selected books for general audience . Our sources include selected books on history .
 Our knowledge of the subject, except for the events of the twentieth century that we personally witnessed, is secondhand . We have no idea of the events in the last century, but we are happy to share our views .
 "At this point we are not much interested even in the historical truth itself," says the author . At this point, we are interested in the truth itself, he says .
 The reasons for such an apparently radical statement will be explained gradually . The reasons behind such a radical statement are to be explained slowly .
 We might have overlooked some sources that expressed similar or same ideas in the past . We might also have overlooked others who expressed similar ideas .
 We cannot provide any consistent review of the literature, the volume of which is enormous, we cannot provide a consistent review . The volume of the study is enormous .
 We take fragments of historical knowledge without critical assessment and use them as experimental material . We use them to test our knowledge of the past and present .
 The purpose of our experiment is to place history on the examination table of a certain apparatus which works like an X-ray machine or CAT scan . The purpose is to put history on an apparatus that works like a CAT scan or X-rays .
 Pattern theory is a new area of mathematics that was developed by one of the authors and accidentally discovered by the other . It is called pattern theory, a new mathematical theory that has been developed by the authors .
 We want to take a look at history not because we search for any hidden defects, but because we can place under scrutiny of pattern theory literally everything . We want history not to search for hidden defects but to examine patterns of history .
 Anything can be written about anything, including human and animal skeletons, grammars, mathematical functions, automata, industrial processes, weaving patterns of fabric, molecules, handwriting, spectra, handwriting and spectra .
 We can examine with X rays a multitude of totally unrelated objects as different as live human hand, Rembrandt’s painting, Egyptian mummy, horse's leg, and the suitcase of an airline passenger . X rays can be used to examine a variety of unrelated objects, such as
 What we see in each of them is a black-and-white shadow with very little resemblance of what is seen on the surface . What is seen is a shadow with little resemblance to what we see on the ground .
 It can be easily scanned and reduced to a long sequence of numbers stored in computer memory . Each point presents the darkness or brightness of a certain point .
 All X ray photos, so put it bluntly, are made of the same black and white stuff, although they are derived from strikingly different objects . All X rays are made from the same material, but they're derived from remarkably different objects.
 What unites all those heterogeneous objects is that they are complex and have structure invisible by the naked eye . The structure of the objects is invisible by a naked eye, the artist says .
 The application of pattern theory to understanding medical imaging is one of the fastest growing . Pattern theory is used to understand the effects of medical imaging on patients .
 We are attempting to apply the same principles to the body of historical narrative. Here we are trying to apply to the same principle to the historical narrative .
 Following this analogy, we will try to show how to produce the image of the skeleton . We will also speculate on how to understand what it tells us .
 If it turns out that a historical narrative and events behind it cast the same shadows of the wall of the cave as horse, suitcase, and chemical reaction in a test tube, this would mean that history, regardless of its content, joins the world of dissimilar objects built along similar principles
 History is such a colorful subject that we will not resist the temptation to put some flesh on the mathematical bones . Of course, history is such an issue that we'll not resist our temptation .
 We would say that our expectations were exceeded. If, however, it stimulated a historian to repeat it in a professional fashion, we would say . We would be pleased to see a historian repeat it .
 The general mindset of pattern theory is not alien to modern culture and we believe that the reader will easily recognize its relation to past and current trends . We believe that we can easily recognize pattern theory as a modern-day example .
 The second half of the twentieth century was deeply imprinted by a dichotomy that Charles P Snow had attributed to the contemporary culture . The second part of the 20th century was shaped by the dichotomy of modern culture, Snow says .
 He saw an impenetrable divide between people living in two immiscible media—natural sciences and liberal arts . He saw a divide between natural sciences and the liberal arts, he said .
 The slow process of fusion goes on in the new century and in unexpected directions . The Sociology of Philosophies by Randall Collins illustrates this point .
 At present, both opposites—digerati and literati—are separated by a very diffuse border . At present they are separated by an extremely diffuse border, says the author .
 We feel how the landscape, vegetation, the color of the skies, and the language of aborigines changes, and somewhere after the exit to Psychology and passing the exits to Sociology and History, we arrive at a different world . And yet driving along the less traveled route from Physics
 Among the major changes, we would certainly notice the fading presence of mathematics, the growing presence of images and metaphors, the declining power of logic, and the rising spontaneity of self-expression . We would also notice the declining presence of logic and the rise of images .
 The mathematician calls many things with one name, while the poet calls one thing with many names . The poet says: "The mathematician calls . Many things have one name," says the poet .
 The simplified truss bridge in the picture presents a simple pattern of identical triangles with joint edges . The simplified bridge in this picture is presented by a simple design pattern .
 We can describe the pattern of the bridge in a few words of common language, extend it in any direction, and apply to indefinite number of similar bridges . We can also describe the patterns of the bridges in any way, using the pattern in common language .
 When we looking at the world as a collection of patterns, it loses most of its color, smell, weight, texture, beauty, and other material and spiritual qualities . When we . looking at . the world, we . look at patterns, we lose most of our color, smells
 We can code the skeletons of things in sequences of numbers, as in digital photography, but the core of what they tell us can be expressed in points and lines . The skeleton of things can be found in the form of points, lines, points or lines .
 For some readers points and lines may invoke the childhood’s nightmare of a geometry textbook . For others it may invoke some memories of the childhood's nightmare .
 The image of history which is one for everybody, like the multiplication table, could be terrifying . It is one of history's one for everyone, like a multiplication table .
 It would be only natural to doubt whether we can gain anything by applying any ascetic approach to liberal arts such as history, flapping in the transient winds of today’s political weather .
 Spinoza tried to apply mathematics to philosophy in his Ethics . It was this kind of mathematics that he tried to use to apply to philosophy .
 Computer experts say computers are the most powerful marriage brokers of our time . But with a mutual curiosity on both sides, computers can be a powerful marriage broker .
 Pattern Theory is an attempt to draw attention to new intellectual adventurers to pattern theory and provide them with basic tools that one of the authors developed .
 The “atoms” of pattern theory are called generators and “bonds” are called bond couples . “Atoms’ of patterns are generators and bond couples are bond couples. “Generators’ are generators .
 Pattern theory is a fonnal mathematical theory of all such objects, including real molecules . It is a mathematical theory for all objects, such as real molecules, to be patterned . Pattern theory has been applied to all molecules in the world .
 Some bonds, therefore, are ‘stronger’ than others, and some configurations are more probable than others . Some configurations are 'more likely than others', which translates probability into energy . Some bonds are 'stronger' than others; some bonds are more likely to be '
 Some configurations are stable and lasting, others, like the 24 hours of the day of Presidential Elections of 2000, are unstable, fuzzy, transient, and short-living .
 This seems like a very intangible kind of discussion, especially if we are frustrated by the TV reports from the hot spots of the globe . This seems to be like a discussion of the world's hot spots .
 To give an idea, we do not offer a new theory of history, but, rather, try to generalize how events happen, whether real or imaginary . We try to give a generalizing of events, whether imaginary or real, in this case .
 Romeo and Juliet and West Side Story are two different stories, but when one story is transformed into another, the pattern is preserved . The pattern of the story is preserved when a story is turned into another .
 Our approach is more general than that of that of a historian and it may raise some eyebrows . Our approach to the history of the past may raise eyebrows, says historian John Defterios .
 A theory of folk tales is not a treatise on the properties of dragons and magic swords but an analysis of what remains constant when we jump from tale to tale . If this is a theory, then it is a . theory of histories, as a theory of history .
 "The reader who wants to understand this book has to follow the authors all the way," says author . "This book is the work of the authors," she says . "It's a good book, but it's not easy to read," she adds .
 In first fifteen chapters, we browse through some episodes of history, share some observations on the use of geometrical imagery in the works of historians . We prepare the reader 13 to handling a few basic mathematical, physical, and chemical ideas .
 We want to show that most of those ideas have always been secretly present in works of historians and sociologists . We hope to show most of the ideas have been hidden in history and sociology . We also show that the ideas are hidden in the history of American history .
 At the same time we want to locate our own place among different views of the world . At the time, we also want to find a place in the world, and find a common place among others . We want to be able to find our place among other views of world .
 We formulate the ideas of generator, bond couple, regularity, bond relation, transformation, etc., certainly, with much less rigor than it is done in original sources . We formulate ideas of generators, bond couples, regularities, etc. ... with little rigor, rather than
 The phenomenon of catalysis is more general than chemists and stock market veterans might believe . Next, we add more examples and look into dynamic aspects of regularity and structural change .
 In Chapters 22 to 25 we apply our tools to some large historical developments and fonnations . We apply these tools to our toolkit to some of the world's largest historical developments .
 "We wish history did not give us an opportunity to add Chapter 28 prompted by the tragedy of September 11, 2001," says President Obama .
 It was, however, a typical case of transition from one configuration to another, which is essentially the subject of this book . It was a typical transition between configuration and another .
 "We would like to take this yet unfinished transition as another illustration of our approach," says President Obama . "We are committed to the future of the U.S. military," says Obama .
 We assume that most readers are very far from mathematics, physics, and chemistry . We assume most readers don't understand mathematics or physics .
 The following Chapter 1, for example, helps the reader to notice the persistent tendency of our mind to find connections between different things and ideas . The following chapter 1 explains how the mind finds connections between ideas .
 The title of this chapter means “after this, therefore because of this” It is the Latin tenn for a common logical error of concluding that if one event precedes another, it causes it . Post hoc, ergo propter hoc, is Latin for the common logical
 It would be erroneous to conclude that lightning caused the rain to follow, but it does . Very often it does, and the lightning causes the subsequent thunder, but not the rain .
 The logical error turned to be very productive at the very dawn of the human understanding of the world because it had shaped the very concept of cause and effect . It was very productive in the very early days of understanding the world .
 The world appeared not as a flurry of sensations, but as a system of lasting links and pennanent bonds . The world seemed to be more like a nation of nations, rather than a nation, it seemed like a world of nations .
 Human knowledge became to grow and evolve as a tribal hut grows when branches are tied together in a stable structure that can be changed, repaired, or abandoned altogether . A tribal hut is a stable, stable structure where branches can be tied together and repaired .
 The hypertext link of the web page is significantly “dematerialized” because it is a state rather than physical body . To establish or break it requires a very small amount of energy to establish or make it .
 An idea, for example, causality, truth, or guilt, has a similar fragile nature in our brain, but this is not so simple . Apparently, an idea of causality or truth, truth or guilt is also fragile .
 It is equally easy to type a word into computer memory or erase it, but to make people abandon their ideas or acquire new ones is a hard work, says author .
 Looking at an iron bridge, we can clearly see its structural elements and the way they are riveted, bolted, or welded together . We can also see the structural elements of an iron structure .
 Since the very beginning of history people believed that some ideas would stick together and some would not . Some ideas stick together, and some will not, according to experts .
 They used to build models of the world basing on some assumptions about their properties . The models are based on assumptions about the properties of each object .
 From the start of human quest for understanding the surrounding world, it was very important to find some guidelines to distinguish observations that have some affinity to each other from those that do not want to be close in any sense, as well as those that have no apparent preference whatsoever .
 Ad hoc ergo ergo propter hoc was an obvious way of driving a rivet through the right hole while building the structure of knowledge . Ad hoc was the obvious way to drive a rivete through a hole .
 Although lightning and the rain do not always follow each other, it happens often enough . The lightning and rain often happen often enough in the world .
 Pre-scientific ideas often express the belief that similar acts are in some way attracted to each other so that if one act is performed, then the other is likely to follow . Pre-Scientific ideas believe that if a person performs a similar act, the other follows .
 This underlies the imitative magic whose basis is therefore more theoretical than empirical . This is underlying the 'imitative magic' that underlies its 'informative magic'
 In Thiiringen the man who sows flax carries the seed in a long bag which reaches from his shoulders to his knees, and he walks with long strides, so that the bag sways to and fro .
 In the interior of Sumatra the rice is sown by women who, in sowing, let their hair hang loose down their back, in order that the rice may grow luxuriantly and have long stalks .
 The modem burning of the flag or the enemy leader in effigy, as well as the revulsion toward burning the national flag, seem to come from the same ancient belief .
 The search for rules or regularity in establishing li nk s goes back at least six thousand years, as the rich written heritage of Mesopotamia testifies . It is not the first time the search for regularity or rules has been found in the world .
 The people there made their conclusion basing on extremely superficial similarity, sometimes based on the sound of the word . The people at the center of the debate made their conclusions based on very superficial similarity .
 The following illustration may seem too technical, but it gives us a unique opportunity to look right into the mind of ancient people . Moreover, such observations must have led them to wonder to what extent the following events could not have been not only preceded, but also announced by the 18 anteced
 If the fact is authentic, we would have a double reason to relate the two oracular elements, the omen and the prediction, to each other . Once more, if the fact was authentic, it would have been the same thing .
 James Frazer’s famous book was first published in 1890 and after many subsequent editions is still in print . After many editions, Frazer's famous book is still being published in print.
 The identification of two fish with two fingers of the hand was probably the very beginning of mathematics .
 Magic, divination, and astrology are still in demand, and still influencing the travel schedules of an occasional American president . We can see the same trend of connecting identical or similar things in the ancient practice of divination and magic .
 Marius was a Roman general and consul . His parents consulted the prophets and were told that Marius “was fated seven times to hold the supreme power and authority”
 After his sixth consulate the circumstances made Marius a fugitive, powerless, in great misery, with the family myth as the only source of strength and will . Marius was forced to flee the country after the death of his wife . The family myth was Marius's family myth .
 Plutarch gathered all the available evidence for and against this story, including the biological fact that the eagle rears not more than two eaglets . We must say that, as any modem scientist would do, he gathered .
 Marius returned to Rome, took a bloody revenge over his enemies, and died 17 days after he became consul for the seventh time .
 Both Plutarch’s suspicion about the whole story as well as the attention he gave it were well founded . The story was well-founded .
 Marius Marius’s success in the form of his seventh consulate, unprecedented in the history of Rome, needed an explanation . Marius's success in form of seventh consulate was unprecedented in Rome's history of Romanism .
 The driving impulse behind the human attempts to find the link between similar things was to overcome the isolation of facts and observations, to find regularity in the endless flow of sensations, and extract order from the surrounding chaos .
 20 holes in the liver stick to the holes in a wall of a Mesopotamian city . One s even sticks to another seven, as 20 the holes stick to one of the holes .
 The fate of Octavius, the defender of Rome against Marius, illustrates. How successful this method was, the fate of the Roman Roman soldier illustrates. Octavianius, a Roman citizen, was killed by Marius .
 Here we can see scientific thinking right in the moment of its birth from superstition . Here we see how scientific thinking was born from superstitious thinking .
 Plutarch noticed that two implications of the same ‘theory’ were leading to a contradiction and the theory did not hold water . The theory was not held water, and the idea was that the theory was wrong, Plutach noticed .
 Plutarch and other thinkers of antiquity explored li nk s not only between objects of the external word, observable with the senses, but also between ideas . The philosopher's work was published in 17th century and has been widely published worldwide .
 Aristotle lived almost half millennium before Plutarch and twenty-three centuries before us . They did it by the same rules as we do, following Aristotle who lived half millennium .
 Some ideas linked naturally as a bird and its nest, and some did not, as a lion and a fire . Some ideas were linked naturally, as well as naturally linked to the animal and the nest .
 Prophesy and prophesy stick together, but he did well and he was destroyed do not stick . He did well, but the prophecies of his destruction don't stick, he says .
 Aristotle created formal logic, and the newborn science found a firm ground under its feet . In the search for regularity in these relationships, Aristotle found formal logic . Aristotle's creation of formal logic was the birth of science .
 A more intricate systems of parallels may lie behind the Biblical concept of origin of species . The New Age belief in the power of a crystal pyramid may be behind the New Age beliefs .
 Since the Earth was “the measure of all things,” it did not need any solid of its own . Since the earth was ‘the measure,’ it didn’t need any . solid . Earth . The Earth was the measure of everything .
 For Kepler’s contemporaries and historians of science, it was a daring and elegant construct . Kepler's contemporaries thought it was the most daring construct of all time . For Kepler, Kepler was an elegant construct of science .
 Kepler’s time was too limited to affix a conjecture, Kepler says . Kepler's time was more limited than Kepler's own time . Kepler was the only scientist to hold on to a conjecture .
 The difference is, however, is that they know both empirical and theoretical justification of the rule .
 Science had been driven toward a minimum of contradiction and disharmony in the picture of the world . Science had to be driven toward the minimum of contradictions in the world, he said . Science was driven toward 'a minimum of conflict and disharony in a world'
 While it is possible to make people believe in two contradicting things by propaganda, it requires substantial efforts and constant work . It is possible that it can only be made to believe in contradictory things .
 American teenagers believe that if they have the same basketball shoes as a sports star has, they will play as good as he and make the same career . American teens believe they can succeed if they get the same shoes as sports stars .
 The stars aside, a teenager boy wearing the same clothes as his peers does not feel isolated any more . Teenage boys wearing same clothes are no longer isolated .
 A newcomer to the world, linked to it by the shoestrings of his sneakers, he is as comforted as Marius . Marius, former six times powerful Roman consul, hiding in the woods on a hostile coast, exhausted and hungry .
 Humans came to this world with tools, aware of the physical bond between the arrowhead and the stick, mallet and its handle, thread and needle . It is not the first time we have seen a human interaction with tools .
 This kind of link can be explored in all detail and reproduced many times, says author . The link is an example of a link that can be easily explored many times .
 Ancient observers of the world noted that there were invisible immaterial li nk s between objects and 23 events, some easily understandable, like the bonds of kinship, and some mysterious . The bond between the rain dance and the rain is mysterious .
 The sun always rose after the Aztec human sacrifice, and even, defiantly, without it . The Aztec sun always rises after the sacrifice, even without it.
 Today, the link between smoking and lung cancer is established by using statistics in tandem with the principle ad hoc, ergo propter hoc .
 When two events always or very often occur together, there is, probably, a positive link between them . This is when the events always occur together - and there is a positive relationship between them.
 If two events never or rarely occur together, there is probably, probably, a negative link between them . If you have a negative relationship, there will probably be a positive link between events .
 To evaluate probability, however, requires accumulating a database for statistics . Probability makes sense only over a multitude of observations, so probability makes sense .
 The old Latin warning simply means that a single coincidence does not constitute a causal link . A single coincidence is not enough to constitute a link, the Latin warning says .
 In criminal justice, to show how the crime was committed, the prosecution must demonstrate the causality in the sequence of events, similar to showing how to tie the arrowhead to the arrow and head the thread through the needle . The prosecution must also demonstrate the causeality of the crime,
 This complete sequence of causal li nk s is called mechanism in chemistry as well as biology, biology, history, economics, and engineering .
 We will return to mechanism in Chapter 14, Fermentation in Wine Barrel and Society . Fermentation is a form of fermentation in wine barrel and society .
 "The thrill of both detective story and science comes from the effect of the missing link of the mechanism," says the author .
 Justice may fail because some incredible things happen with a low probability, but a detective story does not work if it is too predictable, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 The clockwork mechanism embodies the principle of the perfect causal link, which we can trace from the spring, pendulum, or battery to the movement of the clock’s hands . We can trace the spring and pendulum from the movements of a clock clock to the hands of the
 The realization that our world is not as perfect as the clockwork was quite traumatic when physics 24 discovered the world of elementary particles . Physics 24 was created by Albert Einstein in 1964 .
 There are no statistics of American or French revolutions in the sense that we have a multitude of them . Since history seems to be built of unique cases, there is no such statistics of the revolutions in America .
 An important question is whether such mechanisms can always be established, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Even if we pool together all the revolutions in the world, we may not be able to arrive at a generalization for the causal link of revolutionary terror . The world's most recent revolution was the Arab Spring in Tunisia, Egypt and Syria .
 As a preliminary observation, we need to apply efforts to keep in the mental picture some elements that repel each other, while others are naturally attracted . We need to keep efforts in mind that some elements are repel and some attract each other .
 We have to spend energy to break the seemingly superstitious associations, but they might turn up not so false after all but simply ahead of time .
 We will return later to the probabilistic interpretation of the link and its connection with the concept of energy and affinity .
 Evolution of human knowledge started with recognition of separate elementary objects and observations and establishing links between them . Evolution of knowledge started at recognition of different elementary objects, observations and observations .
 With time, natural sciences, religion, arts, and humanities went their separate ways . Natural sciences and religion, religion and humanities are now separate .
 We regard any particular work of a historian, from Plutarch to Niall Ferguson, as a doctrine, i.e. a system of statements about the world, regardless of whether it is true or not . Here we regard any work from a historian as a . doctrine, from
 Be it the story of Marius or of World War I, we do not try to prove it, criticize, or find the truth, but are more interested in the internal structure and properties of a doctrine . If it is a story, we are interested in its mechanism of its un
 Our secret and, probably, at this stage unfounded hope is to find the general rules of structural change regardless of the particularities of the structure . Our secret is to 'find out the rules' and 'to find out what the rules are'
 The fact has no lifetime warranty and it may turn out a hoax or an illusion, it may be a hoax . The fact is not a fact, it's a fact that it's an illusion .
 If we have a set of something presented to us as facts, we are not trying to verify them but examine how they fit the doctrine . We take them for granted and examine them as facts . We are not going to verify anything but examine the facts, examine them to see how they
 "We might have our own idiosyncrasies. Naturally, having been spectators and participants of the history of most of the twentieth century, we might have their own . Naturally, they might have been spectators or participants of history . We might have had our own peculiarities. We have our
 Similarity of different things, as we have seen, is a very ancient observation . The examples in the previous chapter can be formally represented by lines of two kinds of lines of attraction and repulsion .
 Most fish are similar in the outline of their body, and so are birds, conifers, and many other groups of objects . The outline of most fish is similar to that of many other animals, such as birds .
 The ancient people went much further in the interpretation of similarity . Ancient people went further than the ancient people interpreted similarity .
 The ancient belief that similar attracts similar reveals the idea that certain things are connected and others are not, and the connection has something of an attraction of a mother to her child .
 One needs to do some physical work and exert energy to separate all those couples . "One needs to exert energy in order to separate them from each other," says the author .
 The next step in establishing connections was to recognize the importance of dissimilar or even the opposite phenomena, which may struggle and annihilate each other, says the author .
 God and Devil in Christianity, Truth and Lie in Zoroastrianism, Yang and Yin in Chinese Naturalism, and earth, air, fire, and water of Aristotle of Aristotle . God and devil in Christianity .
 Certain things in nature and human mind have affinity, while others do not, and some even repel each other . In other words, certain things in human mind and nature have affinity . Some even repels each other in nature .
 Fire scares off night predators, the cross keeps off the devil, nature is afraid of void, garlic scares off vampires, and macho behavior intimidates the rival . Thus, fire scares off predators .
 His follower and popularizer Lucretius wrote a large poem On the Nature of Things . His followers and popularized the poem On The Nature Of Things .
 "All objects can be tightly knit and bound and made to show unconquerable strength," says author .
 Generations reproduce nature, habits, motions, ways of life, of their progenitors . Be it otherwise, Nor could the generations Kind after kind so often reproduce The nature of habits, motion and habits, of life .
 Some seeds would have a body of infinite increase . For were these shapes quite infinite, some seeds Would have an infinite body of increase .
 The shapes can't vary from one another much much. For in one seed, in one small frame of any, any . The shape of the seed can be found in a single seed, a seed of any .
 To choose the building blocks is a crucial and difficult step 29 when building a representation . The building blocks are a crucial part of the process when choosing a representation, says author .
 No simple recipes can be offered; only some general and necessarily somewhat vague advice . "No simple recipes" can be given, but only some vague advice. No simple recipe for a recipe for success .
 The development of the atomic theory of matter can point us in the right direction . We are indebted with that to Democritus and Lucretius. The atomic theory is the key to understanding the universe .
 The theory was revived and deepened by Dalton and other chemists in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth century . After them the theory then had become dormant for a long time until it was revived .
 Even as late as the 1900's, prestigious natural philosophers preferred to think of the concept as a hypothesis, useful but not established . Far from believing in the real existence of atoms, the concept was thought to be useful and useful .
 Democritus in the fifth century B.C. believed that only the atoms and void were real, Ernst Mach ca 1900 regarded atoms only as a postulate . Ernst Mach in the 1900s regarded atoms as only as postulates .
 In a naive view the atoms could be thought of as small rubber balls bouncing against each other and the containing walls, resulting in an irregular motion otherwise called heat . Heat is caused by the atoms bouncing against the walls of the walls .
 The discipline of statistical mechanics was developed and used as the theoretical underpinnings of thennodynamics . Thennodynamics is one of the great success stories of modem science .
 We will talk more about thermodynamics later, but here we would like to note that it is much more than a chapter of physics . We will discuss thermodynamics in more detail later .
 In spite of the triumph of science, one could still question the physical reality of atoms, especially as quantum mechanics, emerging in the 1920’s, replaced the classical view of material particles by a less intuitive one . In the 1920s, quantum mechanics emerged as a way of understanding
 Some would argue that the concept of atom is just a shorthand description of certain measurements that differ from one element in the periodic system of 30 Mendeleyev to another .
 In other words, atoms were man-made concepts, extremely useful but not as real as rubber balls . atoms were atoms, but not real as the rubber balls, scientists say .
 The subsequent developments of science left no doubt about the existence of atoms . The discovery of atoms in atoms made it impossible for atoms to be atoms .
 In the most recent time we have learned to see and move single molecules and manipulate matter atom by atom, as we move word by word with the word processor . In the latest time, we have even learned to manipulate single molecules .
 The analogy between atoms of matter and more abstract building blocks of the world should not go too far, and yet in the same way as physics initially perceived atoms, we shall think of our building blocks as man-made generators .
 Their purpose is to help in organizing a body of knowledge, to make it appear simple, and make it cohesive, they say . They aim to make their knowledge appear simple and cohesive .
 Sometimes it is obvious how to create useful generators, other times it will require a deeper understanding of the domain of knowledge .
 All modem science looks for the relations between apparently disconnected things as diligently as the ancient fortune-tellers looked for the entrails of the sacrificed animals and the outcome of a marriage .
 Edward B Tylor, one of the founders of cultural anthropology, interpreted magic as pseudo-science . J.G.Frazer, the author of The Golden Bough, both interpreted magic in pseudo-scientific terms .
 Anthropologists differ in their interpretation of the subject, but if we consider the search for bonds, links, and regularities as the driving force of understanding the world, we can trace the origin of science from mythology and magic to present .
 The pieces of each new picture of the world stick together as long as they stick with the world itself, and if not, they are rearranged, new pieces added, and the general cohesion tested . If not, the pieces stick together, they will be rearranged .
 Ptolemy suggested that celestial bodies were moving along perfect cycles with centers moving along other cycles centered at the earth . The celestial bodies are thought to be moving along cycles around the world .
 The Ptolemaic system of epicycles may seem clumsy and unnecessarily complicated to today's critic but at its time it was based on accepted principles of geocentric Aristotelian world .
 Modified forms of Ptolemaic systems were in use in navigation long after the Copernican system had rearranged the celestial pieces in a different way . Modified forms were used in navigation for long periods .
 Copernicus himself had to use a system of epicycles in his calculations . Copernic had to have to use an epicycling system in his calculation .
 The great attraction of Ptolemaic system was that it dealt with the visible surface of the world . Ptolemic system dealt with visible surface, rather than visible world .
 Only the advent of satellites and the Global Positioning System put it to honorable retirement . Satellites and Global Position System put the GPS system to honorably retire .
 A complex area of knowledge of obvious importance to everybody was medicine, where attempts were made to systematize the existing lore according to what was supposed to be laws of reasoning .
 Four cardinal humors interact, too little or too much of one causes a specific disease . The aim of the physician is to restore the balance, for example, inducing a vomit or employing bloodletting .
 It is the same as to say that they transformed the relation between the Aristotelian elements, leaving its geometry unchanged, but renaming the elements . It is also possible that they changed the geometry of the elements but renamed them .
 Rules of transformation from philosophy to seasons to humors to temperaments to organs preserve the correspondence between dry/cold, earth, autumn, black bile, melancholy, and melancholy .
 Aristotelian theory of medicine explains what blocks mean . What blocks mean is stated explicitly .
 The outcome of the comparison will detennine the health status of the patient . The outcome will be compared to the patient's condition .
 Both blocks and lines that connect them have identities of particular objects and relations between them . What is important is that they have identities and relations, and that they connect .
 The today’s weather forecast and traffic report are ephemeral pieces of infonnation that are dead next day or even next hour . The weather forecast, traffic report and weather forecast are not real-life news stories .
 A doctrine is a more complex and long lasting representation of knowledge, a doctrine is more complex than a doctrine . A doctrine of knowledge is a long-lasting representation of the knowledge, the author says .
 We find in ancient doctrines a structure common to all systems of knowledge, and it is the structure that we are interested in . The structure is common to ancient doctrines, and we find it common in our knowledge . We find the structure common in ancient doctrine, and that is what we are
 We will use the term doctrine for all systems of statements about certain properties of the world, whether they are religious systems, myths, scientific theories, empirical rules, irrational beliefs, or even hearsay and advertisements .
 We do not care much about their truth value but look for a certain system of relations, i.e., structure they describe . By this we want to emphasize that we . care for the truth value of their statements .
 A mini-doctrine may state that brushing your teeth with a certain brand of toothpaste is good for you, while any other brand is not as good . For example, toothpaste can be found to be good for your body, according to a study .
 From the initial stages of the development of knowledge to its modem overwhelming exuberance, one thing remains unchanged. From the start of the knowledge to the end of the first stages of its development, the world's greatest achievement remains unchanged .
 It is meant to be applicable to a number of situations not even known in advance . It is intended to be relevant to any of those situations .
 For a doctrine to be useful it is necessary that it can be applied repeatedly in circumstances that are similar but need not be identical in time, place or other incidentals . The doctrine must be used repeatedly in similar circumstances but not in identical circumstances .
 What constitute an incidental will depend upon the doctrine and its specification is crucial . The doctrine and the specification of the doctrine is crucial, says the author .
 If the logical system only served to explain a unique event, impossible to repeat even in principle, it could possibly be classified as a miracle but not as a doctrine in the sense we have used the term .
 A reader may object that the Big Bang theory of the creation of the universe would then not qualify as a doctrine . But that is not so. The Big Bang Theory is not a doctrine but it is a theory of creation .
 The Big Bang would be repeatable in principle, unless the ultimate physical laws were suspended momentarily at the time of creation and only once . It is not possible to repeat the Big Bang if the laws were temporarily suspended momentarily .
 William of Ockham, a logician of the fourteenth century, is credited with the principle of minimization . William's theory of the minimization is said to be based on his work in the medieval logician's writings .
 It has always been considered strictly intuitive and could not be reduced to other principles . It is now considered 'purely intuitive' and 'couldn't reduce other principles'
 In earlier history a doctrine often became popular because of its simplicity, geometrical symmetry, and beauty . Aristotelian doctrine, Ptolemean system of astronomy based on perfect cycles, the symmetry of the double predestination, and opposition of City of God and City of
 Spinoza's Ethics explores the pyramidal hierarchy of the Eastern Roman Empire and the parallel between objects and ideas in Ethics . Augustin, Augustin and the pyramid of the Roman Empire are discussed .
 The intuitive beauty of a scientific theory has been an ideal and a proof of superiority for scientists up to present, says the author of the book .
 The goal of a complete perfection of a scientific system was illusory and any such system had small defects . The development of mathematics and physics in the twentieth century seemed to confirm, however, that the goal of perfect science was ill .
 In the traditional esthetics of Japanese 37 art small imperfections were highly praised . Curiously, in the traditional . esthetic of Japanese art small . imperfections are highly praised in Japanese art .
 The above diagrams can be said to be representations of the knowledge incorporated in the doctrine . The diagrams are said to represent knowledge incorporated into the doctrine of Christianity .
 Whether the knowledge represented by a diagram is true or not is another matter that will have to be decided empirically . Let us leave this topic until later .
 Most of our sensory data come to us in visual form, the diagram is an effective means of communicating knowledge . We can also employ written or spoken representations, but we shall often employ such configuration diagrams .
 The diagrams like in Ffigures 2. and 2. are actually points connected with lines . The diagrams are actually connected to each other .
 Epistemology, the study of knowledge and its limitations, is a time-honored field of philosophy . Often it is a good idea to go back to Aristotle to find out what he said .
 What we know concerns only certain categories and knowledge can be represented by them. According to himself, what we know is only certain . According to him, knowledge can only be represented in certain categories .
 Aristotle used the categories to criticize Plato's theory of forms . The categories were intended to classify the main aspects of reality, both universal and real . Aristotle used them to criticize the theory of form .
 Plato's view is that our knowledge is based on the imperfect impressions our senses give us of the world of ideals, the Platonic forms . In Plato's theory, this is because of our senses' imperfect impressions of ideal ideals .
 For both philosophers, knowledge is built from such primitives by connecting them together . For example, knowledge was built from the primitives of knowledge by connecting together .
 When we say ‘atomistic,’ we mean that there are standard blocks in any knowledge representation . A certain combination of blocks is somehow held together in a stable structure, “tightly knit and bound” like atoms in a molecule .
 The structure itself can be applied to a multitude of real or imaginary situations . It can be stretched within certain limits . The structure can be used in a variety of situations and it can't be stretched .
 If one accepts this view, the next question is how should the primitives be joined together in a meaningful manner so that the resulting structure can serve as a representation of knowledge in a specified discourse . The next question: How should primitives join together?
 In the epicycle theory circles are the primitives and the rule says that circles roll along each other . The epicycle is the most common form of an epicycle . The rule says circles roll around each other and roll along the other .
 All doctrines in the world form a superstructure, but it is so large that each doctrine may be as lost in the overall web as an individual molecule in a glass of water . Each doctrine is part of a larger, more complex web of ideas, says author .
 A tree-like system of library catalogue or Internet search engine is best represented by a tree . Nevertheless, certain regularity can be clearly seen even in such a big structure best of all .
 It is regular to find cats and dogs side-by-side in a doctrine about pets, but it is irregular to find dogs and differential equations in the same topic .
 The atoms or primitives of knowledge, i.e., are connected with lines according to certain rules, so that some are connected and some are not . To summarize, the atoms of our diagrams are connected to lines .
 The configuration of atoms can be changed by adding new atoms, taking away others, recombining the atoms in a different order, or even changing the rules .
 This is a combinatory view of knowledge representation and it will lead us to regularities that will be used to describe our attempts to know the world . This is the combinatory approach to knowledge representation .
 The primitives are the logical objects, the building blocks, and we shall discuss in detail how they can be modified by transformations when they are viewed by an observer . The Platonic forms are changed in the way they correspond to sensory data . We shall discuss how they are modified when they
 The transformations shall be constrained to leave certain fundamentals unchanged, to allow for invariances, for some stability and some, perhaps very limited, degree of predictability . But the transformations shall not be constrained .
 A cube remains a cube whether it is a solid block or a model made of twelve thin sticks . A cube is a cube regardless of whether it's made of 12 thin sticks or a cube made of thin blocks .
 Even disorder shall be subject to laws and invariances, all the more, any natural chaos is never perfect, says the author of the book .
 If the world were completely chaotic, it could not be understood in any operative sense . The world would be completely chaotic if it were to be understood by anyone .
 Science is to a large degree a search for invariances, say patterns, and the same is true about other human quests for knowledge although in a less rigid fashion . Science is not just a quest for knowledge, it is also a search of patterns .
 We will have much to say about how to do this, and it should not surprise the reader that terms like probability and variance will occur many times in the following . We will also discuss probability, variance and probability .
 The “tightly knit and bound” structure has a high probability to exist and not slip easily into another, more probable structure . The ‘tightly knicker’ structure has been described as ‘a tightly knit, bound’
 The structure, therefore, carries some indications of its possible fate . The structure was built in the 1960s and 1970s .
 Demon is assumed to be able to observe without error the position and velocity of every atom in Newton’s universe . It is assumed that this Demon is able to do so without error .
 Demon can calculate, using the laws of Newton’s mechanics, the state of the universe at any future time . Perfect prediction would be possible, for example in the stock market .
 The Demon could also compute backwards in time and see whether the beauty of Helen of Troy really motivated a thousand ships to be launched . The Demon has never been seen in the world .
 For us he should serve more as a warning against scientific hubris . The Demon caused much headache to the natural philosophers of the 19th century . For us, we should serve as more as warning against science hubris.
 Uncertainty plays an important role also outside quantum mechanics and should be accounted for in any theory of knowledge representation, according to the author of the book .
 Laplace, contrary to his mechanistic fame, was, actually, one of the main founders of probability theory . Laplace was a pioneer in probability theory, and was one of its founders .
 The purpose of this book is to demonstrate that it is possible to use its concepts and methods also in non-numerical contexts . This book is written in English and Latin .
 We attempt to use the apparatus of pattern theory to X-ray such an apparently anti-mathematical subject as history as history . We use pattern theory in an attempt to make history seem more mathematical .
 The common way to proceed is to advance into the subject systematically and gradually . Epluribus unum. The common form of progress is to proceed slowly and systematically .
 Pattern theory, however, is so young that some pranks can be tolerated . Pattern theory pranks are still a growing trend in the U.S.
 Let us plunge right into the middle of a historical metamorphosis, the American Revolution, where we may find not only George Washington and Thomas Jefferson, but also major protagonists of pattern theory .
 Its motto, e pluribus unum, means “from many, one” and is a metaphor for the essence of the opening events of the Revolution, as well as the inscription on a penny .
 By 1775 there were thirteen British colonies in various degree dependent on the British Government, but self-ruled, not always democratically .
 Some, like Rhode Island, were, actually, republics inside the Empire . Others were owned by a single man, like William Penn, and some, like Virginia, belonged to the Crown .
 The chronicle of the Revolution and War comprises innumerable original documents written by the participants, secondary documents in the fonn of the primary ones, and tertiary documents in form of review and analysis of the secondary ones, plus the art inspired by the events . Although the colonies managed their
 Historians and fiction writers are capable of tracing the chain of causality and explain in most cases what event was result of what . Historians, fiction writers can trace chain of causation and explain most cases .
 Each piece of research, scientific or fictional, deals with concrete place, date, location, and cast of characters . Each piece is researched by a team of researchers .
 The American Revolution called to the foreground a cohort of extraordinary and colorful personalities whose voices still reverberate in national memory . The American Revolutionary War was a major event in American history .
 This is the live body of history, however strange it may sound when said about the long gone past . This is not only about the past, but it is also about the present .
 The motto ‘from many, one’ works for scores of other unrelated situations such as clenching fingers into a fist, bird flocking, collecting antiques, assembling a car, calculating the bottom line of a budget .
 The Seal is a configuration of generators that could be arranged in a different way . The Seal was designed to be the largest generator generator in the world .
 By changing the shape and position of the components of the Seal and adding or removing some of them we would still stay within a certain pattern . We would then add or remove some of these components to the Seal . The shape of the seal is the same as the shape, position and position
 Pattern is, in a sense, a group of configurations, but the word group has also a mathematical meaning to which we will return later . Pattern is patterned in a way that it is a mathematical group of configuration configurations . Pattern has a mathematical mathematical meaning, but it is also a
 In everyday speech we would say that “from many, one” is a pattern covering a whole lot of different but in some aspect similar events . In everyday talk we would like to say ‘from many to one’ - a pattern of similar events.
 This is yet another pattern covering an even larger collection of various things . This turns out to be a pattern covering a larger 45 items .
 In history we discover the dissolution of Roman, British, and Soviet empires, as well as the split of former Yugoslavia . In this week's History of Yugoslavia, we find out what happened in Yugoslavia .
 Playing with both patterns, FMO and FOM, we may wonder whether their alternation FMO-FOM-FMO-... is also a pattern of a seductive regularity . If we do not find it in history, it could be hiding somewhere in the future .
 Some philosophers believed that our knowledge was the only primary reality . Others regarded the knowledge as secondary to the world .
 Plato and his mental experiment with people confined in a cave, their backs to a fire, and judging the real world by its shadows on the wall . It all started with Plato's idea of people confined to a cave .
 Maths is not only about numbers, but mathematics is also about numbers . Maths are not only numbers, they are also about mathematics .
 Geometry deals with points and lines, mathematical logic plays with propositions, and set theory comprises everything we can imagine . Geometry plays with points, lines, and logic deals with propositions .
 The historical transition started with the formation of bonds between the colonies . The country is now in transition mode .
 A line connecting two dots is a convenient way to graphically represent a binary link . Bond is a binary relation, it requires two participants, and a line connecting dots is the only way to represent it .
 The bonds turned out to be strong enough for the colonies to act as a whole on some issues, for example, on foreign and military policy . The bonds were strong enough to support each other on some of the issues .
 In tenns of diplomacy, the two-arrow line means negative relation . Simple line signifies a positive one, e. e. mutual gravitation . The twoarrow line is used in diplomacy .
 Britain and USA have been friendly after the peace treaty up to present . Remarkably, the bonds between Britain and the USA have remained strong .
 Spain's relationship with the other continental neighbor, Spain, was complex and mostly antagonistic . The 47-year-old country was one of Europe's most powerful nations .
 Spain did not have friendly relations with other European denizens in the 1930s . Relations between Spain and Europe were not friendly, and hardly any relations in Europe were . Spain's relationship with the European Union was not friendly .
 Crane Brinton wrote a book appropriately entitled From Many One . Crane wrote about this subject in his book, From Many Many One.
 Half a century before the event, it predicted the formation of the European Union . Half-a-century before the EU was formed, half a century ago, the prediction was made .
 Crane Brinton analyzed the situation when several sovereign entities give up their sovereignty to fonn a union . The situation is similar to that when several nations give up sovereignty to join a union. Crane Brintin analyzed the circumstances surrounding the union .
 There is a process by which a number of units get together voluntarily and agree to merge themselves in a larger whole; thus A, B C, and D will unite to form E . This 1 shall call the method of federalism.
 Imperialism and federalism are in these senses mere abstract polar concepts, useful to us in ordering our thought, but by no means accurate descriptions of how political units do get integrated . Now imperialism, federalism, is in fact just an abstract polar concept .
 Pure force or pure consent, pure imperialism or pure federalism, simply do not exist on this planet . Pure force, pure consent and pure consent simply don't exist on the planet . The United States is the only nation in the world without a single act of force or consent .
 The conqueror always finds among the conquered some who had been won to his cause in advance . The conquerors always find among the conquerors some of his conquests .
 To use the language of our own times, there have always been quislings. There are always quismsings, and there's always been a quisling in the world .
 The best federal unions evolve from unanimous consent and without frustrations, union officials say . Nor does the best of federal union evolve without frustration, they say . Union officials say the best unions evolve without unanimous consent or frustrations .
 The United States were formed, without losing identity of the federates . The U.S. was formed without the loss of the federation's identity .
 When an empire fonned by absorption splits, it rarely returns to its original constituents, as the fate of Austria-Hungary can illustrate . Austria-Germany was absorbed by Austria-Austria in 1918, but it was never fully formed .
 The Soviet Union, formally a federation, had always been closer to an empire in its power structure . The former Soviet Union was known as a federation but was more powerful than an empire .
 The Crimean Peninsula was lost because in 1956, when nobody could imagine the future, it had been transferred to the administrative jurisdiction of Ukraine . If the U.S. ever splits, we can only speculate whether it will happen along the interstate lines .
 In fact, there could be more subtle structural differences in the pattern of unification, say experts . "There could be a subtle structural difference," they say .
 It can be a cooperation of several equals with one single selected entity, union of equals, hierarchy of domination, and union of the unequal, as well as a lot of combinations . Most of the combinations are not yet explored in the course of history .
 "To the structural variety of unification we have to add much finer quantitative differences," he says . "We need to find a way to unify the world," he adds .
 What we are concerned with here is the process by which once ""independent"" or ""sovereign"" states yield, voluntarily or involuntarily, that independence or sovereignty to some other political grouping . We are concerned about the process of "independent" states yielding sovereignty to other parties .
 Since the word ""sovereignty"" is a notably complex word, charged with centuries of debates among political philosophers, and since the process as above outlined sounds a bit mechanical, 1 should like to translate it into the language of human emotions .
 About 1100 A.D., for instance, it was sweet and fitting for a man from Normandy to die and kill for his duke . A man from Paris died and killed for his king, and a Normandy man did . A Parisian man died and died for his country .
 Subinfeudation may have confused many good men in this matter of ultimate loyalties, but they all thought the ultimate loyalty could somehow be found on earth . The ultimate loyalty can be found only on earth, and they all believed it could be found .
 Normandy became, as we say coldly in the textbooks, a part of France . Normans became Frenchmen, and no longer legally killed Frenchmen . Within a few centuries, Normandy became a French nation .
 Answering the question “why do they hate us,“ we can only point to the persistent historical pattern. An answer to the question is that the U.S. has a long history of hatred toward us .
 It is hard to build any meaningful social structure without recurring to forces of opposite sign . Regardless of international relations, it is difficult to build a social structure with opposite signs .
 Structuralistism is a form of structuralism in anthropology, especially anthropology . Structuralism is an important part of anthropology .
 Redrawing of the map commonly leaves an area with a lot of bad blood between inhabitants, prompting further conflicts and wars in which the sides look for ideological friends and relatives . As modem history and current events .
 The mathematics of history is closer to geometry than to calculus . It looks like the math of history looks like geometry than calculus . History is the subject of a new book, "History of America"
 In fact, our dots are nothing but points because their shape and size does not matter . We are nothing more than points because they are points . We have no shape or size of our dots, but their shape, size doesn't matter .
 We give them various names, but there are no nameless points in geometry, either . The points are known as 'nameless points' in geometry . They are also known as "nameless" points in the world of geometry .
 Unlike geometry, however, we are not concerned with the length, angle, and distance of a given object . We are concerned about the length and angle of an object .
 Topology, formally, is a branch of geometry . The more abstract world of binary relationships is called topology . Topology is an abstract form of geometry, formally known as topological .
 They can form various bonds, can carry some labels and even have a fine structure of their own . They can be formed into bonds, they can carry various labels and can even have their own structures .
 We can supply the line between the two objects of mutual emotions not only with a sign but also with an indicator of intensity . The line can be used as a sign or a sign to indicate the intensity of an emotion .
 The line, therefore, will have something of a length, bringing it even closer to the Euclidean geometry . The line will have to have a length to bring it closer to a length .
 Line is an all-or-nothing binary relation that is either there or absent . Line is either an all or nothing binary relation, or an absence of it .
 Line with a quantifier, whether by a number, or just by words “much” and “little” or “strong” is a different mathematical object . Line with quantifier is different from a number to a number or just a word .
 "With all its simplicity, it gives an access to describing objects of great complexity and realism," says author . "It gives us a way to describe objects that we can describe with great simplicity and realism"
 Very strong bonds are commonly attacked and broken in chemical reactions by 53 tricks reminding of the Trojan Horse . The Trojan Horse tricks are commonly used to attack strong bonds .
 Love, politics, and economics are pattern relatives of chemistry, some examples to be soon presented . Love and politics are pattern cousins of chemistry . Some examples will be presented .
 There is no single way of portraying the type of bond between two entities, although the meaning remains the same . Same meaning can be expressed in various languages and styles within the same language .
 We use small circles as symbols of pre-revolutionary colonies and subsequent states, limiting their number to three just to save space . We use this symbol to show how small circles can be used in a state .
 We will use large circles for such entities as Parliament of Britain , Continental Congress and the national U.S. Congress that took over . We will also use the terms of the British Parliament and Continental Congress .
 We do not claim allegiance to exact detail, and our description should be regarded as related to events on a planet very much similar to our Earth and during a historically similar period, but not exactly same .
 To learn how the Revolution actually happened, one should turn to books of historians, historian says . To learn about the Revolution, historians should look to the books of history .
 "To learn how everything can happen and what everything is ... well, let us wait until Chapter 15," says author .
 The pattern of the American revolutionary transformation displays between the initial state K and the final state Q . History is a continuous process and the terms initial and final correspond only to a certain segment of the process .
 Initial state K is the array of disjoint colonies dominated by Britain . The initial state is the state of K, which is the initial state K of the continent .
 Next, in M they develop a common legislating body, the Continental 54 Congress . Next, they will try to create a common legislative body .
 The entire pattern K possesses a high generality. From domination to independence, the pattern K has a high generalality .
 Here is a short list of some possible initial situations with the same pattern of change .
 In our simplified presentation of the American Revolution we use only three small circles for the initial colonies, but we could use ten or thirteen, the pattern would not change . We could use 10 or 13 colonies for the first colonies, or more for the colonies .
 If we substituted symbols for the words Britain, British, French, and colonies, nobody could guess that the subject was history . The subject of history is history .
 We use here the terminology of our point-and-line pictures and, hopefully, this language does not sound completely alien . We use this language to explain our point and line pictures .
 The pictures themselves do not provide a clue to the answers . Note also, that the pictures themselves don't give a clue .
 The 56 answers would have something to do with the strength or other properties of the bonds, some of which are broken and other established . Intuitively, we can guess that the answers would be related to strength or properties of bonds . Some of the answers are broken or established .
 Our questions may rise new questions of epistemological nature, i.e., questions about asking questions . We may rise to new questions about the nature of the questions .
 This question does not make sense unless we have something like the laws of nature for human society . This is not the answer to the question: 'What is the law of nature?'
 History is fertile soil for all kinds of arguments and antique theories . No wonder, history is a fertile soil . History is rich in history, but it's also rich in antique theories.
 At this point we are asking more questions than we can answer, but a good question is half an answer . "At this point, there are more questions to be answered," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 History never repeats literally, but we can clearly see some patterns . Although history never repeats, we can still see patterns in our history .
 If we focus on the reign of Henry VIII, with all his extravagances and unfortunate wives, there is little we can leam about world history . Henry VIII's reign was the most lavish reign of the 16th century, with many unfortunate wives .
 We leam much more about monarchy when we rise above some details . We follow the rise and decline of European monarchy from the early Middle Ages to its demise in the national revolutions .
 "We have to stay at a certain level above the detailed historical narrative, to be on target," says Mourinho . "We need to stay above the historical narrative to stay on target"
 The confusion between unavoidable explanation and indispensable narrative is closely connected with another equally natural terminological confusion between generalizing and theorizing . The confusion is related to the confusion of generalizing, theorizing and generalizing .
 This implies that he helped himself to a cigar, bit off the tip, or cut it off, or merely punched it . He struck a match or somebody offered him a light; he puffed several times, and uttered a little sigh of pleasure . Meanwhile, he expelled several distinct clouds
 The narrative would never reach its end if it had to enter into these details, every single one of which can in turn be analyzed into further details . The narrative never reaches its end .
 "What we are probing here is a symmetrization of history to cover not only the past but also the future," says the author . "We want to look at the past and the future. What we are doing here is probing here," he says .
 We use the question marks like an excessive postage. To be on the safe side, we use them like an extra postage stamp .
 We can certainly ask those maniacal questions, but the answers would not help us, says CNN.com's John Sutter . We can't ask the answers, but we can ask maniacs questions .
 Making history always takes at least two interacting sides, for example, “us” and “them,” . The outcome of every such struggle is rarely predictable, and the outcome of such struggles rarely predictable .
 History, running as we speak, still retains some characteristics of a sports game where everybody plays by the same rules but, nevertheless, only one side wins . History still retains characteristics of the game, but only one team wins .
 Unlike the game of football or chess, nations and their leaders can also play by the rules of their own . Unlike football, chess, however, nations must play by their own rules .
 We do that by describing the structural aspects of events in tenns of variously labeled points and connecting lines . The structure of the events is described as "structural aspects"
 Those are our Platonic shadows of the colorful and vibrant reality, and we are ready to experiment with them and give them a gift of life of their own . We're ready to give them the chance to experiment .
 Next, we would like to extract some regularity from the complex and confusing picture . We hope to extract regularity and regularity out of the complex picture .
 Inventing a new philosophy of history would be no better than any other philosophy, he says . He says it's not a good idea to invent a new history .
 The chosen way to treat historical transfonnations brings them in a much wider family of natural and artificial phenomena, which all could be treated the same way . Instead, we would like to show that the chosen way .
 In this Chapter we are looking for evidence of confusion, uncertainty, and excessive imagination in history . Alternatives and altercations in this Chapter are discussed .
 In order to prove that we are not driven by arrogance or critical itch, we need to gather some factual and counterfactual material . We need to find out what the facts are based on the facts and counterfacts .
 For most of us, non-historians, the French Revolution is mainly what is written about it two centuries later . The French Revolution was mainly written about two centuries after the revolution .
 Textbooks and other historical narratives describe the Revolution in terms of social and economical condition, fate of a leader, movement of a group, military campaign, massive human loss, rearrangement of social roles and interactions, and extraordinary event . Textbooks describe the revolution as a 'social and
 Different narratives by different authors can be different and even contradictory, say authors . Studying the texts, we immediately find out that the texts are different .
 The distance in time does not explain it because even the contemporary observers and participants, for example, Robespierre and Marie-Antoinette, could have very different perceptions . Even the contemporary observer and participants could have different perceptions of events in the French Revolution .
 French historians had a lot of arguments about their own history . The French historians, more than anybody else, had a very different history . French historians have argued about their history .
 Francois Furet wrote at length against politicizing the French Revolution . Among recent historians, he wrote a long letter against politicalizing the Revolution .
 Every historian in France carried a label of royalist, liberal, Jacobin, anarchist, or libertarian, he said . He noted that every historian in the country carried a different label .
 Had it been otherwise, there would be one historian laureate for all humankind at any given time . Had been otherwise it would be a historian laureate of all humankind .
 Scores of interpretations of Hamlet's character have accumulated until present, with no end in sight . We all have a complete and absolute record on Hamlet from the Shakespeare’s text, but scores of interpretations have accumulated .
 All contemporaries and historians consider Louis XVI weak, but maybe he was just too human to be the king . Louis XVI was too weak to be king .
 Though fat and clumsy, he developed real skill at his favorite pastimes of hunting and locksmithing . He became a locksmith and hunted enthusiast .
 Considering Hamlet, at least the text of the play is a firm ground on which multiple interpretations can be built . Hamlet is one of the most famous plays in the world .
 Conflicting opinions may clash even around facts, not just interpretations . Conflicty opinions are even more important than just interpretations, says CNN.com .
 Revolutions were always confiscated, their principles denied or diluted . Revolutions are always confiscated and denied their principles . The U.S. House of Representatives will be held in Washington, D.C.
 They were always the agents through which an authoritarian, centralizing regime seized power . They were the agents of an authoritarian regime seizing power, the author says .
 There was some doubt even about whether Napoleon was born in 1768 instead of 1769 . Napoleon's birth date is still uncertain .
 The year of 1768 would mean that he was not born a Frenchman because it had been before Corsica became part of France . Corsica was part of Corsica in 1768, meaning he was born in Corsica not France .
 Even if he was formally a French citizen, he spoke French with a French accent . He spoke French even though he was born French .
 The most common problems with facts are that there are too few or too many of them, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Any historian who writes about a subject has to perform a selection because of the limits of space . If the latter is the case, any historian must perform a . selection .
 Facts and opinions compete for the space of the page like the rainforest plants for sunlight . Facts and opinion compete for space on the page .
 Only the top facts see the full light of the day . As result, a vertical hierarchy of facts develops, and only the top ones see the light of day . Only the most important facts are revealed to the public .
 Three or four hundred years ago to study history meant to read Plutarch who on many pages described the life of the Scythians in fascinating detail .
 The following classical story was often mentioned in history textbooks as an example of ambiguity of oracles . The story is said to have been a classical example of the ambiguity of an oracle . It is often mentioned as a classical story in textbooks .
 Croesus asked the Delphic oracle whether he should march on the Persians, the answer was that he would destroy a mighty empire . The oracle said he would be destroyed by the Lydian king if he did so .
 Croesus felt encouraged to march, only to leam later that the empire to be destroyed was his own . The empire was destroyed was the empire he was trying to protect, but the empire was never his .
 Croesus consulted the Pythoness again, asking whether his kingdom would be of long duration . The cautious Croesu consulted her again, and asked her to give him a long-lasting kingdom .
 The mule the oracle meant was Persian king Cyrus who was of a mixed descent, from Median mother and Persian father . It turned out later that the mule was Cyrus, who had a mother and father of Median mother .
 The story of the unhappy fortune-telling goes for pages, with many quotations of the oracles . The oracles are the most famous oracles in the world .
 All that that has been lost in modern books, and for good reason. Naturally, all that has all been lost . The best-loved book is now available on Amazon.com .
 Herodotus was inspired not by Clio but by Calliope, says historian . Herototus looks like a lot of what we find in herodotus is pure fiction, says author .
 To us this esoteric subject seems to be of no relation to history as we understand it today. To us, it seems to have no relation . To us we are not interested in the subject of history .
 We mention it as an introduction into the topic of prediction, to be revisited in Chapter 27, History and Computers .
 We can only guess how much of the material has been lost with every new quasi-Orwellian repackaging .
 A writer selects a fixed and limited sequence of words from a practically infinite stock of meaningful combinations . Similarly, a writer selects one word from an infinite list of possibilities . The writer selects his own sequence from a limited list of words .
 Europe could have been transformed into something not wholly unlike the European Union we know today . But without the massive contraction in British overseas power entailed by the fighting of two world wars, it would have been possible .
 Perhaps too the complete collapse of Russia into the horrors of civil war and Bolshevism might have been averted . The collapse of the Russian empire might also have been avoided by the fall of the Great Depression .
 A properly constitutional monarchy (following Nicholas IPs probably inevitable abdication) or a parliamentary republic would have stood more chance of success after a shorter war . Though there would still have been formidable problems of rural and urban unrest, a constitutional monarchy would have been more likely to succeed after
 There is a sequence of ten events that might have or might have not happened . There are ten things that might not have happened in this sequence of events .
 The probability of a complete scenario starting with the Britain’s standing aside would be 0.0. Then the probability of the complete scenario was 0.9 per cent . The probability is 0.5 per cent of the chance of Britain standing aside .
 If we take the probabilities as 0.2, the ultimate probability will be one in ten millions . The ultimate probability is one in 10 millions, the scientist says .
 Of course, this calculation is flawed because the outcomes are not independent, but it shows how improbable every extended scenario could be . It shows that the outcome of the outcome is not independent .
 At the first glance, whether we describe the American Revolution verbally or in point-and-line symbolism, it matters little, if at all, regarding these questions . At the end of the Revolutionary War, the question is whether or not it matters to be answered .
 It has always been typical for historians of the past and we can find innumerable examples . We can find numerous examples of historical errors in the past, says historian .
 If they had brought plenty of supplies with them, and had persevered in the war without scattering for piracy and agriculture, they would have easily defeated the Trojans in the field, since they could hold their own against them with the division on service .
 The things could be different if De Launay did not lose his head and order to fire on the group of militia who came to ask him for gunpowder . The governor of the Bastille, who died in 17th century, lost his head .
 Napoleon could have won the battle of Waterloo if he was not physically exhausted, according to Duke of Wellington, or not using his usual well known tactics of head-on assault . Napoleon was physically exhausted at the time of the battle and did not use his usual tactics .
 Louis had many opportunities in the next years to retain important powers for himself as a constitutional monarch . As it turned out, Louis had a lot of opportunities to keep important powers in place .
 Mirabeau dragged out the last few months of his life in a pretty complete political impotence . Suspected by both sides, he died in December .
 His fate suggests the limitations, during so unusual a time as that of that of the French Revolution, of even extraordinary political sagacity .
 In sci-fi stories, the time-travelers into the past inflict catastrophic changes in the future by a minute action . Time-traveling time-travellers in the past have inflicted catastrophic changes on the future . In the future, they can inflict catastrophic damage on the planet
 History tells us how difficult it is to change the course of history in the long run . In fact, history tells us that it is difficult to change history in a long run, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The battle was full of errors on both sides and if not for the timely appearance of Bliicher’s army it could have been lost by the coalition . The battle is full of mistakes and the coalition could have lost it .
 Leon Trotsky happened to be in Berlin when other enemies of the people were there . With a tortuous twist of mathematics, probability was even used as a political weapon, says author .
 We are not historians and we have had no chance to acquire even a small part of the knowledge a historian possesses . We have no idea what historians are capable of doing, but we are here to learn .
 Not being historians, we cannot repeat their work and we have to choose a limited number of sources among the incredible abundance of sources . We cannot repeat the work done by the historians of this generation .
 We are sympathetic to counterfactual history in spite of its improbable conclusions, we say . We are highly sympathetic to Counterfactual History, despite its improbably conclusions .
 Counterfactual experiments may seem just a mind game, but a chemist would easily find a kindred spirit in a counterfactual historian . The history of the world's most famous chemist would find a similar spirit in his work .
 When a chemist explains why a chemical reaction takes an observable turn, the explanation consists of making up the list of all other possible directions, comparing them, and showing that the observed one had some advantages over the rest .
 Some pharmaceuticals require ten and more steps of the synthesis . The chemist builds a tree of alternative outcomes and let them compete for the highest probability .
 Suppose that the yield, e., the percentage of desired molecules among byproducts and non-reacted starting material is 50% at each stage .
 The chosen sequence of chemical events may be incomparably more probable than other pathways to the product . However improbable, the chosen sequence may be more likely than others .
 The chemist 69 possesses some tools and tricks of the trade for pushing the process in the desired direction, very much like a skilled politician running the election campaign . Besides, he also has some tools to push the process further .
 The formulas of organic chemistry look conspicuously like points connected with lines . The formulas are often connected to lines .
 The same structural meaning is expressed in different symbolic languages . The meaning of the language has different meanings depending on the language .
 Two structures, A and C, have different looking points but the same 70 connecting lines . The two structures have the same look and feel of each other but have 70 different points .
 The chemist tries to imagine all possible intermediate structures X between A and B . He ranks them according to some criteria, from least probable to most probable . The chemist then ranks each of the most probable structures .
 The common criterion is energy, which metaphorically and poetically can be presented to hard line non-chemists as tension, discomfort, or frustration of the molecule . A —> Xi, X 2 , X 2, X 3 ... —> B —> Energy .
 A similar way of thinking is involved in answering the question why A turns into B at certain conditions . The answer to the question is to explain why a certain condition turns into a certain type of thing .
 The chemist tries to imagine all other virtual outcomes C, D, E ... etc. etc., and ranks them by probability . The chemist then ranks the virtual outcomes by probabilities .
 The chemist builds the intermediate states and ranks them again, to arrive at the final conclusion, which is always probabilistic . For each couple A —>B, A—>C, A->D..., the chemist builds an intermediate state and ranks it .
 A -> X t , X 2 , X 3 ... —> B A —» X l5 X^X^-^B A —> Yi, Y 2 , Y 3 . —> Zj, Z 2 , Z 3 — —> D A — > Zi,
 For example, C and D could be highly improbable and only B was to be expected, or, only B could be expected with ratio 2:3, etc. Or, only C and B were expected to be B or B .
 The question we could ask is whether A, X, Y, Z, B, C, and D could be something other than chemical structures . The question is whether the answer to the question is yes .
 Social structures and situations within the same framework of the diverging transition and final states . Remembering the invocation of rain by sprinkling water, we may try social structures within a framework of diverging transitions and final state .
 It is the same branching tree of outcomes that we find in counterfactual history . It is a branching tree, the same tree we see in counterfactsual history. It is also a tree that we see as a result of counterfactorial history .
 The question how chemistry can not only be possible at all but also very successfully navigate in such complexity—as it certainly can—exceeds the scope of this book .
 "Our secret desire is to make chemists and historians look at each other with a new kind of curiosity and sympathy," says the author .
 In chemistry, where a large number of molecules can take part in all possible transformations, the outcome is a mixture of all possible products . The outcome of chemistry is the result of a large mixture of molecules and products .
 Society, on the contrary, exists in a single copy and only one transition really happens. Society, the contrary . Society, he says, exists only in one copy, and only transitions happen .
 When an individual makes a decision, only one action can take place, but the alternatives are repeatedly replayed in mind . For comparison, Hamlet, the classical treatise on human chemistry, see Hamlet . For example, when an individual chooses to make a decision only one decision,
 If we add to the above that chemical structure is also visualized by points and lines, our rain dance may seem something more than an extravagant act of entertainment .
 Presentation of historical knowledge in terms of ‘atoms’ and bonds between them . Formal presentation of historical . knowledge .
 Fonnulation of criteria of choice between various structures, i.e. what makes some structures more probable than others . Fononnulating of criteria for choice between different structures,e.i. What makes some of these structures more likely than others?
 Throughout centuries, historians and philosophers gave over two hundred reasons for the fall of the Roman empire . The fall of Roman empire was one of the most significant reasons for its downfall .
 The reader can offer his or her own solution of this historical counterpart of Fermat’s Last Theorem in mathematics . The reader offers his own solution .
 A conciliatory chemist would wisely say that all those reasons, and probably more, contributed to the outcome . Each with its own weight in the total, some significantly, some little. Some significantly . Some significantly. some significantly .
 A vague parallel between chemistry and history in terms of points and lines, almost a metaphor, was for many years a guiding idea for the author-chemist of this book .
 For the author-mathematician, chemistry is just one of many applications or embodiments of pattern transformations, and history is yet another one .
 Pattern theory, history and chemistry humbly sit side by side with other applicants . Pattern theory and chemistry sit alongside each other in the reception room of the school .
 The witnesses of the demise of Robespierre did not remember the weather of that day . It could be just because of the general excitement of the moment . The reason why the witnesses of this day do not remember was the excitement .
 It is well known that people in the state of agitation and anxiety can have contradicting views of the fast moving events . People in a state of anxiety or state of unrest can have conflicting views of events, says Ravi Agnew .
 Hundreds of people witnessed the assassination of President Kennedy and still there was a wide range of testimonies . Many hundreds of people witness the assassination .
 Revolution and war involves high emotional temperature . Temperature is the measure of chaos and inherent deviations from the statistical mean . War and revolution involves chaos, and temperature is the measurement of chaos .
 If a chemical reaction is conducted at a high temperature, it runs fast, but usually gives a larger variety of undesirable products . The reaction is often conducted at high temperatures, but runs fast .
 We would like to find a place for our ideas among other intellectual currents of the modem era, as we have already found it among doctrines of antiquity . We hope to find it among ideas of modem-era, as well as doctrines of classical antiquity .
 There is an immense literature on most general aspects of history . There is a great literature on how history unfolded . The world is full of views of the world .
 It starts with mythology that explains the present state of the world by unique events of the past, which can never be repeated . The book is based on mythology and mythology .
 They belong to scientists working in particular areas, far from history, as well as from each other . They have been together for more than 20 years .
 We would roughly characterize them as substance philosophy and process philosophy . The philosophy of substance philosophy is called substance philosophy .
 "We must say from the start that we have no bones to pick with either view. We must say that we must say . We must . say that there are no bones in the eyes of either view," says CNN.com .
 Enlightenment is the belief that entirely on our own we can know, and in knowing, understand, and understand, choose wisely . The legacy of Enlightenment is to know, understand and choose wisely, says the philosopher .
 We can understand what people most need, and how they go about getting it, from their biological and social nature defined to a great extent by genetics . We can use genetics to help us understand what we need and how we get it .
 The world according to this picture looks comprehensible, capable of stability and balance, and not quite responsive to the whim of individual desire and will . The world in this picture is comprehensible and not responsive to individual desire or will .
 This is the classical picture of the world, going back to the French Encyclopedists, Newton, and further back to Galileo . This is a classical picture, going from Newton to Galileo, and back to Newton, says the author .
 "We would compare this world with a palace or labyrinth which, however large and intricate, can be explored and mapped," says author . We would compare it to a palace, however, with a labyrinth which can be mapped .
 Every floor of the world, usually inhabited by a particular science, can be understood in conjunction with both upper and lower floors . The world's first floor can be used to understand the science of the universe .
 Its evolution points in the direction of human society, which is influenced not by winds and earthquakes but by ideas generated in human heads .
 The floors communicate through staircases that connect each floor only with one floor up and one floor down . Each floor is connected by staircases .
 From the molecular level we can go up to . minerals or down to 78 atoms along the same stairs . For example, from the . molecular level, we can . go down to minerals or . down to . 78 atoms .
 There is no direct connection between molecules and life unless we take to account the properties of the earth surface . If we are pros in molecules and get interested in life, we have to change the staircases .
 Life is a peculiar kind of a mineral, a nonperiodic crystal, as Erwing Schroedinger prophetically noted in the 1940’s . Life is not a periodic crystal but a mineral .
 The concept of reductionism has been evolving for centuries and there could be multiple perceptions of what it means . The concept has evolved for centuries .
 As another illustration, we shall compare two discourses that exemplify the latest concept of reductionism pertaining history . We shall compare them to the latest version of the latest theory .
 Pizarro had the obvious military advantage with his steel, armor, horses, and guns . The answer to this first why is this is the obvious advantage .
 Jared Diamond points to some preceding events, including civil war among the Incas, as well as an epidemic of smallpox . Diamond: The Incas were the first Incas to arrive in Peru .
 The Incas had no such means. Spanish maritime technology combined with state organization, while the Incas did not .
 Because he did not have correct information about the Spaniards, their power, and intent. Because he didn't know about them, he did have incorrect information about their intent .
 Jared Diamond traces the chain of causation deeper and deeper back into the past, for about ten thousand years, until there is no answer . Diamond: "There are no answers"
 Because light has certain wavelength and its interaction with matter is selective, it is selective . Light has certain wavelengths and interaction between matter and light is selective.
 Photon particles of light interact with atoms, which can be in discrete states . Because photons interact, atoms can't be in a discrete state, photons can be found to be in states .
 Because of the wave properties of electrons ‘vibrating’ at certain frequencies, electrons “vibrate’at certain frequencies . Because of wave properties, electrons "vibrated” at certain frequency .
 Elementary particles are combinations of quarks, etc. etc, until there is no answer . Elementary particles can be found in elementary particles, such as quarks .
 The first discourse is a continuation of the second one, although in a very different logical key . It is not the first discourse, but the second discourse is the continuation of that one .
 There is a gap, about one hundred million year wide, between the chalk and humans . The chalk consists of remains of simple microscopic organisms, and the emergence of human beings with tools, gardens, and livestock .
 Steven Weinberg is well aware of the gap between creationism and evolution . Even wider gap exists between the physical and historical approaches, Weinberg says .
 At the other end of the spectrum are the opponents of reductionism who are appalled by what they feel to be the bleakness of modem science .
 Understanding the behavior of an electron or a quark is one thing you can't do with a tornado's behavior . Understanding how a tornado behaves is one of the most difficult things to understand .
 Only a very large system is capable of a unidirectional irreversible evolution when only a small part of the system changes at a time and the possibilities of change are uncountable . While a small system just goes straight through its limited number of states, passing them many times .
 Evolution or history seems to be an inherent property of all large and complex systems, including galaxies and the Earth’s crust . This is where the second world view steps in .
 It is less interested in how the world is built than in why it is as we know it, it is why it's not built up .
 Ilya Prigogine is a scientist who contributed much to expanding foundations of physics beneath systems similar to life and society . He says evolution systems with the past, present, and future are evolving systems with past and present .
 Some phenomena, like society, life, and weather, belong to so-called dissipative systems . In short, some phenomena like society and life, such as life, are dissipative, say experts .
 They consume energy, fdter order out of it, and dissipate chaos as heat as heat . They are in perpetual change and never reach equilibrium because they consume energy . They also consume energy and create chaos, but dissipate it as heat.
 Large catastrophic changes are subject to large catastrophic changes resulting from small causes, say experts .
 Such systems are capable of dramatic amplification of small fluctuations . Charged with energy, such systems can amplify small fluctuations, experts say .
 Not only the future is unpredictable in principle, but the past, too, may not have a rational causal explanation . The past may have been unpredictable, as is the future, as well as the future .
 Ilya Prigogine made a decisive contribution to the area of non-equilibrium thennodynamics, for which he was awarded Nobel Prize in 1977 . He was awarded the Nobel Prize for his work in the nonequilibrium thennodynamics .
 Prigogin’s arguments, however, can only refer the reader to his remarkably rich books . Unfortunately, we cannot dwell here on his arguments, and instead refer to the books .
 "We can only slice off the thinnest layer of his ideas, but with a thick sauce of interpretation," he says . "We're only able to slice off a thin layer of ideas," he adds .
 Nature, following our analogy with building, is not the building but the process of its construction, Prigogine says . Nature is not a building, it is a process of construction, he says .
 It is much less organized, however, than what builders do on the construction lot .
 The unfolding of history is similar to repetitive rolling and folding a piece of dough, says historian . History unfolds slowly and slowly, the unfolding of it's a repetitive process .
 Both authors of this book, one, an ardent home baker, and the other, a new convert, can confirm this observation . Both authors are avid home baker .
 Ilya Prigogine uses this so-called baker’s transfonnation to illustrate the inherent instability of social systems and the particular kind of time in them . Ilya uses this .
 The once popular concept of “punctuated equilibrium” falls into the same general framework of alternating stability and instability . “Punctuated equilibrium’s adverse stability and instability is the result of alternating instability and instability, the author says .
 We start with a piece of dough with two raisins, dark and light, side by side . flatten this piece down to half its initial height (A and B) and twice its length (B and A) and flatten it down .
 This operation of mixing will unavoidably separate the raisins, more and more with each new stage . This is especially true in the modern world, with the development of the world's largest fruit .
 A tiny difference in initial conditions leads to a big and in principle unpredictable difference in potential results . A tiny change in conditions can lead to an unpredictable result in potential success .
 Neither Prigogine nor Wilson discuss problems of history in any detail . Their juxtaposition, as well as the following reasoning, is entirely authors’ responsibility .
 The murder of Archduke Francis Ferdinand in Bosnia 83 on June 28, 1914 ultimately caused two world wars in a row . An apple, according to a myth, caused the Trojan War in the twelfth century BC, and the murder of . Archduk Francis Ferdinand .
 One might say that if not that accident then something else would trigger the war and set free the accumulated energy of both weaponry and nationalist passion, but this assumption would be beyond any test .
 The example with the raisins means that a transformation of a system can be so drastic that it does not preserve topology, i.e. the general shape of things . The example is an example of a transformation in a system that preserves topology - i.E. the
 Two close points have high chances to be separated during the evolution of the system . Applied to historical configurations, it means that two close points can be separated .
 Germany, Vietnam, Korea, and China divided by the Cold War between Capitalism and Communism . The latest example is the latest example of the divide between capitalism and Communism in China .
 The two still separated Koreas are, in a sense, two raisins touching each other but divided by an impenetrable wall of political topology . A similar wall was forcibly removed by the North Vietnam and spontaneously by the two Germanies in the twentieth century .
 The great movements of people throughout history also remind dough kneading, which we can trace by language . We can trace the dough-kneading process by using language, says historian .
 People speaking Finno-Ugric languages are encountered in disconnected areas spanning from Hungary to Baltic Sea to Eastern Siberia .
 Altaic languages are scattered along the routs of westward moving Huns and Mongols . Altaics are scattered across Asia between its Mediterranean and Pacific coasts .
 As far as the Basque language is concerned, we do not even know whether the other raisin has ever existed and where to look for its seeds . The Basque raisin is the only raisin that has ever been found in the region .
 In the course of historical kneading, most kings and queens got separated from power, and some of them even lost their heads . Some of the historical monarchs and queens even lost heads .
 Monarchy, the common way of governing society in the 84 seventeenth century, became a symbolic link with the past and part of cultural heritage . Monarchy became a symbol of the past, even more secure than in times of times of peace .
 The view of the modem version of reductionism seems to find support, too . The view is similar to that of reductionist reductionism, according to the Economist .
 We can trace the roots of the internal stress in the Southern Slavic region of the former Yugoslavia back to the great contest between the descendants of the Roman province Illyricum and the advancing Ottoman Empire .
 This area was kneaded, stretched, folded, rolled, rolled and tom apart by many hands, as well as by internal fennentation . Subsequently, this area was stretched, stretched and rolled apart by hand-to-hand .
 Serbian king Alexander I and Croatian Communist Josip Broz Tito kept together by the authoritarian force of Serbian king and Communist leader . Both leaders were alive during the time they were alive .
 Following the concept of consilience, we may hope to explain the violent nationalism by the genes and modes of behavior inherited by humans from their animal predecessors .
 In our explanation we would have to turn to social psychology and its studies of liking, frustration, and displaced aggression . Social psychology is a study of liking and frustration, according to social psychologists .
 The Yugoslavian territory is populated with people of four different religions and three alphabets, and with historically alternating record of domination of one nation over the others . We should take account of the unique peculiarity of the Yugoslavian region .
 The fact that all of them, except for ethnic Albanians, speak identical or very similar languages and have a strong feeling of belonging to the same family of Southern Slavs, is a certain prerequisite for the family being dysfunctional . The family is dysfunctional, says the author .
 From this point of view, we would probably conclude that the recent situation was by no means accidental and could not be any different . The recent situation could not have been any different, the author says .
 Father West had taken up the paternal authoritarian role played previously by Alexander I and Tito . His Serbian stepson displaced his aggression onto his brothers and sisters . Father West took up the role of the authoritarian role .
 We suspect that this kind of research could resurrect the pattern of Giordano Bmno and zealous political correctness .
 The people of fonner Russian Empire mostly neither spoke the same language nor were pressed to . Neither knew any other dominant nation except Russians nor had any big internal ethnic conflict on their historical memory .
 One sees the world as a layered cake, the other sees it as making the cake . The world is made up of two layered layers, one of the world's most important layers .
 The dynamic, “processual” and “substantial” points of view are evidently complementary . The dynamic and static, ‘substantial,’ and ‘disintegrated’ points are apparently complementary .
 Some philosophers and scientists mean by reductionism any impersonal, scientific explanation . Some philosophers, scientists say reductionism is an impersonal explanation .
 We must acknowledge our debt to reductionism which has created the largest and the most widely used body of knowledge . We need to acknowledge that reductionism is the most commonly used body-building knowledge .
 Reductionism, especially as refined a concept as consilience, ‘interlocking of causal explanation across disciplines’ , is the very spirit and flesh of modem science .
 As result, we can see both the remarkable continuity and diversity in patterns of culture around the world . As result of this, we are able to see the remarkable diversity of culture in the world, and in fact, we have a rich history of culture .
 We all knead the same dough but bake our daily bread in different shapes every morning . We bake our bread in the shape of different shapes each morning .
 Both points of view are difficult to dispute, but none has ever been tested on particular historical events . Neither has ever tested on historical events.
 Most of very general statements are true even if they exclude each other . Most of the most general statements in the world are true, even though they exclude other things .
 There is one thing, however, that points to a substantial void in the complementary union of two points of view . There is a "substantial void" in the view of the U.S. President Barack Obama .
 The past as distant as that of the Bible, not to mention the past as young as several hundred years, is still capable to shape history of a region . The past, not as distant, still can shape history .
 Initial conditions are lost in baker’s transformation or in another mathematical model known as Markov chain . But they are not lost in historical records and national memory . The initial conditions are also lost in other mathematical models .
 Prigogine concentrates on the problem of time and change, while the resilience of memory seems to be left on the wayside .
 Each eddy is a coordinated and organized movement of large numbers of individual molecules of water . This is the result of the eddy movement of the water in the form of an eddy .
 It looks chaotic, but it is full of order because the eddies have a certain average shape and size . The eddies look chaotic but have an average size and shape .
 Historian's task is to show how the present has come into existence . According to R.G.Collingwood, the historian’s task is showing how the past has come to existence .
 There is a difficulty of the transposition of the concepts derived from the behavior of continuous fluid bodies to the social structures that behave more like solid bodies of a particular and intricate design .
 Collingwood himself saw in history the transformation of ideas, to which neither physical continuity nor classical thermodynamics could be applied . He saw the transformation in history as a result of ideas that were not physical continuity or thermodynamics . Collingwire himself saw history as an example of the transformation
 The central concept of Prigogine’s thermodynamics was further explored by the Santa Fe Institute of Complexity on non-physical discrete models . The emergent behavior of the thermodynamic process was also explored .
 Order comes from chaos when certain parameters reach critical levels, which is exactly the essence of turbulence, says President Obama . Order comes out from chaos, says Obama, who says order is chaos .
 The works of Stuart Kauffman and other authors united around Santa Fe Institute of Complexity is a very big topic with history of its own . We can only refer the reader to the sources of the sources .
 He contributed the powerful idea of selection of configurations known in details, i.e., structures, to the more diffuse thermodynamic picture . He contributed to selection of configuration of configurations .
 Water is not just zillions of molecules dashing in a table spoon of clear liquid but an immutable structure built of two atoms of hydrogen connected at an angle to a single atom of oxygen .
 This is what water has always been since it first formed in the universe and this is what it will be forever while the universe lasts . Water will always be the same thing it has been since the universe formed .
 Water is not drinkable liquid but its individual molecular pattern made of two atoms of hydrogen and one of oxygen . In the peculiar and unique view of the chemist, water is not the drinkable .
 The chemist perceives the molecule of fluid water as a flexible but solid body . Paradoxically, the chemist believes that fluid water is a flexible body .
 Plato and Spinoza would say that the chemist deals with the idea of water . "Plutopia" is the name of a chemist who deals with ideas of water.
 The body of a molecule, although subject to internal movement such as vibrations and deformations, cannot be described in terms of collisions, ensembles, dynamics and dynamics, and mass statistics .
 Society reminds a solid body, a crystal, with most atoms moving only within a certain limited space . Society, too, reminds society, too . Most atoms move only within limited space, and society is like a solid crystal .
 The structure of an individual molecule changes in the course of a chemical reaction once and forever as a unique catastrophic event, says the author .
 The V-shaped molecule of water can be stretched and bent, but it remains water, unless broken . Water can be bent and bent but it's still water, even if bent .
 It breaks like a solid body and can be resurrected from the same pieces . If we manage to catch them while they scatter around like frightened mice, we'll be able to resurrect them .
 The closest parallel with molecule is a three-dimensional geometrical figure, such as, for example, Platonic bodies: tetrahedron, cube, etc., only it is not typically symmetric . We omit an important but technical subject of reversibility .
 A mobile sculpture, like that in Logan airport in Boston, has a lot of internal motion, but remains itself . The sculpture has been installed in Boston's Logan airport, Boston, since 2010 .
 We can imitate this structural change by small balls of modeling clay and cocktail straws, or simply, as chemists still do, with pen and paper . They change atom by atom, connection by connection, and we can imitate that .
 Structural chemistry is a science of the individual object, not the crowd, says author . Structural science is the science of individual objects, not crowds, says the author .
 Making cake is also within the chemist’s expertise, and it means fermentation . We will touch on the subject later in this article .
 It grew from different roots, planted by Democritus, and perceives the world in terms of atom-like blocks 90 arranged in a certain order . It grew, however, from . different roots .
 In short, it is about structure, usually shunned by physics and taken as granted by reductionism . The structure of the world's most complex structures is thought to be the structure of a structure .
 History, from this point of view, is always a concrete arrangement of such blocks as particular, not abstract, event, person, idea, territory, power, relation, etc., which changes according to certain rules and laws, whether smoothly or catastrophically . History is always an arrangement
 The same holds for chemistry, but the computers are really a big help . Believe it or not, the same holds .
 The third view notes a certain similarity between ancient kings, modem dictators, and even charismatic CEOs . The view is that ancient kings and modem dictators are similar to each other .
 It understands the phenomenon as pattern, i.e., a property of human society that is neither accidental nor reducible to any lower level, but akin to the way water vapor crystallizes into different snow flakes, all having the symmetry of the six-ray star .
 As we promised, we will introduce elements of a much more general and abstract mathematical approach, for which chemistry itself is just an illustration . We will introduce a more general approach to chemistry .
 Next we are going to explore mathematical objects similar to molecules but more abstract . Next we will go to look at mathematical objects like molecules .
 The constructs made of points and lines are subject of the area of mathematics called graph theory . We need to take at least a superficial tour over its terrain before entering the realm of patterns .
 In each intersection of a column and a row the unity means a certain relationship between two points, and zero means its absence . The unity of a row means the unity of two points .
 The matrix only looks like a square, but we can cut it out and roll into a cylinder along the rows or columns . We can cut out the matrix and roll it into a cylindary .
 We can now cut a cylinder along a generatrix between any two rows and any matrix will represent the same graph . We can cut this cylinder along any row and any row will represent a graph .
 It is a mathematical object reflecting an essential aspect of what is commonly understood as structure . It is an essential part of the structure of a structure .
 The arcs may mean lines drawn by a pencil, or telephone lines, or friendships, or anything else, totally invisible . As long as there are a set of nodes and a binary relationship between all or some or none of them, the arcs are possible .
 Arc, therefore, is a representation of a relationship, and whether we portray the arc with thin, thick, long, short, straight, or curved lines does not matter because all of them simply mean that two nodes are linked in a relationship . Arc is a symbol of the relationship between
 In simple graphs all nodes are equal and so are all arcs . Graph as matrix of incidence in simple graphs is matrix of incidence of incidence .
 The structure of the interstate commerce in the United States is a full graph on 50 nodes, all states having potentially same ties with each other, indiscriminately . All states have potential ties to each other .
 The first 13 stars on the American Flag were arranged in a circle . Not accidentally, the first thirteen stars were arranged to form a circle around the circle .
 We can invent a variety of more complex graphs by allowing more diversity but less equality . We need to allow diversity but not equality in order to create a more complex graph . We can create a new graph by allowing diversity and equality .
 They can also be drawn as one way street, 94 with a direction from one node to another . They are also drawn as a one-way street, or as one- way street .
 A graph of subordination within an organization normally looks like an upside down tree, the link goes from the superior to the inferior . For example, in an organization, the graph looks like a tree with an upside-down tree .
 Our illustrations will consist mostly of points and lines, but we will not deal with simple graphs . We will not use simple graphs. Instead, we will use point and line illustrations to illustrate our findings .
 The real world does not know either zero diversity or absolute equality, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "The real world is not the world of diversity or equality," he says .
 We may portray points by dots of different size and shape and fill them not only with black paint but with their names in Latin letters . We may also distinguish between different kinds of arcs by drawing them with different types of lines .
 The relation of being neighbors, or being in a relation, is the essential subject of the mathematical discipline called topology . Topology is a mathematical discipline known as topological .
 Topology as science takes a set of objects, for example, points on a surface, and for every pair decides whether they are neighbors or not . Topology is a topology of the universe, where objects are placed on surfaces .
 When we have an orange made of modeling clay and make a cucumber out of it, topology is preserved . But if we make a donut, formerly close neighbors become separated .
 Basketball and American football have different shapes but the same topology . Bagel and muffin are worlds apart, although they are both as American as apple pie .
 If we cut it, the relation of closeness between some points will be lost, unless we glue them back . The relationship between some of these points will not be maintained, says the author .
 In political terms, topology is preserved in a transformation without revolutionary scissors and authoritarian glue . Topology can be preserved in the transformation of a political system, says Julian Zelizer .
 Graph is a topological set because it is a binary relation between every two nodes that are either connected or not at all . Graph is an example of a topology set . It is a set of nodes that is either connected to each other or not .
 Euclidean geometry, unlike topology, takes account angles and distances, and if those are changed, the new triangle is different from the old one . Euclidan geometry takes into account angles, distances and distances .
 The common property of all triangles is their pattern of ‘triangularity” or “triangleness,” preserved under all transformations . What is of interest for us here is the common property .
 Some triangles possess the mystical property of symmetry . Some triangles and other figures possess the same symmetry . A triangle is a triangle that has a symmetry .
 We can rotate the triangle in the upper row around its vertical axis until it falls back into the plane . For example, we can rotate a triangle in order to fall back into a plane .
 This new triangle is not the same because we have changed vertices B and C . When we repeat the same operation again, we come back to the initial triangle . This triangle is the same as the original triangle .
 We can also rotate the triangle around its center for 1/3 of the full cycle . The triangle is rotated around the center of the cycle .
 If we label the vertices, we have to do that three times in order to come back to the beginning of the story . The vertices have to be labeled three times before they can be returned to the same place .
 Symmetry operations with triangles invite us into a different hall of mathematics called group theory . We will enter it in Chapter 8 plainly called Groups .
 An impenetrable divide exists between geometry of triangles and the fabric of social and personal change . The King and the Pear is a collaboration between the two triangles .
 We would like to provide more illustrations of the evasive property that falls within such overlapping terms as invariance, regularity, order, and structure . We would rather focus on the properties that fall within those overlapping terms such as regularity and order .
 In general, this property is something that is preserved under spatial, temporal, or other transformations . The property is preserved when it is in a spatial or temporal change .
 Not everyone is aware of mathematics’ ability to deal with objects that seem to inhabit the mysterious realm existing without space and time . ‘I’m not sure how many people are aware of this ability of mathematics,’ says mathematician .
 The “triangularity” described in the previous chapter had nothing to do with either the ruler or the clock . Thus, the ‘triangular’ity’ described in this chapter had no connection to the ruler .
 Operations can be applied not only to connected points, as in the previous chapter, but also to disconnected objects . However strange it sounds, operations can also be applied to connected objects .
 The transformation of the head into the pear preserves the pear-like shape of the pear .
 Picture illustrates one-to-one correspondence which allows for establishing similarity between different sets . The picture illustrates one to one correspondence .
 Transformation in changes one discrete set of figures into another one, so that there is one-to-one correspondence between the two sets . Transformation in is one of the most common ways to transform figures .
 Characters of a Greek or Shakespearean drama are transferred into contemporary surroundings . One example of this transformation is a remake of a classical play where characters of the play are transferred .
 Every epoch, up to our times, made the reverse transpositions of the immortal patterns . Every epoch has made a reverse transposition of the old patterns, says historian .
 The figures of set a have a difficult-to-define similarity to their counterparts in set oti when only considered through visual associations between the pawn and the slouching man, the bishop and the woman in a skirt, the rook and the square outline of a jacketed man .
 A small violation of this rule is noticeable as an extra vein on the left side, and we do not know whether it was intentional or just the manifestation of a universal chaos .
 We can regard stagnation, equilibrium, evolution, and revolution as something that does not change during transformation from one society to another . Stagnant, equilibrium and revolution is something that doesn't change during a society's transformation .
 Pattern theory establishes a close relation between pattern theory and geometry . The concept of regularity as invariance of transformation constitutes the core of the mathematical apparatus of pattern theory .
 This is a totally different example of invariance, however, which is also taken from a book on mathematics . Here is an example taken from the book on mathematical theory .
 The two meanings are tied together by the common “X eat more than Y” in the same way the rain and the rain invocation ceremony are linked by the sprinkling of water .
 A bombing of the Chinese embassy in Belgrade during the Kosovo conflict in 1999 was perceived as an accident by NATO and a barbaric act by China . For example, NATO and China perceived the bombing as a 'barbaric act' by NATO .
 The similarity of the situation with that of a pun is that both Ai and A 2 are logically compatible, e. e. An order to commit a barbaric act could be made by accident . The similarity to the situation is to that of that of the pun .
 In international relations this pattern is a typical source of conflict and by no means a joke. Yet in international relations it is a problem, it is not a joke .
 Emperor Ch’ien Lung, sometimes compared regarding his grand style with that of Louis XIV of France, denied the request .
 "Our dynasty, swaying the myriad races of the globe, extends the same benevolence toward all," he said . " Moreover, our dynasty ... extends the . same generosity toward all"
 Your Ambassador has put forward new requests which completely failed to recognize the Throne’s principle to ‘treat strangers from afar with indulgence’ and to exercise a pacifying control over barbarian tribes, the world over .
 The King has ordered the departure of the mission from his island . He has ordered his Ministers to enlighten your Ambassador on the subj ect .
 Common sense and reason that allows people to understand one another should not be ignored . Common sense should not. It should be common sense and common sense .
 The reader could look for an answer not in history, but rather, along the reductionist principles in psychology in psychology . "Reducedist principles" in psychology could be used to answer the question .
 Emperor Ch'ien Lung of the Ch’ing dynasty ruled China for sixty years . By the end of his rule he showed signs of impaired judgment .
 The old Chinese pattern could be called Cinocentric, similar to the geocentric pattern of Ptolemy, with the Emperor ruling the Earth under the mandate of Heaven .
 In the span of fifty years, the self-image of China and her image of the world was to be crushed in the Opium War . The West entered a long process of reeducating itself about China, sending new missions, losing wars, and learning the language of humility and
 Modern physics understands symmetry with a much wider perspective than that of a traditional view stemming from antiquity . Modern physics, however, understands symmetry in a different way .
 Physicists describe these two properties of physical laws as symmetries of nature . They say they do not depend on when or where you use them .
 Physicists say nature treats every moment in time and every location in space identically—symmetrically . This is by ensuring that the same fundamental laws are in operation . By this usage, physicists mean that nature treats all moments in time, places in space and time identically
 The question arises, therefore, whether a transfonnation should necessarily have a mathematical expression . The question is whether a transfer on a person's nationality should have an expression, or not .
 The translation of a joke from one medium to another is not what would have been considered mathematics in the nineteenth century . In fact, the translation is not the same as a joke being translated from a joke to a joke .
 Today, mathematics also embraces algorithms, i.e., systems of clearly defined instructions of any kind, even with elements of randomness and uncertainty . Today, however, mathematics embraces algorithms .
 The long and explicit instruction would include everything concerning the art of playing both instruments . The long-and-a-half-hour long instruction would be required .
 Electronic musical instruments can do the same using built-in algorithms . Electronic instruments can also be programmed to play using algorithms to create musical sounds .
 There is little need to argue whether the hardly definable translation of a pattern from one culture to another should be considered mathematics . But the body of mathematics is changing before our eyes.
 More and more often simulation takes precedence over mathematical inference on a piece of paper or blackboard . Computers can be trusted to the massive power of computers, experts say .
 Classical mathematics was the drive of mathematicians to test the limits of their imaginative power . The brutal force of computing is commonly assigned to do what the human mind is powerless to accomplish, limited by its very nature .
 They preserve the property of being a polygon, and the number of edges, but nothing else . The polygon is a polygraphic shape that has edges and edges .
 It is hard to ignore that what some people expected to happen in the future has never happened . While that which has really happened on earth no one could have foreseen, no one has foreseen it .
 With some interruptions and interregnums, this rule by the strongest became the normal pattern . The strongest was the strongest in the world, and the strongest won the most .
 Carolingians displaced Merovingians and were pushed aside by the usurper Capetians . So it was in medieval France, where the Carolingian displaced the Merovingian and the Capetian . The Carolingians displaced and pushed aside in turn by usurper the
 In Japan, however, the solution was not to dethrone and expunge the dynasty but to immure it . The solution was to remove the dynasty from the country .
 What is preserved is the pattern of the rule of the strongest, with a slight deformation concerning the means, not the ends, says the author . What's preserved is a pattern that is consistent with the means and ends, he says .
 There is a great variance of changes falling under the notion of transformation, deformation, or operation while clearly leaving something unchanged . To summarize, there is a lot of changes to be seen in this article .
 Both the change and the pennanence are sometimes hopelessly difficult to define . Change and the change are sometimes impossible to define, but they are still important .
 The changes that leave something unchanged constitute one of the most important mathematical subjects that we shall discuss in the next chapter of this chapter . But the changes that remain unchanged will be discussed again .
 Deformations and symmetry operations with triangles point to another important field of mathematics, reaching far beyond geometrical figures .
 The concept of deformation or transfonnation attracted a lot of mathematical attention and is the subject of group theory . Deformation is a form of operation that is subject to group theory.
 The founder of group theory, Evariste Galois tried to publish his discovery . Group theory is a theory of the origin of group theories .
 On eve of duel he wrote notes about his work and was killed next day at the age of twenty-one . On the eve of a duel he died next day .
 D’Arcy Thompson was one of the pioneers in exporting ideas of group theory to the world outside classical mathematics . Thompson was author of the influential and widely quoted book On Growth and Form . Group theory is a theory of mathematical theory that works out of theory .
 This process of comparison lies within the immediate province of mathematics, and finds its solution in the elementary use of a certain method of the mathematician . Ill Ill Ill says the mathematician is capable of recognizing in one form a definite permutation or deformation of another .
 We start with any primate and use the shape of its scull as a template, i.e., a selected starting point . The shape of a primate's scull is used as a starting point for the study .
 We can obtain any other scull shape by deforming the template while preserving its topology . The shape can be obtained with deforming of the template .
 We can infer scull shapes of primates that have never existed and, by employing a template with a different topology, we could infer entirely new species and families . Moreover, as follows from the concept, we can infer the scull shape of primates never existed .
 Soft tissues such as ears, eye sockets, etc. have their own groups of transformations, so that we can fantasize over the shape of an eye and overall appearance . Concerning the soft tissues, such details as ears and eye sockets .
 Scores of sci-fi movies and animations, including Star Wars, old and new, show various aliens and creatures that look very much unlike our earth forms .
 If we look closer, however, all we can see is a deformation of the human form . If you look closer to the image, it appears to be a deformed human form.
 "This is the only template available to us without the actual contact with other worlds," says the author of the book . "We need to use this template as a template for the future"
 If an artist invents something completely out of this world, the viewer may not even recognize it as a form of life . The viewer may even recognize the creation of a new kind of art .
 The computer-generated aliens undergo further transformations that make them turn and move around without losing the identity .
 Group theory is a basic component of mathematical apparatus of pattern theory . It is a fundamental component of the apparatus of the theory of patterns .
 Structuralist idea was to turn from uniqueness to their ordinariness as members of a class . The structuralist idea turned from uniqueness of the phenomenon to its membership of the class .
 Instead of explaining properties of each element, he showed how such properties could be derived from all the rest of the elements in his system . It became possible only century later that such properties were possible .
 The idea of structure borrowed from the group theory invaded anthropology, linguistic, sociology, and other humanities . It created a resistance movement in the competitive atmosphere of humanities . The group theory invades anthropology and linguistic .
 Groups, like graphs and other mathematical creations, are abstract objects . Groups like graphs are like abstract objects, but groups are not abstract objects.
 To discuss the difference between graphs and groups could help understand both could help explain the difference in graphs and group graphs .
 graphs are defined by a set of elements and binary relations between them . As we know, graphs are completely defined by the elements and relations between those elements .
 A square table of who is acquainted with whom is added to the list of guests at a wedding reception . An example is a square table added to a list of friends .
 The elements of a group are operations that convert a pair of elements into a third one . A group is made up of two elements and a group of three elements .
 As an example of group, we take a set of all integers and operation of addition . We use this example to represent a group of integers .
 The table is infinite and its extension would accommodate all the positive integers . The extension would be infinite . The table would also accommodate all positive numbers .
 This group tells us something about the structure of the Euclidean space . This group is a group of scientists who have studied Euclideans . They say it tells us about the Euclidan space structure .
 Guests at a wedding reception can be changed by changing the order of guests at a table . Changing the order can be exemplified by changing guests' sitting order .
 Some of the transformations preserve the property of being a triangle . Some of them, like rotation, translation, and symmetry, preserve the properties of a particular triangle . All those transformations preserve a triangle, and some of them preserve its property .
 graphs can be easily interpreted and illustrated with examples trom everyday life . But it can be more difficult to do with groups of people .
 Groups may show some properties of the world that are hidden and it can take some effort to uncover them . Groups may be able to uncover some hidden properties .
 Groups of translation, rotation, and symmetry reflect those properties of the world that allow us to rearrange furniture in the room without destroying it, while stretching is something we can do with only few things made of latex .
 Changing both shape and color can be done by changing shape or color . Changing shape or shape can turn black square into a white circle .
 Change of wetness/dryness and temperature are basic elementary operations of the group . Change of dryness/ dryness and change of temperature are the most basic basic operations .
 Claude Levi-Strauss borrowed by classical structuralism from mathematics . That was the idea of structure as system of relationship that was borrowed from mathematics, he says . He adds that structure is a system of relationships .
 Structure in structuralist sociology and anthropology consists of binary relations called oppositions . Structure in sociology and anthropology consists of a binary relation called 'opposition'
 Structure is a combination of relations and it can be traced trough various cultures . Structure can be found in cultures such as Japan and China . Structure is the result of relations between people and their cultures .
 Plus means positive, respectable, or tender relationship, while minus denotes antagonism . Plus is a positive or respectable relationship, or a tender relationship . Plus means negative, respectable or antagonistic relationship .
 Levi-Strauss noted that in each system the four relations fell into two pair of oppositions, and there were exactly two positive and two negative relations in each of them .
 The structure of kinship, therefore, is not a particular distribution of relationships in a family but the statement that out of four relations, husband—wife, wife, wife—brother, brother, brother—son, and son—husband, two are positive and two are negative . The
 We find a somewhat similar structure in literature, an evolutionary successor of mythology, along with history . The structure of kinship is similar to that of mythology and history .
 The pattern of tragedy here is the same pattern, but it's not always positive . Here, however, we have three positive relations and one negative, says CNN.com .
 In other words, it is a property of a system that is not that conspicuous on the surface . The system is not as conspicuous as the surface, it's a property that isn't that conspicuous .
 In fact, all mathematics is about structures, invariances, and regularities, of which group is only one example . The group is just one example of a structure .
 Graphs embody the idea of structure as an arrangement of constituents, some of which are connected and some are not . Graphs are a representation of structure that is not connected to each other .
 A graph cannot portray a shape, such as human face, but it may serve as a starting system, as simple circles and lines for children learning to draw .
 The graph is an embodiment of the chemical and architectural concept of structure . It is a graph that is a representation of the structure of a structure .
 In essence, it is the hidden “physical” order of things that could be explored by transfonning one thing into another . The hidden ‘physical’ order is the order that can be explored in the world .
 We cannot even ask why one structure changes for another on its own unless there is an additional principle similar to a physical law . We can't even ask, however, why such a change is made for one structure on the surface .
 The world of groups is the world of common sense, without miracles, catastrophic losses, and staggering innovations . The predictable world of mechanical motion, solid objects, and conservative properties is the predictable world .
 It is the world of individual creations of the mind comparable with a collection of crystals, in a museum-like atmosphere . It is a world of personal creations comparable with the collection of crystal crystals .
 Wireframe shape is a combination of a metric 3D graph-like structure with a group of its transformations consistent of stretching and compressing of arcs . The wireframe shape, used, for example, in computer animation, is .
 When mathematical ideas of structure were introduced into humanities, the next step was to tie the stability of a structure to the internal tension created by negative relationships and compensated by affinities . The stability of the structure is tied to the tension created in negative relationships .
 By looking at the individual graph of relations we could in principle make a transition to problems of dynamics . We could look at the graphs of relations in a new way to solve problems of dynamic dynamics .
 The fundamental idea of sociology, anthropology, and chemistry was to evaluate the overall stability of a structure by scanning its elements . The idea of evaluating a structure is to evaluate its stability by scanning the elements .
 This idea of additivity of positive and negative increments of structural elements into an overall non-structural value is, therefore, something very general and it opens a way from classification to dinamics .
 In case of Romeo and Juliet, we could ask what could happen in this situation . We could ask: 'What could happen if you're in the same situation?'
 Outcome happens if R and J can produce enough energy to compensate for the repulsion of C and M . Obviously, is out of question .
 The conclusion is that this situation is equivalent to the superposition of two opposite forces on R and J, which causes their elimination . This is the ultimate outcome of a tragic human conflict, the author says .
 The group of transformations of the wireframe describes a moving dinosaur but has nothing to do with the prediction whether the beast will be killed or happily feast on a human . For example, the transformations are of the dinosaur but not the prediction .
 We can discuss differences between a Neanderthal man and Homo Sapiens but not the evolution of primates from the first mammals . To put it differently, we can discuss the differences between Neanderthal men and Homo sapiens . We can talk about the differences but not differences between the two species .
 The quest of cultural structuralism for a social physics was not finished . The quest for cultural structuralist for social physics is not finished. The quest is still ongoing .
 The lack of evolutionary dimension and the absence of time from the picture was another shortcoming, says the author of the book .
 The main threat to structuralism came not from internal difficulties, however, but from the explosion and outside invasion of postmodernism . Postmodernism is a form of modernism, but it is not a solution to the problems of structuralism .
 As Crane Brinton noted, revolutions always change less than they leave unchanged . The revolution is not the first time a revolution has occurred in the U.S.
 History of structuralist ideas that independently originated in sociology is an interesting subject, from both theoretical and personal perspective . Sociology is an immense subject, in many aspects similar to chemistry, and neither one nor the other can be reviewed here . Sociological history is an important subject, but sociology
 The typical features of the primate scull can be described directly, without any coordinates . Note that the typical features are described directly without coordinates .
 Group theory is basically non-numerical, which facilitates their export and reimplantation on alien soil . Note also that ideas of group theory are basically not-numbersical .
 Columbus did not find pepper, cloves, and nutmeg in the ‘India’ he discovered . Structuralism did not bring intellectual spices for everybody’s use as it promised .
 The intellectual sailing in humanitarian seas by the mathematical winds is far from over . Yet the intellectual sailing is still not over, he says .
 In the next chapter we shall give the tired reader some verbal potion to ease the mathematical seasickness . The next chapter will give the reader a verbal potion of sorts .
 The quest for knowledge has been driven by many forces, one of which is the craving for power . To understand the world, the quest is driven by the desire to know more than anything .
 Knowledge can be used to control the future, influence the behavior of the enemy, perhaps even the gods, it can be exploited to improve one's health or success in love . It can make the clever rich and the adventurous victorious . Knowledge can also be used as a tool to influence the
 Princes employed astrologers to study the motion of the planets and republics had asked augurs to examine the entrails of animals before important decisions were made .
 The curious mind searches knowledge for its own sake, for the pleasure of discovery . To find beauty in order, to find truth. To find truth, find beauty and truth .
 Pythagoras had discovered the theorem to be named after him . He ordered a hecatomb of oxen to be sacrificed, little did he anticipate the practical use of his lovely find .
 Today science depends on money and the money is hard to get if the scientists do not show the practical importance of their work, whether true or imaginary . Science depends on the money, and it is hard for scientists to show the importance of work .
 The scientist cannot refer to Democritus who said, “It is not in strength of body nor in gold that men find happiness, but in uprightness and in fullness of understanding,” he said .
 Science and politics proclaim themselves extremes, but the extremes meet . The extremes meet in science and politics, but they often meet .
 The explorer must start from a belief that knowledge is possible and that the world can be understood . Whatever motivates the search for knowledge, the explorer needs to start with a belief .
 An underlying assumption, perhaps made tacitly, must be the tenet that there is some order hidden under what at first seems like chaos . The underlying assumption is that there must be some order hiding under what appears chaotic .
 For millennia people managed to understand the world around and survive in a hostile environment without literacy, education, and any notion of order and chaos . People were able to survive without literacy and education .
 Animals do the hard business of survival every day every day with even scarcer educational background . Animals do not have the same educational background as animals in the wild .
 "What we intend to do here is to understand some aspects of understanding itself," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 We cannot do that by just throwing words around, we need to give some idea of what we mean by that . We cannot just throw words around. We need to explain that order and chaos is not just chaos, it's order .
 Chaos stepped into the line-up of the most fundamental scientific concepts in the twentieth century . Chaos is a form of chaos in the scientific world .
 The inconvenient thing about chaos, however, is that it escapes universal definitions and is regarded as absence of order . Chaos is not a thing that can be defined in the universal definition of order, but it is a thing of chaos . Chaos can be seen as a form of chaos, but
 As soon as we notice such links, we begin to see the underlying order of the world, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com . "We are not going to ignore these links," he says .
 In fact, this view is not too far from the physical perception of chaos of molecular movement . Chaos is the absence of interaction between individual particles of gas moving independently of each other .
 Chaos means that they are not connected in any way, whether they move or not . The broader view implies that there are stable particles, components, blocks, units, cells, atoms, primitives, etc., in any object, and chaos .
 We can get some taste of static chaos from a text in a totally unfamiliar language, especially in a non-Latin alphabet . We can see some of the chaos in a text written in an unfamiliar language .
 We simply cannot comprehend anything in a Chinese, Hebrew, or Hindi text, unless we know the language, and neither can we imagine how it sounds . We simply can't understand anything in Chinese or Hebrew texts without knowing the language . We can't imagine how the language sounds, even if
 We are hardly capable of imagining a larger world without relations and connections, we are hardly . We need to connect ourselves with each other to make sense of the world . We are not alone, but we are connected to each other by our connections .
 If we look at the string of alien characters, we can in most cases split the line into separate characters, identify their sequence, recognize some identical characters, and even standard elements of Chinese characters, not knowing what they mean .
 When we look at a picture, we immediately distinguish between left and right, top and bottom, close and distant details, etc. etc. We immediately distinguish from left to right, right to left, top, bottom and bottom .
 We look for incoming cars because there is a link between the car and danger . When we want to walk across a road, we look for the incoming cars . We also look for cars in order to avoid being hit by cars .
 Animals can probably read the book of nature better than we, but their world may have no links with our world . Animals can read nature's book better than us, but they may not have links to our world. Animals can also read nature more easily .
 Each spring and fall, driving on country roads, we can see carcasses of small animals hit by cars . The carcasses can be seen on the side of country roads in the fall and spring .
 A squirrel or a raccoon have no links with the small but fast growing object looking like no familiar predator . Despite their excellence in the art of survival, a squirrel or raccoon do not have any links with a squirrel .
 The lethal experience does not give the animal a second chance to establish the relation between the object and danger . The animal is not given a second opportunity to establish a relationship between the animal and the danger .
 The stretch of the highway is for them like a line of text in an exotic language for us, we say . It's for them to be like a 'line of text' in an 'exotic language' for us .
 All we know is that it has been presenting a constant challenge for schoolchildren as well as to distinguished scientists . It has been presented to schoolchildren and distinguished scientists alike .
 Now we have a powerful scientific apparatus for discovering the regularities of the world, from the link between nutrients and health to the dependence of economics on political decisions—none of them faultless . The world is full of regularities, but none of them are faultless, he says .
 If people had a picture of nature long before any science, we cannot blame them for a strange fantasy or a ridiculous blunder . We cannot blame people for a bizarre fantasy or blunder.
 It may be very difficult to find a connection between events even in somebody’s own life, not to mention the events involving large numbers of people, which is exactly the subject of history .
 One can only speculate how early humans began to observe order in Nature . One of the first discoveries was likely the regularity of the changing seasons, how summer is followed by fall, day by night .
 Ancient astronomical observatories all over the world witnessed the dawn of natural science, of course intermingled with magic, beginning a long history of uneasy coexistence with religion .
 It is the connection between two disparate entities that we call an atom of knowledge . We call it the "atom of knowledge" - an atom .
 What has no link to something else is either chaos or it does not exist . Chaos or it doesn't exist. Chaos is chaos or chaos, or it is not exist. What is chaos?
 Hodja Nasreddin, the legendary sage, trickster, and preacher of Central Asian folklore, was said to promise fierce Tamerlane to teach his donkey to read in twelve years . The legendary sage said to have told Tamerlan to teach him to read .
 We have already met the first points and lines which we are going to make work for history . From Augustus to Nero, we are already meeting first points of history . We have met first points, lines which are already being made work .
 Graphs have a common, although less illuminating, presence in works of historians . By no means we claim to be the pioneers in this field, however, Graphs are a common feature of works by historians .
 They are often used to show the structure of kinship in royal families, genealogy, and subordination in social institutions . They often show how they relate to each other .
 Such graphs seem static, but they can be useful for portraying evolutionary change . Such graphs can be used to portray evolutionary change, say experts .
 We have enclosed men in rectangles, women in ellipses and highlighted the names of emperors . We have succumbed to temptation to show how violent death descended on the family of Octavian Augustus .
 The chart shows couples (Augustus and Scribonia, Tiberius and Livia) and their children, and the children of their children . The chart was created by Augustus, Scribonia and Octavia, who lived in Rome .
 The junction is used as a way to show that the children are connected to their parental couple as a whole and have links to both parents . The children are used to be connected to both their parents .
 The subject of genealogy used to be a serious matter and its differing interpretations were often a reason for starting medieval wars . For example, the Hundred Years’ War was the result of a genealogy debate .
 Edward III was the love child of Isabella and Edward II, the descendants of two rival nations, was a destabilizing factor . Edward III, the son of Edward II and Isabella, was born in France in 1881 .
 The War was precipitated by the dispute over the French throne between Edward III of England and Philip VI of France, nephew and cousin of the deceased, respectively, respectively . Edward III was the nephew of Philip and Philip of France .
 Since the royal genealogy of Europe used to reach far across state borders, it was both the instrument of peace and war, depending on the circumstances . It was both an instrument of war and peace, depending upon the circumstances, as well as peace .
 There were periods, for example, after the defeat of Napoleon, when the monarchs cooperated well . There were also periods, after that, when monarchs cooperate well, the historian says .
 The history of Europe up to the end of the WWI was a record of wars . Still, from early Middle Ages, in spite of the ongoing royal intermarriage, the history of the Middle Ages was a history of wars.
 The French appealed to a law denying the succession trough a female line, but the English did not accept it . The English refused to accept the French appeal .
 The subsequent hundred years of history of France had their share of insanity and murder . The subsequent 100 years of French history of the country had its share of madness and murder.
 Genealogies do not seem to attract any significant interest of modern historians, but they commonly illustrate the narrative . Genealogists do not appear to attract significant interest from modern historians .
 We see in them a graphic way to express the link over time between mundane events without much effect for contemporaries but with dramatic consequences in later times . We see them in them as a way of expressing the link .
 Square dot means marital union between parents that resulted in progeny . Round dot means a person, the in-arrow means spousal bonds, and the out-arrow is a parental bond .
 The graph shows the divergence and convergence of two lines of kinship, which is evidence of inbreeding through marriage between relatives . What we can see from the graph is the divergence .
 One continuous string of arrows goes from the parents of Augustus to Julia, Agrippina S to Aggripina J . The other makes the same connection through Octavia, Antonia, and Gennanicus .
 There are two or more somewhat independent layers of relationship, for example, spousal and paternal . The reason for this is that there is a somewhat independent layer of relationship . For example, there is an independent layer in relationship between the two families .
 Cycles of kinship are indicated by shadowed areas; emperors encircled; ■ means birth therefore, to use either two types of arcs or two type of nodes .
 If we wanted to emphasize brother/sister relationship, we might need a third type of arc . The arc of the brothers and sisters might need to be different .
 Mother-child and father-child relationships are marked by separate arrows . The relationship between mother and father is marked by different arrows .
 In some primitive cultures, as we have seen, there are even more important layers of modes of relationship, like uncle—nephew, for example . In some cultures, uncle is uncle, nephew, uncle, uncle and nephew .
 The need to graphically express multi-layered kinship was one of the stimuli for the development of structuralism . Structuralism is a form of art that can be graphically graphically expressed in art .
 We need them only as exercise and illustration to more important matters of representation of knowledge as structure . We need to use them as examples of how knowledge is represented by structure, not knowledge .
 As a preliminary conclusion, even in rather trivial cases knowledge can be very complex, and its representation even more so . Even in a rather trivial case knowledge can become very complex .
 In our further exploration in this direction we shall look for ways to simplify complex structures . We shall look at ways of simplifying complex structures.
 Maximus, Avitus, Mqonan, Severus, Anthemius, Olybnus, Glycenus, Nepos, Augustus, Augustulus. Maximus . Maximus. Avitus . Avitus. Mqonsan . Mqontan,
 Normally, genealogy is a branching tree, but it could include cycles when relatives marry . Any culture allows certain minimal blood distance between spouses .
 Theodosius I was the last emperor to rule both halves of the empire . He split the empire between his sons Arcadius and Honorius . He ruled both sides of empire .
 The two lines of inheritance crossed in the marriage of Valentinian III and Eudoxia . Valentinian Ithinian III was the son of the king of the Roman Empire .
 The Western Empire ceased to exist amidst constant squabble between the two halves of the diagram . Twenty years, nine emperors, and many a colorful detail after Valenitinian III, the Western Empire ended .
 The names in bold print belong to three women who had the real but disconcerted power during the final act of the drama .
 The appearance of the philosopher’s name carries some information, too, and the filled areas indicate schools . The filled areas are filled areas indicated schools .
 Dozens of such diagrams in the books portray the networks of philosophers all around the globe from the very beginnings of philosophy to almost present, creating a captivating threedimensional picture .
 Randall Collins’ work extends far beyond the illustrative apparatus, but we cannot dwell on it here . The originality and significance of Randall Collins' work extends beyond the illustration apparatus, says Collins .
 The only thing we would like to mention is his perception of history of philosophy as a natural process in which philosophers, aware of each other’s intellectual presence, compete for the limited space in the focus of attention .
 Collins gives important hints how it could be done . It would be possible to add yet another dimension to the picture by introducing evolution of philosophy in terms of doctrines .
 He clearly sees competing philosophical doctrines as combinations of blocks, some of which are simply negations of blocks in rival philosophies .
 Use of lines in genealogies helps find the particular system of lines that we call connector . The use of lines helps find a particular system, called connector .
 As everywhere throughout this book, line is not a geometrical object but a symbol for CAMBRIDGE Trinity Coll. Coll. As everywhere . Throughout the book, . line is . not only a symbol but also a symbol . for Trinity Coll .
 We encounter a problem of similar kind in language, where meaning can be expressed in a variety of forms . We encountered a similar kind of problem in language where meaning is expressed in variety forms .
 The decline of Rome was the natural and inevitable effect of immoderate greatness . But the decline of the Roman empire was the inevitable result of great greatness .
 The beginnings of history come to us in pictures in caves and on rocks . We have to look at caves and rocks to find out where history began .
 The text of a narrative is a verbal representation of historical knowledge . The text is written in a narrative that is a written form of text .
 It is nothing but a string of words equally suitable for communicating the most mundane and transient situations in life of teenagers as well as the decline and fall of Roman Empire . It is an easy way to communicate mundane situations and the decline of the Roman Empire.
 This is the form in which history is recorded, stored, and accessed, and since the reader may be confronted with the question what points and lines could add to it, it seems worth spending some time on language .
 The study of meaning drew attention of both philosophers and non-philosophers early in the twentieth century . It stimulated the study of structure in general in general . The study was first published in 1900 .
 Structure is a central concept in such technical areas of human activity as chemistry, construction, and engineering, where it is clearly visible to everybody . Structure is an important part of science and engineering where it's visible to the public .
 There is hardly any place for meaning, except for architecture where one may ask about the meaning of Gothic Cathedral or Eiffel Tower . The meaning of architecture can be found only in architecture, especially Gothic Cathedral .
 The Swiss linguist Ferdinand de Saussure was especially influential in the structural study of language . His work later spilled over to many other areas of humanities .
 Claude Levi-Strauss, the leading figure in structuralism, never stopped reiterating the influence of Saussure . The leading figure of structuralism in the U.S. continued to be influenced by his work .
 The Course remains as open to interpretations and heresy as a dark sacred text . Probably because of the circumstances of its own genesis, the Course remains .
 The Course seems to be written not just about language but about structure in general . The Course is written about language and structure in particular .
 With its examples taken from chess, finances, and biology, it could be about chemistry, as well . The book is based on chess, money and biology .
 Chemical series compared with lexical ‘associative series” of Saussure . Chemical series .
 Course regards the language in a strikingly atomistic fashion as a system of units connected with li nk s and changing over times through a sequence of steps .
 The changes in such complex systems are usually local and small, leaving the rest unchanged, like chemical changes in big molecules . Even more important from our point of view is the observation that the changes are usually small and small .
 Saussure's conclusion that language as system does not change at all seems to contradict the time dimension he himself granted to language . The paradoxical, much misunderstood, and debated conclusion seems to be contradictory to his time dimension of language, he says .
 For us it means that the most abstract patterns of change work the same way throughout history . For us, this means that we need to look at the history of the past and present .
 For the chemist it is the same as to say that the laws of chemistry do not change, says the chemist . "For the chemist, it is not the law of chemistry," he says .
 Saussure was able to make linguistic predictions that were confirmed after his death on the example of Hittite language . Basing on his ‘chemistry’ of language, Saussures made some of his predictions .
 Within a certain language, sounds are distinct entities that combine with each other in certain ways and not in others, words and their parts behave likewise . But deeper under the surface structure, which can be perceived and characterized in all detail, lies a level of concepts that manifests a different kind of
 For example, whether the sentence “A dog chases a cat” is spoken or sung, written in bold typeface or in italic, or translated into French, it has the same meaning . Whether the sentence is spoken, sung, or written, it is written in
 If we lose a knight from a chess set, we can substitute any small object for it and play chess anyway . We can substitute a knight with a small object, or a knight, for chess .
 Meaning, therefore, is a pattern, like the melody played in different keys and on different instruments . Meaning is also a pattern like a melody played on different keys or instruments . For example, the melody of a song is played in a different key or key .
 Life would be much simpler and history more peaceful, however, if meaning was not so often evasive and slippery . Life is much simpler if meaning is not so evasive, slippery .
 It can be distorted not only at translation but even between the speakers of the same language . It can also be distorted between the speaker and the speaker .
 Murphy’s law goes, whatever your intent is, somebody will misunderstand you . The authors of this book brace themselves. They say they are prepared to brace themselves .
 There are meaningless combinations, but meaning can come with time to what was considered meaningless in the twelfth century . “Alex has two mothers” would be meaningless two decades ago. “This Toyota has a fuel injection’s would be . meaningless, for example .
 In other words, the meaning is tied to a contemporary body of knowledge . The meaning of the word "transcript" is tied in modern knowledge, the author says .
 Saussure was created by the German painter in the 1920s . He was inspired by his work on the world's most famous works of art . The work was created in the same way as the works of Charles Darwin .
 What is hidden behind the string of words is a branched structure with the actual words hanging from the branches like apples .
 The sons of Japhet, Gomer and Magog, and Madai, and Javan, and Tubal, were the sons of Tubal and Meshech, and Tiras . The sons were Gomer, Magog and Gomer; Gomer was Gomer
 In order to travel in the semantic dimension we do not need to thoroughly follow the grammar. We do need to use the grammar in order to understand the meaning of the language .
 The meaning of a sentence is commonly portrayed by a part of a semantic network . The network is a graph where labeled nodes are connected with arcs symbolizing certain binary relations such as “is mother of,” ‘is a historian,’ ‘walk’,
 This is a typically mathematical way to deal with large sets by naming them all with one name . Instead, we can use terms of grammar such as S, sentence, N, noun, NP, noun phrase, VP, verb phrase, V, verb, PP, preposition phrase,
 All possible nouns, therefore, are N, whether it is a Roman emperor or a cat . The Roman emperor is the only person to be called N .
 This graph contains information about which words are syntactically connected and which are not . This graph includes information about how words are connected and how they are connected .
 A biologist may recognize in it a certain type of a plant root, again in a very general fonn, or an overturned plant, such as cactus . It is nothing but a formula, similar to formulas of mathematics as well as chemistry, says the author .
 Syntactic structure window, photo, computer, microphone, typing, chair, sitting, staple, stapling, etc. Stapling is a form of language used in writing .
 All those objects, things, people, and actions can be used as labels for nodes of a certain graph . The labels are used to label nodes in a graph .
 The difference between a tenn and a relation is often blurred because the same word can be used as verb, noun, and adjective . In the English language, the difference between the word and relation is blurred .
 War is not only a term, but also a relationship and it connects two enemies, like Rome and Cartage . War is war, not just war, but a relationship, and it's a relationship .
 End is a term, and also a relationship between an event and a point in time . End is the end of an event or a point of time, and a relationship is a relationship . End means end, and end means end .
 The chart tells something about a deadly accident at the intersection of Carthage and Rome . Even if the names of Rome and Carthage do not ring the bell, the chart shows something about the tragedy .
 If we include the episode of spreading the salt over the ruins of Carthage, we can smoothly pass a bridge from history to chemistry . The episode is about spreading salt over Carthage .
 Simple illustrations in textbooks on semantic networks are confusion-free . Simple illustrations of semantic networks can help students understand what they mean .
 Nothing contributes to our appreciation of plain language as much as trying to convert a piece of text into a semantic network . Nothing more than trying to translate text into something more like a network of words .
 Equivalent semantic networks could be built in different ways, and there is no standard one . Equivalent semantics networks could also be built using different ways .
 For example, we can connect Scipio and Carthage with the arc destroy or we can do it as Scopio—^Destruction— > object —»Carthage .
 Instead of the frivolous is a we can use the more ponderous is a member of the set of. The most ponderous member of. the. set of the . set of . the.
 One may ask why do we need to bend, warp, and torture our written and spoken language that is so delightfully linear . One might ask: Why do we have to bend and warp our language?
 The whole problem arose from the subject of knowledge representation in both humans and computers in the domain of science called artificial intelligence . The natural language, naturally, sounds pretty artificial, says the author .
 A semantic network built upon a text means a fonnal representation of a piece of knowledge . The semantic network is built on a text to represent a knowledge .
 Knowledge is represented inside the computer not as a picture but rather as a graph in its matrix fonn. Knowledge was represented in the computer's matrix matrix . It is represented in a graph rather than a picture in a computer .
 We can, of course, use various kinds of labels for binary relations, but it would not really matter much for the structure . We can also use various types of binary relations for binary relationships .
 Scipio and Carthage will always be lurking nearby . However, destruction will always lurk nearby .
 The semantic network, with all its fuzziness, has a certain topology, which reflects some important properties of the real world . The network's topology reflects some of the properties of real world, the author says .
 "This cohesive influence of the world on its reflection in a semantic network is very typical," says the author of the book .
 Noam Chomsky illustrated with the sentence Visiting relatives can be a nuisance . There could be no one-to-one correspondence between words and their meaning, Chomsky said .
 It has two meanings, but they are in fact very close and converge on the association between relatives and nuisance, which may not be the case in a more functional family . The two meanings of the word "family nuisance" are very close .
 Similarly, Revolution is a blessing and tragedy converge in Revolution . Revolution is blessing for some and disaster for others, writes David Cameron .
 There are two opposite opinions on whether history has any meaning, with a stack of intermediate views in between . As it is always the case in humanities, there are two opposing views on the meaning of history .
 The Enlightenment saw history as a natural process driven by properties and aspirations of human nature . The Enlightenment was a belief that history should be based on the properties of the human nature of history .
 Historians believed in historical determinism driving civilizations through cycles of destruction and rebirth . Some historians believed in a historical . determinism . driving civilizations to cycles of . destruction, rebirth .
 Karl Marx noted the role of production of inanimate things in the social evolution of the world . Karl Marx said production of things inanimate objects is crucial to the evolution of society .
 The more a body of knowledge grows, the more there is to deny . In general, there is no way to deny the existence of the world's knowledge .
 The thrown stone first flies up and ahead, then down, then further ahead, following a specific parabolic curve . The thrown stones first fly up and down, before going further ahead .
 Science was to look behind the appearance and represent the event in different tenns, such as mass, acceleration, velocity, and force . The task of science was to examine the appearance of the event .
 The French Revolution can be represented as a series of slides or momentary shots showing a certain structure in the process of change . Geography of a continent must reflect the changing borders and a nation in series of conflicts .
 The charts, graphs, and semantic networks concerning particular events do not appear to reveal much of order and regularity . The charts and graphs of particular events are not always consistent .
 If history followed strict formulas, we would be less interested in it because we would know what to expect . We would be more interested in history than if history had been written with strict formulas .
 An important property of this chart is a certain force acting upon its elements, like the force of gravity that pulls the stone toward the ground . The force is like gravity pulling a stone from the ground to pull it toward the sky .
 The noun phrase attracts the verb phrase, a noun ambushes an adjective, and a verb lures and adverb . Several conspired nouns pull in the conjunction and pull in a conjunction and .
 In some languages, linked words could be separated by a very long chain of other words . The long-distance interaction is not typical, and connected words stay close to each other . The linked words are linked by a chain of words .
 It looks like some mutual attraction, affinity, or repulsion exist between certain elements of a structure, but not others . Some of these elements of the structure appear to be attracted to each other .
 Maps are essential non-verbal illustrations of history . Geopolitics of Europe is an important part of the history of the world .
 Up to present, history has been a series of map redrawings and it seems to be so in the future . History has been redrawned in the past, but it seems that it will continue to happen .
 In a more distant past, the changes followed conquest and expansion, as well as destruction and demise, while in our times they are mostly related to the ongoing national self-determination . In our times, these changes follow conquest, expansion, and destruction, but not conquest .
 We can portray an essential part of geopolitical infonnation by connecting two neighboring countries with a line symbolizing a common border . We can also portray an important part of the geopolitical inferno by connecting neighboring countries .
 This border could be a strip of water, as between England and France or Sweden and Denmark . All maritime nations are, in a sense, neighbors .
 In the second half of the twentieth century air and space made all nuclear countries watchful of each other . Air and space make all nuclear nations watchful each other, says CNN.com .
 Global topology has a history of its own, shaped exclusively by weapons and communications . The world's topology is shaped by communications and weapons, and it has been shaped by weapons, communications .
 Graph is a topology because it defines a binary relation between every two nodes that are either connected or not at all . Geopolitical transformation of Europe Graph is the result of the topology of the graph . Graph defines a relationship between every node that is connected or connected .
 We can see once how much information is lost in the geopolitical topology as compared with the actual map . But a lot of the topological infonnation remains intact, the map shows .
 Geographically, England is not connected to anything over the land, and we cannot tell from the graph whether it is closer to Italy than to France . We cannot tell whether England is closer than Italy than France .
 Britain was close enough to Russia during the Crimean War when her troops fought on Russian soil . The Crimean War was the first time Britain fought in Russia .
 Waterways have been preferred channels of conquest since ancient times . Waterways are preferred channels for conquest of Europe and Asia .
 Vikings used both waterways and land most extensively and efficiently in their invasions . Vikings could not only transport horses on their ships but also portage the ships between the rivers . Vikings were able to portage their ships between rivers .
 We can find this nautical topology where everybody is connected with everybody also in a circle of friends, an economical or political alliance, and even in living organisms where biochemical messengers circulate all over the bloodstream .
 Maps challenged topology with the famous mathematical problem: what is the minimal number of different colors to color a map so that no two neighboring countries are painted with the same color . Maps challenge topology to find out what is minimal number to paint a map with different colors .
 The difference between the graph and the map or any other drawing is that the graph does not have metrics, i.e., distance, even though our drawing of a graph has lines of certain length . The graph is not a map, but a graph is a graph that doesn't have
 This limited symbolism makes possible to portray important historical changes . Yet even this limited symbolism is necessary for the film .
 Czechoslovakia is not yet split into Czech Republic and Slovakia . Czechsoslovakia has been divided into two Czech Republics and Slovakia since 1968 . Czech Republic is now known as Czech Republic .
 Diagrams of this kind can lead us backwards in time to the Roman Empire . The Roman Empire was founded in the Roman empire .
 Change of the border structure is an essential element of history, along with changes of institutions, ideas, and technology . Change of borders is essential to history, as well as institutions and ideas, says historian .
 What was to become France shrank and instead the Holy Roman Empire grew in Europe . Soon what was to be France was in fact a French empire .
 Geopolitical activity has been coming to a halt in the Western Europe, while there are areas of volcanism in the Eastern Europe . The geopolitical activity is coming to an end in Western Europe .
 Formally, nothing prevents us from attributing a label or even a number to an ark of a graph . The ark is a graph that can be attributed to a label, a number, or a label .
 The property of an ark can be anything, for example, the driving distance on a road map . Such graphs are called colored, although the property is anything, such as the length of a map .
 On the topological version of a map we can indicate, for example, the relationship between two neighboring countries . We can also indicate the relationship of two countries .
 This particular information would certainly be of little value in modern times when practically all nations are diplomatically connected . The information would have little value, especially in the context of modern times .
 Considering ancient empires, we cannot speak about the borders in modem terms, we can't speak about borders . The borders of ancient empires are not the same thing as modern times, they are .
 One of many projections of history is, first, the rise of the metrics of a two-dimensional map, and the devaluation of distance due to means of transportation and communication . The topological revolution in relations between national states is also expected to change distance, he says .
 The space where we think, however, is not metrical in the same sense because we cannot measure the distance from the idea of cat to dog with a measuring tape . The space we think is not the same as the space between the ideas of cat and a dog .
 From all the above examples we can derive a notion of discrete metrics significantly different from the one usually associated with geometry and the measuring tape . Although these numbers are hardly meaningful for a historian, we can use them to help historians .
 Matrix B shows not only the connectivity of the graph but also the actual distances between the nodes, with the side of the hexagon as the unit of measurement . Matrix B also shows the actual distance of the nodes between nodes .
 We can write any symbol, or word, or even a whole story as labels of the binary relationships . To generalize this idea even more, we can write symbols, or words, as labels for a story .
 One important class of values is probability of transition from one state to another or the probability of connection between two points . The probability of a state to transition between two states is one of the most important classes of values .
 A whole bunch of cardinal mathematical ideas developed in large branches of mathematics stem fonn a single general idea of a set with a binary relation defined on it . We started with simple graphs and carefully proceeded toward more exotic square tables in order to demonstrate .
 The binary relation in a fonn, say, of a love story between Romeo and Juliet might look very frivolous even to some mathematicians . But it is still a binary relation, and, therefore, a mathematical object .
 We have taken to such length in preparing the reader to the concept of pattern in order to soften the non-scicntific reader’s possible prejudice . We are prepared for the readers to understand pattern patterns in the book .
 Mathematics is just as much of a product of human mind as belle lettres, and may have as much artistic beauty . Maths is as important as art as it is in the world, says French mathematician .
 The moat separating them is at some spots so narrow that we can easily step over it back to back-to-back . At some spots it is so narrow it is easily stepped over the moat .
 Each arc of the Augustus-Nero graph has a number expressing the degree of their mutual attraction or hate . For example, we can attribute to each arc of each arc to a number of people expressing their mutual love or hatred .
 Agrippina Junior was said to murder Claudius with poisonous mushrooms, and she was in turn assassinated on orders of her son Nero . Nero also had all three of his wives killed and finally killed himself .
 France-Germany, France-Britain, Sweden-Denmark, and Poland-Russia are among the most recent examples of European relations . The relationship between FranceGermany and Britain would be pretty low for FranceGermany .
 History of Europe has been a history of disputes but also working alliances, says historian . History of disputes and alliances can be positive or negative, he says . Europe has history of working alliances and disputes, he adds .
 Switzerland has managed to stay away from open expression of both love and hate to her neighbors for about half a millennium, i.e. Switzerland .
 Metrics are any property of a bond between two structural units that can have a numerical expression of value other than 1 and 0 or yes and no . Metrics can be defined by a bond that is not 1 or 0, yes or no .
 Even if the individual bond can have only two values, 0 and 1, a certain metrics is possible for the structures . The bonds can only have two values - 0 or 1 - and the bonds can have multiple metrics .
 The genealogical distance between Augustus to Caligula is longer than from Augustus to Julia, while he is not related to Claudius at all . Thus, the genealogary distance from Augustus . to Calagula is . longer than between Augustus and Julia .
 Distance of this kind is important in biology and genetics, but has little value in history . Not surprisingly, this kind of distance of this sort of distance has little importance in history, says author .
 By metrics, therefore, we shall mean a varying property of an individual bond, with the geographical distance as the closest visual analog . We shall use this metric to show how close a bond is to a bond .
 What we can often do is to compare two values and tell which one is more than the other . We can also tell which values are more important than those of the other. We can then tell which value is more important .
 If one bond is stronger than the other, then the weakest one will probably break down under stress . The bond bond is strongest than the bond bond that is stronger and stronger than both .
 We have a good reason to expect that, in the new globalized and computerized world, the non-geometrical bond values could be somehow measured more or less accurately . Nevertheless, we have a reason for expect that in the future, the bond values will be measured more accurately
 The higher the trade between two nations, the more positive the bond, while the more skewed the trade balance, a conflict is more likely . For example, the higher trade balance between two countries is the more likely to be a conflict .
 In Chapter 27, History and Computers we will discuss it in more detail . In chapter 27, we discuss it more in detail .
 As soon as we outline a certain social, national, or geopolitical structure, we will be able to look for some kind of physics that governs its possible change . The way molecules undergo chemical transformations according to the laws of nature is similar to the way molecules change, like molecules .
 Former Yugoslavia, united under Yosip Broz Tito, split after his death into independent states . Former Yugoslavia plunged into bloody conflicts with Serbia trying to prevent by force its own further split .
 The question that we are interested in here is the relationship between the patterns of unification and split . The question is whether the patterns are the same patterns that unify and split, says David Cameron .
 The process of consolidation has been going on since then, entering now the stage of the European Community . The European Union has been in the process of consolidating its member states .
 The unification requires the reconciliation of border conflicts, quenching the aggressiveness of the nations hurt by the consequences of wars . The unification of nations is needed to quench aggressiveness, the author says .
 In pattern theory a subconfiguration under certain conditions can be considered a single generator . Subconfigurations are considered to be single generators by pattern theory . The subconfigurations can also be considered as single generators .
 It is exactly the internal stability achieved by European countries (nobody knows for how long) that created conditions for an attempt of unification . Formation of a new generator from a subconfiguration .
 The united Germany was possible only because of the internal instability of its Eastern part . The union was only possible because of internal instability in the Eastern part of the country .
 France has been, especially since 1189, so nearly the complete nation-state, nearly unified in culture and habits, disunited only in the half-unreal struggle of party politics . We are likely to regard her building-up from these medieval fragments as somehow predetermined, ""natural
 It seems impossible that France could ever have been other than she is, it seems . France is now France, and she is France .
 We are coming closer to a new alternative view of structure, which was only briefly mentioned in Chapter 5, Three Views of the World, and is related to the way chemists view the world and its transformations .
 Scientists concerned with most general problems of change . There is one remaining preliminary topic, however, that preoccupied scientists . There are still questions about climate change .
 In the next chapter, we shall continue our search for points in lines, alias, binary relations in history .
 Let us compare descriptions of two oddly sub-violent revolutions . To find the points and lines lurking under the surface of a historical narrative, let us compare .
 He was too harsh in his suppression of a revolt by James Scott, Duke of Monmouth, in 1685 . He created a standing army; and he put Roman Catholics in the government, army, and university .
 William of Orange was a Protestant and stadtholder of the Netherlands and husband of the king's elder daughter, Mary, to safeguard Mary's inheritance . In 1688 his Declaration of Indulgence, allowing Dissenters and Catholics to worship freely, set up a Roman Catholic succession
 Parliament gave him and Mary the crown jointly, provided that they affirm the Bill of Rights listing and condemning the abuses of James . Parliament in 1689 gave him the crown with the help of the Queen, provided they affirm that they condemn the abuses .
 James II of England suppressed the revolt of Duke of Monmouth, created the standing army, put Roman Catholics in the government, army, and university, allowed Dissenters and Catholics to worship freely, and so antagonized opponents .
 The main cause of the July Revolution was the reactionary policy followed by Louis XV11I and his brother, Charles, who had become king in 1824 . Charles had been king of France since 1824, but had been in charge of the revolution .
 The nobility and clergy, foes of democratic progress, were shown special favor . Two classes, the nobility and the clergy, showed special favor. The clergy and the nobility were seen as enemies of democracy .
 The French Revolution gave the French state partial payments for lands confiscated during the Revolution . Readmission of Jesuits and clerical control of education were among the favors given .
 Chamber of Deputies, the lower legislative house, demanded the dismissal of several of the king's ministers . In March 1830 the chamber demanded the removal of several ministers .
 The king ordered new elections, but the results indicated that the new legislature would be even more strongly opposed to the policies of Charles than its predecessor had been . Charles ordered the king to order new elections .
 On July 26, a few days before the new legislature was to meet, the minister of domestic affairs issued ordinances suspending the liberty of the press and declaring the new elections null and void . The new elections were declared null-and-void .
 The people revolted, and rebels took possession of the municipal government in the city hall . The rebels took over from the people who had been living in the government .
 After three days of fighting, the entire city was in the hands of the workers and the middle class . By July 29, after three days, the city had been taken over .
 The workers advocated a republican form of government . The liberals, supported by statesman Marquis de Lafayette, favored a limited monarchy under Louis Philippe, due d'Orleans .
 Charles II of France suppressed the liberty of the press, nullified elections, readmitted Jesuits, reinstalled clerical control over education, repaid the confiscated property of nobility and clergy, and so antagonized his opponents .
 For that purpose, we rename the terms, using the following more abstract terms in the descriptions .
 The action ANTAGONIZE OPPONENTS includes a series of actions such as SUPPRESS , SUPPORT , NULLIFY , etc. Actions : An action ANAGONIZER A OPPonENTS REVOLT FLEE OFFER CROWN TAKE CROWN .
 This gives us a set of terms belonging to a certain fonnal language suitable for describing similar historic events separated in time and space . The terms are used to describe events separated from each other and separated in space .
 The two narratives look similar because there is a hidden structure of the formal language behind them . The two narrative narratives are similar because of the hidden structure behind them, says the author .
 It generates fragments of historical descriptions by substituting particular words for general terms . The fragments are created by replacing words with general terms in historical terms .
 The task of generating phrases, statements, and texts out of modular elements was widely explored in linguistics and artificial intelligence . Stimulated by the study of fonnal languages by Noam Chomsky, the task was widely studied by linguists .
 The generation of a text is regarded as a sequence of steps between the beginning and end . According to the principle of the final state language, the generation of the text is considered to be a sequence .
 After each step there is a selection of blocks to be chosen and so-called rules of rewriting . After each block is chosen, the blocks are chosen and are then rewritten using a new language .
 They are somewhat similar to mathematical variables, for example a, X, etc. They are similar to a mathematical variable, such as X, or a, a, x .
 Rules of rewriting, otherwise called production, from more general to more concrete structures . Rules of writing, otherwise known as production, are now more general .
 Grammar is regarded as a machine producing phrases according to some rules of connection . Grammar, therefore, is a kind of a machine that produces phrases in accordance with some rules . NOUN —» cat .
 Various recipes can be generating by rewriting the general pattern, specifying sweetener as sugar, honey, molasses, or saccharine, etc., adding optional fdling, which also can be rewritten as jam, currants, nuts, etc. or specifying the shape of the cookie
 This imaginary machine is a non-numerical mathematical object known as algorithm . It can generate grammatically correct stories, whether real or totally unreal .
 As far as history is concerned, such machine can not only write various “what if’ scenarios but also expand the counterfactual history to accounts of completely fictional events . As far from history, the machine can write various "what if' scenarios"
 In the same way, by combining standard blocks of narrative, one can write novels, scripts, and fairy tales . The whole process can—and has been—computerized in games for children .
 It is appropriate to point here to an analogy with the development of a multi-cellular human organism from a few identical cells of an early fetus . The development of the human organism is similar to that of a newborn fetus .
 There must be a universal grammar in the developmental mechanics of cells to guide the subsequent expression of the genetic code into a unique organism, says the author .
 We start with the initial state 1 and generate the first block containing the name of a historical person, which brings us to the state 2 . The state 1 is generated by generating a block containing a historical name . We then generate a state 2 and a state 3 .
 The same grammar can generate an utterly fictional revolution resulting in the displacement of an unfortunate king Aspirinos by his lucky rival king Ibuprofis .
 A narrative could be generated by simultaneous unfolding of the hidden structure, according to another type of formal language with the so-called context free grammar . OPPONENTS INVITE LEADer B LEADER A FLEES .
 Catholic James alienated his Protestant opponents and lost the crown to Protestant William . Catholic James was Catholic James' father of one of his sons .
 Catholic James alienated his Protestant opponents by creating a standing army, putting Catholics in the government, army, and university, and allowing Dissenters and Catholics to worship freely . James alienated Protestants by creating standing army .
 Protestant William lost his crown to Protestant William who landed, landed, and took the crown .
 The achievement of structuralism was not just the analysis of the combinatorial nature of human social and cultural life, it was also analysis of combinatorially nature of life . The achievement was not only the analysis but analysis of society and culture, he said .
 Claude Levi-Strausse noted that a great variety of actual attitudes of people toward each other were covered by a limited number of kinship relations .
 A few further remarks here may underline the striking analogy between the development of this problem and certain stages in the evolution of linguistic theory . The development of the problem is similar to that of linguistic theories, says John Defterios .
 The variety of possible attitudes in the area of interpersonal relationships is almost unlimited . The same holds true for the variety of sounds which can be articulated by the vocal apparatus, which are produced during the first months of human life .
 Our sketch of the historical development of the avuncular problem is at precisely the same stage. Our sketch is at the same point. Our sketches of the . historical development are at the . same stage .
 Social groups have a great wealth of psycho-physiological material at their disposal . Like language, the social group has a lot of material at its disposal, says author .
 Like language too, it retains only certain elements of which remain the same throughout the most varied cultures and are combined into structures which are always diversified .
 The central idea here is the concept of the structure that limits the possible combinatorial explosion of human imagination and variability, so that only certain structural types survive . The idea is that the structure limits the possibility of the possible explosion of creativity .
 The world selected, however, opens a passage into a completely different world, which we will visit in Chapter 18, Conflict . We will visit the world selected by the world of Conflict .
 As a preliminary remark, there must be some non-structural criterion, value or parameter which is extremal—either minimal or maximal—for the selected structures . The criteria must be an extreme value, either minimal, or maximal, for each structure .
 When the cultural tide turned against structuralism, structuralism was trampled by the new wave of post-structuralism .
 A champion fisherman is selected by the highest weight of the caught fish, and the runner is chosen by the shortest time of the run . A runner is selected in the final round of the competition .
 Neither of the types of structural analysis that we described above provided a sufficiently convincing solution of the problem of selection . Neither of these types of analysis provided a . convincing solution .
 We would like to add an example of a somewhat different version of a structural approach . Here we want to show a different kind of structural approach.
 Struggle for power sides of the conflict are involved in a tug of war with the outcome depending on some kind of force exerted by the sides . The outcome of the struggle depends on the forces exerted by both sides .
 In both revolutions we have a transfer of a bond between a person A or B and the position of leadership L . The diagram shows not only the initial and final states of the transition but also the brief and full of uncertainty transition state .
 Organic chemist would recognize in them two basic mechanisms of chemical substitution . An organic chemist would have recognized in them in the form of substitution .
 The basic sequence of events is rarely disputed by historians, especially, if it was chronicled by contemporaries . Historians rarely dispute the events, especially if it is documented by historians .
 History happens in a certain undeniable way, although we may differ on some points . History is undeniable, but we may disagree with some of it, we say .
 Historians can fiercely disagree, however, on the explanations why it did not happen otherwise, and they rarely have a common ground for a dispute . Historians often disagree on the reasons why it happened .
 There is a notable difference between formal linguistics and classical structuralism, on the one hand, and the transition state analysis . Transition state analysis is a key part of linguistics .
 We cannot even ask why Mary and John did not rent a house instead of buying it, we cannot ask why . Moreover, looking back toward the past, we can't ask why they didn't buy a house .
 All we can say is that they could not buy the house they had already bought, or to sell somebody else’s house . All that they can do is not to sell someone else's house, but to buy it already .
 In the language-generating grammars, the basis for choosing the next word is not any real Mary or Russia, but just the statistics of the language . In other words, some artificial reality, that neither God, nor hidden laws of history, nor just pure chance, but
 The grammars described above are called formal because the texts they generate cannot be subjected to tests of realism, feasibility, and truth . Conventional plot structure is called formal .
 The chart could be regarded as another instance of unfolding the basic structure through rewriting, as well as a seed of a Hollywood script . Genealogical background of the Glorious revolution .
 This fuzzy parameter of tension is not structural and we can suspect that in almost all historical events the structure is characterized by some semiquantitative value that detennines, to some extent, the direction of change . This fuzzy parameters of tension are not structural, we suspect .
 "If we were not, it would be just a statement of physics with energy as the parameter," he says . "We were not. If we were . were not."
 Real events, as witnessed by contemporary observers, also have a similar non-structural dimension of suspense . Real events as seen by modern observers, as well as historical observers, are also suspenseful moments of real life .
 Not surprisingly, it was a family conflict still felt in Northern Ireland . The conflict was still felt through the eyes of Northern Ireland in the late 1980s .
 In Chapter 18, Conflict, we shall look for the pattern roots of conflicts . We shall look at the patterns of conflicts in this chapter .
 Our current objective is to cautiously outline some topics of pattern theory without formalizing them . We are exploring patterns in pattern theory in a systematic way .
 We want to show that some important structural ideas have been gradually developing in humanities . The project aims to show some of the ideas have emerged gradually developing .
 It may be enlightening to listen to a great storyteller’s view of history . Next, since we have drawn a parallel between history and storytelling, we may listen to great stories .
 The fermenting sugar splits into fragments like AustriaHungary after the World War I, British Empire after WWII, and USSR and Yugoslavia after the Cold War .
 As far as fennentation is concerned, we can translate this process into a series of changes in the chemical structure . The process can be translated into a change of chemical structure, scientists say .
 The transfonnation is always the same whether it takes place in wine cellars of Bordeaux or California . It's the same if you're in Bordeau or California, it's a wine cellar .
 In fact, between the initial and final states lies a multitude of intennediate steps which can depict the process in its dynamics as movie frames do . The process is similar to a movie frame .
 Chemists call this sequence of stages mechanism and it has a close analogy in history . The chemists call it a sequence of steps mechanism .
 The decline and fall of Roman Empire was described by Edward Gibbon in his monumental book The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire . The decline is also a sequence of steps in the mechanism of the process, says Gibbon .
 Sulfur dioxide or strong alcohol are used to kill yeast cells and stop fennentation . Strong alcohol or sulfur dioxide is used to stop yeast cells dying of fennetation .
 Scores of people had lost their heads, but the books of Henri Rousseau did not lose a word . Rousseau's books of Rousseau were not lost a word. Rousseau was the only person to have lost his head .
 He had a very critical frame of mind and was iconoclastic on almost everything, including Shakespeare . Shakespeare was 'iconoclastic' and 'iconocentric' in his work .
 He suggested surrendering Russia to the Japanese when the Russian-Japanese war began in 1904 . He went as far as to suggest surrendering the Japanese to Russia .
 A person of his caliber could be an idol on the American campuses of the 60s and a leading dissident in Russia of the 70’s. The person of this caliber could have been an idol in the American .
 Tolstoy was bom in 1828, long enough after the French Revolution and Napoleonic wars . He was born in Russia in 1861 .
 He had witnessed profound historical changes in Russia and her entrance into the new age, which soon would be interrupted by the Russian Revolution .
 Several times it moves eastward and collides with a countermovement from the east westward . Several times this time it moves westward, colliding with countermovements from the west .
 In 1812 it reaches its extreme limit, Moscow, and then, with remarkable symmetry, a countermovement occurs from east to west, attracting to it, as the first movement had done, the nations of middle Europe . The first movement reaches its limit and attracts to middle Europe,
 The countermovement reaches the starting point of the first movement in the west, Paris, and subsides . The counter-movement begins at the beginning of the west -- Paris--and subsides.
 During that twenty-year period an immense number of fields were left untilled, houses were burned, trade changed its direction, millions of men migrated, were impoverished, or were enriched . Millions of Christian men professing the law of love of their fellows slew each other .
 Tolstoy offers a parody of a typical historian's approach . He offers a possible response to the questions how that could happen . As a possible . response to those questions how . that could . happen, Tolstoys offers a . parody of the questions .
 Louis XIV was a very proud and self-confident man; he had such and such mistresses . He ruled France badly. Louis XIV had such many mistresses and such a ministers and he ruled .
 At the end of the eighteenth century there were a couple of dozen men in Paris who began to talk about all men being free and equal . At the same time, the French men began to speak of the idea .
 This caused people all over France to begin to slash at and drown one another . People all over the country began to slash and drown each other .
 Tolstoy ridicules historians because, he says, they answer questions nobody has asked . He ridicules them because they are answers to questions nobody hasn't asked . Historians are historians who have never been able to find answers .
 He is not satisfied with the view that the circumstances produce a historic character who exerts power to cause events . He says the circumstances are not the circumstances that produce a historical character . The circumstances are the circumstances .
 Napoleon was produced by the Revolution contradicts the fact that he suppressed it, he says . He believes that the fact he suppressed the revolution contradicts that he produced Napoleon . Napoleon was not produced by Revolution, he said .
 He refuses to see how ideas, like Rousseau, fit in the causal nexus with the resulting drowning of Frenchmen by each other .
 Tolstoy understands historical process as a continuum made up of infinitely small actions and events, with no beginning . He says historical process is a continuum that has no beginning or beginning . The author of the novel, The Children's Play, is published in New York, New York and London
 Only by taking infinitesimally small units of observation (the differential of history, that is, the individual tendencies of men) can we hope to arrive at the laws of history . Only by attaining to the art of integrating them (that is, finding the sum of these
 Our false conception that an event is caused by a command which precedes it is due to the fact that when the event has taken place and out of thousands of others those few commands which were consistent with that event have been executed, we forget about the others that were not executed .
 He comes to the conclusion that the conception of a cause is inapplicable to the phenomena we are examining . He concludes that he is not satisfied with the idea of a 'cause' for the phenomenon .
 A philosopher would object that the opposite of freedom is not necessity but constraint . The opposite is not freedom, but constraint, and freedom is constraint, he says .
 A modem scientist can understand Tolstoy by just recalling what the opposite of necessity is . But a modem scientist must understand TolStoy by simply recalling what it is like .
 Tolstoy meant by freedom was chance, as his other remark illustrates . The Russian author's other remark was chance chance .
 Whatever presentation of the activity of many men or of an individual we may consider, we always regard it as the result partly of man's free will and partly of the law of inevitability .
 In modem language, Tolstoy refers to ordered chaos, about a century ahead of time . Tolstoys refers to chaos, a century before modern times, in modem language .
 He mentions the laws of statistics describing the number of births or crimes, to leave no doubt that he means probability . He also mentions the law of statistics about the number or crimes .
 Wells’ novel was seen as a fuzzy shape when his skin was covered with dust or rain droplets . Wells was seen to be fuzzy when he was covered in dust or droplets of his book . Wells' novel was also seen to look fuzzy when it was covered by dust or
 Tolstoy in his essay about history obliquely showed us us a dim figure of an invisible force moving the nations throughout history just by the way it pushes everybody around . The author of the novel, "Tolstoy's War of the Ages"
 Later developments of science have been filling the nebulous shape if not with live flesh then at least with some bones .
 Breakup is a pattern of events common for history, when a complex of geopolitical and ethnic entities dissolves itself into its constituents . Breakup occurs when a voluntary, enforced, or historically developed complex of . geopolitical and . ethnic entities dissolve itself .
 "There are some bonds between the entities at one moment, and they are broken in the next moment," he says . "Some bonds are broken, and some bonds are not," he adds .
 For a chemist, the process of breaking up a bond and establishing a new one is not trivial . For a scientist, it is not easy to break up bonds and establish them .
 It occupied the minds of philosophers from Heraclitus to Hegel to Sartre . It was occupied by Heraclites, Hegel and Sartres .
 The condition for considering the problem of a historical change as a natural process is to see it as a change of a configuration fonned by certain atom-like parts and bonds between some of them .
 Some bonds are getting weaker, and some new ones are getting stronger, and this is how it all goes . This is how the bond market is getting weaker and stronger .
 Imagine someone who is a compulsive borrower and goes from friend to friend asking for money . He goes from friends to friends and asks for money from friends and family .
 The shorter the time a friend can lend him money, the larger the loan he seeks, he says . The shorter a friend's time for a friend to lend him a loan is the longer the time he needs to repay it .
 He takes in money only to give it back in short order . Borrow and return, borrow and return—over and over again with unflagging intensity he takes .
 The amount of money the compulsive borrower possesses at any given moment goes through extreme fluctuations, but when all is said and done, an accounting of his finances shows that he is no better off than when he began .
 We have already seen that some historians are inclined to replay history in their minds and see where else it could go . The invisible walls of events are the walls of history . We have seen some of the greatest moments of human history .
 Adolf Hitler could have eked out his life as a mediocre postcard painter and a fulfilled old soldier in Central Europe about which he could have found little to complain about . Adolf Hitler was a German-dominated Central Europe and a happy old soldier .
 This question is better to address to generalized kinetics, which is based on thermodynamics, with some additional assumptions . This question should be addressed to the thermodynamics of general kinetics .
 There is nothing in physical sciences to address this question because they are devoid of the dimension of history . Unfortunately, there is no answer to this question . Physical sciences are not able to answer it .
 Physical scientists do not pay much attention to the historical aspect of the process, i.e. its particular position on the universal timeline . Physical scientists pay little attention to this particular position in the universe .
 A physicist could not seriously say that the stone fell to the ground because Galileo dropped it from the top of the Tower of Pisa . Galileo dropped the stone from the tower at the height of the tower .
 A chemist could not say that the paper bums because Lavoisier ignited it in a closed vessel . A chemist couldn't say that because it was not in a sealed vessel .
 A historian of science would say that we know about free fall and oxygen because of Galileo and Lavoisier . We know about oxygen and free fall because of the two discoveries, he says . We also know that free fall is possible because of free fall .
 They belong to the history of science but not to the scientific explanation itself . The history of the evolution of the world's oldest species is not to be explained by science .
 In our discourse on history we must always be aware of the place, time, and the acting individual . We must also be conscious of the time, place and individual, says historian .
 Evolutionary sciences, like astrophysics, geology, origin of life and species, history, and biography as study of individual life, have not yet consolidated into a general abstract theory because of the enormous complexity of the material and difficulty of its representation .
 Any physical law, like that of universal gravitation, is a powerful statement . Universal gravitation is the law of the universe, says the author of the book .
 In social sciences, saying that nations have always been engaged in wars is of no value . In social science, it's not important to say that countries have always engaged in war, but that's not true .
 Historians study a particular war by tracing the sequence of events and establishing causal links . Historians establish causal links wherever possible to find out where possible .
 Historians analyze the pattern of war or revolution by discovering common properties of a set of such events . There are also historians that analyze the patterns of war and revolution events .
 "What we want to do is to look from a certain distance at the similarities between war and chemical process rather than at their obvious worlds-apart differences"
 War and fire link war and fire by more than just a metaphor . We regard both as natural processes of transition from initial state to final state . War is a natural process of transition between initial state and final state, we say .
 Energy is what changes during any process, from evolution of stars to understanding a mathematical equation to following the plot of a novel . Energy is the result of a process, and energy is what happens when it happens .
 They have less energy at the foot of the tower than at the top and energy is needed to haul them back to the top . Energy is needed for the tower to be transported to the summit .
 As soon as we distinguish between positive and negative bonds, energy comes to the podium . The difference between attraction and repulsion amounts to the sign of energy, says the author .
 Energy is what it takes to break bonds between relatives, friends, and allies, or to maintain order in a dysfunctional family, hold together the Tito’s Yugoslavia, maintain productivity in a troubled company, keep peace in a region with ethnic tensions, unite the Congress split over an
 This tells very little about the nature of energy, but we do not need more depth at this point . This is not the first time we have heard from such a large amount of energy .
 All we need to know is that energy of a system can increase or decrease, says Dr. John Defterios . "All we need is to know are that energy can be increased or decreased," he says .
 There are more or less “tense” theories, statements, texts, texts and even fields of knowledge, in short, societies of ideas . Not only there are definitely more . less ‘frustrated” societies and smaller groups, but there are . more or
 There are more or less ‘tense pieces of art, whole artistic works, and even whole periods in a national culture, contradicting or conforming to the current canons and to internal principles .
 We can see that the tense society or area of science is usually unstable and undergoes evolution . We can also see that a tense society is unstable .
 Art loses its revolutionary fervor either because of the loss of novelty or because of transformed rules . Art is lost because it is no longer revolutionary because of its new rules or because it's no longer novelty .
 We need, therefore, to acquire some means of measuring the ‘tension” at least in a non-quantitative way . We need to acquire a means of measurement of the “tension,’s ‘Tension’ in some way, says
 It simply means that, looking at any two configurations, we need to be able to say which one is tenser or whether they are equally tense . We need to know which one of the two configurations is more tense .
 This is how we can approach the problem of evolution of complex patterns . This is the way to deal with complex patterns, say experts . We need to find a way to solve the problem, say scientists .
 We start with situation A, where generator M is bonded to Y but not to X . As result of a transformation, it becomes bonded to X and the link between M and Y disappears .
 Pattern theory relaxes the rigidity of the bond couple from yes-or-no to maybe . It means variance can be measured by probability . Variability can be seen by probability.
 If a bond couple between generators is improbable, it means that it will take some work to keep it together . If a couple is unlikely to bond between generators, i.e., its probability is less than 0.5 .
 Probability 0 separates connected and disconnected states, but when you deal with probabilities, everything is possible . Therefore, probability 0. separates connected states and connected states . When dealing with probability 0, probability is 0.0.0 .
 Referring to probabilities gives an answer to question 3, but it is a weak answer, more like a subterfuge . Referring probabilities gives the answer to questions 3 and 4, but is not a good answer, but a weak one .
 The causal approach would describe the sequence of events leading to the accident, without referring to other accidents . It would be the first time a person has been involved in an accident in a car accident .
 When somebody breaks a twig, we explain its destruction by an intervention which is external to the twig . We explain the destruction by a 'outside' intervention, rather than an intervention, we say .
 The idea of God punishing some nations and rewarding others is, in this sense, or at least a valid hypothesis . God punishes some nations, rewarding others, is a scientific explanation, he says . The idea is, he writes, "a valid hypothesis"
 In the case of fennenting grape juice, we rely more on yeast than on any deity . The Greeks assigned the god Dionysus to control it, but we rely on yeast to keep it alive .
 He was the first to establish the composition of water and he baptized its elements hydrogen and oxygen . He was also the first person to discover the elements of water .
 He was the first to explain what happens when something bums in the air . He was also the first person to explain how it happened .
 He introduced the fundamental concept of chemical element, made chemistry a quantitative science, and fonnulated the law of conservation of matter . He also introduced the concept of the chemical element and made chemistry into quantitative science .
 In chemistry, he was of the stature equivalent to that of Copernicus and Darwin . In chemistry he was equivalent to Copernica and Darwin, he had stature equivalent of that of them .
 When he was guillotined at the peak of the revolutionary terror in France, his head fell into the basket certainly not on its own and not because of the gravity . The French revolutionary was guilledotined in 1944 at the height of the revolution .
 On this gmesome example we can see the difference between the physical and historical explanations . We can also see how different explanations are possible for each one .
 The Revolution was not brought to France on the bayonets of invaders, the French Revolution . On the contrary, the Revolution was brought in by the people of France, not by invaders .
 Chemistry borrows the answer to the question how anything happens in its own from physics . The answer to that question borrows from physics to explain how things happen in their own form .
 If there is a system that can be in several possible states, all its states can be rated by their stability . The stability of a state can be measured by stability, the state's stability can be judged by stability .
 The stable states are surrounded by invisible walls protecting them from sudden spontaneous change . The stable state is surrounded by an invisible wall, protecting it from spontaneous change.
 The height of the wall is measured in terms of energy and the additional push is needed to overcome the wall . The height is measured by energy .
 It seems that physics, as if following the advise of Edward Gibbon, has found the secret of change in the reasons for stability .
 When we contribute energy to a twig, we break it, and if we do that to a stone, it flies away . The twig is an example of a stone that flies away when it is broken, says author .
 When we contribute energy to a system, it rises above the invisible walls and jumps over to a new stable state . We contribute energy in a system to raise it up to a stable state, scientists say . We need to make sure that energy rises above invisible walls, they say .
 The energy of the bird comes from food and it is stored in a ready-to-use fonn . The energy is stored by food and stored in ready to use fonns .
 We may need energy to contain the bird and prevent it from escaping by surrounding it with the walls and ceiling of a cage . We may also need to use energy to keep it contained .
 Energy of a system, therefore, can greatly vary and even change its sign . Energy of an energy system, however, can be greatly varied and even changed its energy sign .
 A system with negative energy is in a pit, and the walls of the pit prevent the system from transformation . A pit is a pit of negative energy, and walls prevent it from transforming .
 What matters is the sign of the change of energy when the system goes from one state to another, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 Live systems, including society need to consume vast amounts of food and fuel to maintain their balance . Rocks in a valley can stay there for millennia, while rocks in a river valley can remain there for centuries .
 We raise energy of a system by heating it or irradiating with light . In the case of chemistry, we raise energy by heating, irradiating it or heating it .
 Deprived of the source of energy, a higher organism usually engages in a sort of gambling . The higher organism is usually engaged in a kind of gambling.
 Social energy, like physical energy, is an ability to generate change or prevent it . Social energy is a way of generating change or preventing it, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: Social energy can generate change, but it can also be used to create change .
 This is all we need to know about it without any further speculation how to measure it and in what units . This is the only thing we have known about it, and how it is measured .
 Social sciences might be a task of social sciences to analyze the origin and transfonnation of social energy from food and fuel into specific actions . Social scientists might be able to study the origin of the social energy .
 Physics of society as natural system is underdeveloped, but it would take a whole book to explain why . Unfortunately, physics of society, society, as a natural system, is still underdeveloped .
 IB, K does not simply jump into M. First, it has to reach a certain intennediate unstable state L, which is high enough above the wall . The goal is to be high enough to reach an unstable unstable state, L .
 The intennediate state L is called transition state and it is the key to understanding how anything happens in chemistry and material world in general . It is the state of transition state that is key to the understanding of chemistry .
 To apply the concept of transitional state to any system is, with hindsight, not such a big achievement, as well as not such an achievement . It's not the first time we've applied the concept to a new state of state .
 Initial, transition, and final states can be portrayed and discussed in terms of configurations and patterns . What is less obvious is that the initial, transition and final state can be shown and discussed as well as the final states .
 This could be a radically new idea in humanities, and it seems to have genninated independently in a few places, aside from structuralism of Levi-Strausse . The idea could be radically new to humanities, but it could be genned independently .
 His books A Decade of Revolution and The Anatomy of Revolution, as well as chapters in A History of Civilization, are among our main sources of factual material .
 Crane Brinton was little biased by European nationalism and political disputes . As an American historian, he was little bias by Europe's nationalism and disputes .
 The fact that the American Revolution was supported by both the King of France and people like Lafayette favors objectivity, says historian John Sutter .
 He compared society with a building and noted the limited character of change produced by revolutions . As the following examples illustrate, he compared society to a building .
 We may take instead an analogy from the human nervous system, or think of an immensely complicated gridwork of electrical communications . We may also think of a complex electrical gridwork, such as electrical communication .
 Society then appears as a kind of network of interactions among individuals, fixed by habit, hardened and perhaps adorned as ritual, dignified into meaning and beauty . Law, theology, metaphysics, and similar noble beliefs are interwoven strands of interaction we know as law .
 Many of these interwoven strands of noble beliefs, some even of those of habit and tradition, can be cut out, and others inserted . Now sometimes sometimes many of these strands of belief, some of these are cut out of existence, and some of them are cut .
 Alexander Alexander notes that a designer of an object, whether building or tea kettle, has to meet a set of requirements . Alexander says a designer must meet the requirements of the object, such as a tea kettle or building .
 The simplicity of design enhances jointing, while decreasing performance . For example, the simplicity of the design enhances the performance of jointing .
 The sum of all conflicting and cooperating requirements represents the stress of the design, which is synonymous with abstract energy, as we understand it .
 The entire process of design looks like movement from the initial predesign state to the final design through a highly stressed transition state . Therefore, the entire design process looks like a movement of movement .
 The concept is widely applicable to building international coalitions in times of war and peace, European Union, corporations, political parties, and underground terrorist networks . Clearly, this concept is . widely applicable .
 Some diagrams seem to define overall pattern properties of the form, like being circular, being low rather than high, being homogeneous or homogeneous . Some diagrams define overall patterns like circular, circular, homogeneous and circular .
 A diagram defines pieces of which the whole form is made, like a diagram defining the street as a piece of the city, or the handle of the kettle, and so on . They define pieces of the form, such as the street, or handle as piece of a kettle, or
 The distinction between pattemlike and piecelike diagrams is more apparent than real . Actually, the distinction between the two is more obvious than real.
 The circular plan may also be guaranteed by a surrounding wall or boundary of some sort . But the plan’s being circular is not guaranteed by the surrounding wall .
 Subjectivity seems to be one of the causes of the chasm between sciences and humanities . Subjectivity is a problem in the sciences, humanities, according to the philosopher .
 Dealing with life in its animal and human form, we can hardly expect the same level of predictability that we have in physical sciences . We have to deal with animals and humans in the same way as we have physical sciences. We need to be able to predict predictability of life
 We accept the imperfect way natural sciences predict the weather, and we would not mind having even half of that prognostic power for the events behind the horizon of time . Nevertheless, we accept that we accept the way natural science predicts the weather .
 We cannot expect, a skeptic could say, to find anything about history with new tricks that the good old common sense would not tell us . We can't expect to find new tricks in history, but common sense will tell us, he says .
 Graphic presentation of a genealogical tree can save a lot of space and be very helpful in understanding complex kinship . It does not convey any new information as compared with a methodical verbal description .
 If we are going to use dots and lines for historical representation, they should help us understand something that we have not known or did not pay attention to, or at least add some fun to studying history . If we want to learn more about history, we should use them to help us
 We call it energy energy because it is similar to physical energy as far as transition from one structure to another is concerned . We call energy energy energy .
 We realize that there is a big theoretical gap in our understanding what this energy is in social systems and historical transitions . We are trying to find out what the energy is when social systems change .
 Although it cannot be calculated in any absolute terms, there could be means of discussing relative energies of two structures or their components in tenns of which is larger than the other and with what probability is possible . Nevertheless, although it can't be calculated, it can be discussed in any
 We will further have more opportunities to present the reader with additional evidence that this general concept is by no means alien to social sciences and humanities in general . We hope to continue to present more evidence of this .
 Build possible transition routs from the initial state through transition states to final states . Build possible transitions from initial state to final state . Build potential routs of the first state to transition states .
 Look for the transition states with the highest probability and find the most probable final states following from them . Find the most likely final states after them .
 If the final state is known, the most probable route speaks for itself as an explanation . The final state of the state is now known .
 While predictions of mechanics are deterministic, predictions in biology and, all the more, social sciences, are probabilistic . The social sciences are probabilities, so are biology and social sciences .
 Of course, we have an obligation to comment on the connection between physical energy and social one. Of course we have to comment, says the author .
 The fact that the horse is a vegetarian and has a good appetite contributed to the genesis of the feudal society with knights sitting on significant pieces of land that only all the king’s men together could protect .
 A human is omnivorous, requires much less space to feed himself, and, unlike the horse that needs to be taken a good care of, can somehow get away with a meager sustenance . Unlike the horse, a human needs to take care of himself, he can get away
 The use of mineral energy has been the driving force of the last two centuries . It brought about an immense amount of historical change . It has been a driving force for two centuries and brought about immense change .
 If this trend continues, they could put the humans in the position of the horses . The horses could be put in the same position as the horses.
 We can already see that the current process of globalization, with both positive and dangerous consequences, has been driven not by annies and heavy machinery but by computers and communication lines . We are already seeing that the process is driven by computers .
 There is no direct dependence between the consumed food and human energy . Food and energy is not a direct dependence on food and energy, scientists say .
 The concept of energy is more complicated than it seems at the first glance, however . We will come back to it in Chapter 26, Chaos-order, heat-cold .
 This can be done within the framework of pattern theory, for which we have finally made all gradual preparations . This is a framework for pattern theory and pattern theory .
 The next chapter is, probably, the most technical, and the reader may surrender to difficulties . The reader who feels that the intuitive idea of pattern is clear enough may surrender .
 The word pattern is widely used and its meaning seems to be more or less clear from its everyday usage .
 Pattern theory gives an idea of what pattern is in pattern theory . To avoid the ambiguity of ‘more or less’ we shall try to give an idea .
 It seems neither graphs nor groups alone are sufficiently rich structures to extract the regularity from the complexity of the real world with its irreversible dynamics .
 Pattern theory is algebraic in the sense that it manipulates symbols according to given rules . Pattern theory manipulates symbol according to the rules of pattern theory . Algebraic theory is an algebraic form of algebra .
 It is compositional in that some of these manipulations consist of combinations of simple parts into more complicated ones . Some of the manipulations in this work are simple but complex manipulations .
 Metric measures the plausibility of such combinations in terms of probabilities . It is metric in that it measures the likelihood of them to be true .
 The starting point of pattern theory is the creation of its simplest building blocks, the generators, a bit like in chemistry . Pattern theory is similar to chemistry, and the generators are the building blocks of the generators .
 They can be visualized as atoms capable of forming certain bonds with each other and producing ‘molecular” structures capable of change . The atoms are atoms that can form certain bonds and form ‘structures capable of changing’
 An important property of chemical atoms is that they have selective affinity to each other . Chemical atoms have strong preferences regarding what kind of bonds, what number of them, and with what other atoms they can fonn .
 On the surface look like graphs, but this is only part of the picture . They are fonn configurations which on the surface appear like graphs . This is only the surface of the graph .
 Generators are placed in the nodes of a connector graph, and they belong to the same family of objects described by square tables as graphs and groups . Generators belong to a family that is described as a graph and group of objects in square tables .
 There is so much of other data that could be written into the cells, however, that to use tables makes little sense . There is also much more data to be written in the cells .
 In the most general view, generators are a set of objects with rules for connecting them . Generators are generators that connect them to other objects .
 Chemistry is just one of many illustrations of pattern theory, says pattern theory . Chemistry is one of the many ways to explain patterns in patterns .
 Although we compare generator with an atom of knowledge, this atom, like the physical one, is not simple . We compare generators with atoms of knowledge .
 Generators have identifiers labeling them as distinct from one another . Generators use identifiers to distinguish them from each other. Generators can also identify each other by identifying them as separate .
 Identifier is, actually, a name, and generator may have several names, all arranged hierarchically, like first name, middle name and last name . Generators may also have names arranged hierarchially like first names, middle names, and last names .
 The half-circles at the distal ends of the bonds are added to visualize the connection or coupling of generators, symbolized by a complete circle .
 The lower part of the figure presents the same connection without mathematical symbolism . It is not the same mathematical symbolism as the lower part .
 The connections between the bonds can be regular or irregular, as compared to the standard bond relation set as regular . Regular connection between generators can be seen as irregular or regular .
 We may say metaphorically, that the bonds of the same value have an affinity for each other and stick together as if their half circles were covered with glue . The bonds of same value stick together like glue, and the bonds bond each other .
 We started our discourse in Chapter 1 with similarities attracting each other . We started this discourse with similarities attracted each other. We started with similarities to each other in Chapter 2 .
 Like the Toradjas of Celebes, who believed that a bone of a deer would attract the live deer, we make the bonds with same bond values to attract each . We make the bond values with the same bond value to attract the each .
 We can set bond relation as UNEQUAL, for example, so that all bonds but those with the same bond values are allowed to couple . The bond relation relation is UNEQAL . We can also set the bond relation to UNEVEREAL .
 We select the rules of regularity in order to give the simplest mathematical representation of the object . We then select the criteria for the best mathematical representation .
 Bonds can also have direction, for example, outbound and inbound ones . Bonds also have directions, such as outbound or inbound bonds . Bonds are designed to be regular and oriented .
 A regular connector could be defined as having or lacking some topological elements, for example, any graph with outstanding bonds or without cycles . The topological element of a regular connector can be found in a graph .
 We can set a condition of regularity as the same generator subspace, as with members of warring clans, Montegu and Capulet . We can also use the same subspace as a regularity condition for regularity .
 Regularity includes similarity transformation S, which defines how we can deform a configuration without violating its regularity . Regularity is defined as a way to define a configuration .
 We increase regularity by imposing more and more limitations on what is possible in four domains of pattern definition . We need to impose more restrictions on what it is possible to do in the four domains .
 This configuration will be locally regular with bond relation EQUAL, and we do not even need to specify the connector . We will be using a regular regular connector .
 We can obtain all pear-like closed curves by taking any of them as a template and deforming the arcs by changing their radii, length, and shape . We can get pear-shaped closed curves from any template .
 We can, therefore, synthesize a series of configurations of the same pattern, starting with any of them, and applying a group of transformations . We can then synthesize the same patterns, starting from any configuration, using any of the transformations .
 Of course, first we have to analyze a couple of particular configurations in order to define their generators . The generators are generators .
 Pattern analysis results in defining regularity on the basis of selected observations of images and configurations behind them . Pattern synthesis generates regular configurations—whether familiar or never observed—from the definition of regularity . Pattern analysis is a form of pattern synthesis .
 Using this we can also evaluate the degree of irregularity of a configuration . Using this can also be used to evaluate the level of irregularities in the configuration .
 We can define the regularity of an X-ray image of the nonnal stomach and recognize an abnormality on a new image never seen before, or measure the irregularity of potato shape picked by a digital camera . For example, we can define a regularity on an X
 It is a complex mathematical discipline and all we can do here is to present its basic ideas in a simplified fonnn .
 We had to spend some time on topology, graphs, groups, and probability to demonstrate that they were not as intimidating as they might seem . The humanities had been playing with them for the entire century .
 From the densely mathematical atmosphere of pattern theory, pattern theory we make our cavalry raids into the open spaces of history, looking for its big potatoes and pears . We make a cavalry raid on the open space of history looking for big potatoes .
 We would like to convey to the reader a realization that some fundamental mathematical concepts may hover like Valkyrias over the battlefields of history, street barricades, and signing ceremonies, as well as everyday life .
 Group theory can be widely used in group theory . This is why the mathematical apparatus of group theory is widely used there . Group theory is also used in the United States .
 In order to analyze a pattern, we may need to define the similarity transformation, but not necessarily in an analytical form, i.e., as formulas and equations . The similarity transformation can be defined in a different way of analyzing a pattern .
 To calculate area of a plot of land, we apply operation of multiplication to the length and width of the plot . We calculate area by multiplying length, width and length .
 It is easy to do starting with the portrait of Louis Philippe, filling up the picture with ink, turning it into a silhouette, smoothing the contour and then removing the fill .
 It is very difficult to make it the other way around and transform a pear-like closed curve into either a human portrait or a pear .
 We cannot imagine an avocado if we have never seen it, although it has the shape of a pear . The shape of an avocado has the same shape as a pear, but it has a pear shape .
 There is some uncertainty, therefore, whether similarity transformation is always a group, but the assortment of groups is as stretchable as that of the binary relations .
 Pattern is a set of building blocks, rules to connect them, and general architecture, and changes that are allowed . Pattern is the result of a pattern that is consistent with the design of a structure . Pattern was created in the 1970s and is now being used in the U.S
 There are many other subtleties which we omit for the purpose of this book . In fact, there are many more subtletives which are omitted for this purpose .
 Images can be compared with perceptions of a situation by different observers . It is worth mentioning, however, that along with configurations and patterns, there is another class of objects, images, which can compare with perceptions .
 Edmund Burke and Thomas Paine had significantly different views of the French Revolution . But we could reconstruct some information about it even if we had no other sources than their books .
 An image is what is observed, not necessarily by the eyes, for example, a historical document such as the Declaration of Rights . While a configuration is an abstract representation of knowledge, an image is an image of what is seen .
 One configuration can project different images, like a body casts different shadows, and several configurations can be perceived as one image .
 Pattern theory attempts to formalize the hierarchical relation between sets of configurations identified as images, and sets of images identified as patterns . Pattern theory is a theory that formalizes the relationship between images and patterns .
 Pattern theory harbors both order and disorder, but does it in the way that is complementary to the structure-blind thermodynamics . Pattern theory, similarly to thermodynamics, harbors order but not disorder, according to the study .
 Pattern theory is designed for mathematical representation of complex objects . If this highly simplified picture still seems complex, it is because pattern theory was designed to represent complex objects in a complex way .
 As compared with nodes and arcs of graphs, generators and their connections are much more specialized and we have much less freedom in handling them . Generators are more specialized than nodes or arcs and arcs in graphs and arcs .
 This is exactly what they need to serve as building blocks of organized structural complexity . This is what the government needs to do in order to make it more complex and more complex .
 Classical structuralism and pattern theory differ from pattern theory to pattern theory . Here we come to an important difference .
 Pattern theory uniquely offers the possibility to include irregularity and dynamics into the general picture . What the pattern theory offers is the possibility of including irregularity in the picture .
 We have a chance to reconcile structuralism and postmodernism by allowing relaxed regularity as, so to speak, natural phenomenon . In other words, which should not be taken too seriously, should not take too seriously .
 We could relax regularity and allow occasional imperfection with a certain probability over a multitude of configurations of the same pattern . Yet we could relax regularlyity, allowing occasional imperfections, of course .
 This can be visualized as a pattern swinging between the two extreme states, dwelling 80% time in one of them . The pattern can be seen as a swing of 80% in one state .
 The very notion of nature seems to preclude any irregularity . Variation and deviation from the average is the law of nature and exception is the rule, says author .
 Regularity and irregularity, like order and chaos, heat and cold, are not two but one concept . The concept splits only in the everyday human language and relativistic experience, says author .
 As order and chaos are just different degrees of each other, irregularity is just a lower degree of regularity . Irregularity is nothing but a degree of order, and regularity is a higher degree of chaos .
 In pattern theory it can be done in a specific way, as local and global regularity . The pattern theory is based on pattern theory .
 Pattern theory is capable of dealing with just a few structures, as well as ensembles . Pattern theory can be used to deal with complex structures, or just a single structure .
 "No evolution, not to mention revolution, can occur without breaking the rules," he says . Irregular things happen all the time in history of civilization, he adds .
 "Any picture of the world would be incomplete without rendering this inherent tolerable chaos," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Pattern theory gives us a powerful tool to bring all kinds of configurations and patterns into the same family with physical objects . The ability of pattern theory to take into account and express the degree of regularity gives us the ability to .
 As we shall see, we can do something like that also regarding energy and even temperature . As well as we can . We can . do something similar to that, we will . see how it is possible .
 So-called primitive societies display a diversity of customs, beliefs, and mythology . The culture of primitive societies is so diverse as if their building blocks had a complete freedom of combination .
 At a closer look, however, the universal patterns of culture over time and space become evident . The universal patterns in culture are evident .
 The patterns of patterns are less arbitrary than they might look . They are products of evolution of earlier patterns and thus less arbitrary . Moreover, they are product of evolution .
 The author believes in the boundless creative power of the human imagination . He also believes in a little knowledge that can be dispelled by a little more .
 The superficial student mazed in a crowd of seemingly wild and lawless fancies, which he thinks to have no reason in nature nor pattern in nature, at first concludes them to be new births from the imagination of the poet and the tale-teller .
 A more comprehensive study of the sources of poetry and romance begins to disclose a cause for each fancy, an education that has led up to each train of thought, a store of inherited materials .
 Mythology starts, as is appropriate in historical context, with some doctrines about the creation of the world and the beliefs about the first human beings . Mythology begins with the belief that the world was created by humans .
 Most mythologies assert that it all started with a man and a woman, as Adam and made of his rib Eve of the Bible . Adam's rib is the rib rib of the Adam rib . The rib rib is a rib of rib from the rib of Adam and Eve .
 Ask and Embla in Nordic mythology were both made by god Odin from ash and elm . Odin made them from ash, elm, and they were made from the same material as Ask .
 In Hawaii the ancestors were Wakea and Papa, who in southern Polynesia were gods of heaven and earth . In Polynesia, Wakea, Papa and Papa are the ancestors of Wakea . Wakea was born in Hawaii .
 The large circles with names are generators and the bond couples are formed by fusion of small half-circles . The large circle with names is generators . The bond couples form by forming small half circles .
 The function of the bond is, just as in chemistry, to regulate which generator can be connected with which, according to the doctrine being formalized . It is just as well as chemistry, it regulates which generator is connected to which .
 Only combinations M-F are allowed in our mythic examples . One male and one female ‘atom’ of genesis can form a bond couple .
 If we label the generators gi, g 2 , g 3 and g 4 and go no further, it seems that Adam and Embla can form a couple .
 We cannot couple characters from different mythologies, however, unless in Hollywood movies . We can't couple characters without a connection to our own mythologies .
 We need some means to keep reasonable order among the members of the ancestral club . We need a means of keeping order among members of an ancestral club. We need to be able to keep order among those in order .
 We distinguish between Biblical, Scandinavian, and other mythologies, using label C . C can take values such as b , s or s, etc.
 Both should have opposite sex and belong to same mythological system . In common language it means that both should be opposite sex . Both sexes belong to different mythological systems .
 Plain English may be fine for mythology and something else, but mathematics is about everything . The answer is that plain English is not for mythology or something else .
 Since antiquity science have been driven by the search for universal principles and universal language and had to pay for that with exhausting search for minute detail . Science has paid for the search of universal principles, universal language .
 It will now be useful to abstract from the incidental to the fundamental and this we do now and in the following by using systematic notation . We will now abstract the incidental from incidental to fundamental .
 After Fernand de Saussure demonstrated the distance between the signifiant (the sign) and signifie , notation itself may seem to be of little importance, but that is not so . notation itself is of little significance .
 The reason why it is important is not so much the choice of signs and symbols in a notation, but the decision of what to signify . "It is important not to choose signs but to choose symbols and symbols to signify"
 Our choice in this simple case reveals the structure of the object, as well as the approach of pattern theory . Our choice of objects reveals the approach to pattern theory, and the structure, of patterns .
 Generators are abstract mathematical objects and the circles are strictly for pictorial symbolism . Generators were created by Albert Einstein for the University of New York .
 The rule that establishes regularity is the name a and bond value p . There are two of them, each with its name a, and p, and the rule that established regularity .
 This arcane notation can be fully appreciated only in dealing with the entire overwhelming complexity of the world . The world's complexity is overwhelming .
 In Zoroastrian mythology, the first couple was not man and woman but the man Gayomart and his ox . While the pattern man-woman is typical, it is not the typical pattern .
 A tree grown for Gayomart’s body split into the first couple Mashya and Mashyane . The tree was grown for the body and split into Mashya .
 One of the men made a statue, the woman turned the statue into a girl, and so first two couples appeared . The first couple appeared in a statue of a girl .
 The first Pawnee Indians were the daughter of Morning Star and Evening Star and the son of Sun and Moon who became the first human parents . The first humans became the Pawnees .
 In a Talmudic story, Samael was a fonner angel whom God wanted to be the first man . God wanted him to be God's first man, and he died in a fiery explosion . The story goes back to the original Bible .
 Lilith refused to submit to Adam and so could be regarded as the first champion of women’s rights . Next came Lilith, who refused to subdue to Adam, who could have been regarded as a champion .
 The concept of chaos/order seems quite a useful tool for political and social studies . The concept is quite useful for the study of chaos and social issues .
 Designers of a better car engine and a better social order, however, may not realize that they deal with the same kind of objects as anthropologists . The engineer calls chaos heat an embarrassing situation out of control .
 We can now say that the ideal of totalitarian society as well as of bureaucracy is absolute order, which is something very far from the nature of things in society and in transportation . We can say that totalitarian society is something far from nature in society, as well in transport .
 We can index now all mythologies as 1,2, 3..., and we do not even know where the list ends because we may discover a new myth tomorrow . We do not know where to end the list of mythologies .
 Let the generators be denoted abstractly by gi F , g2 F, giw, g2M, ... so that we can fonn the set G of all generators . The generator space is the generator space that contains the primitives created so far .
 Permutation means that we can change 1 to 2 everywhere we encounter 1, and vice versa . Permutations means we can also change 2 to 2 every time we encounter one of our own .
 As long as two generators are indexed with M and F, the connection is regular . The connection is a regular connection between generators .
 The similarity transformation that identifies all regular couples as a pattern preserves the mythology index . The similarity of regular couples is a pattern pattern that identifies regular couples .
 In other words, we can go from mythology to mythology with the same pattern on the banner . The same pattern is on the same banner in mythology .
 The pennutation is a simple and clearly defined transformation, very similar to the translation of a triangle in a plane . It changes all coordinates by adding or subtracting the same number, one for all points .
 We perform translation by moving a book around the table without rotating the book . We perform translations by moving books around the room without rotating them .
 "Here we come to a very important moment for understanding the core idea of pattern history," he says .
 It alone was not sufficient for analysis of historical change that could be compared with a change from one geometty to another . It was not enough to compare historical change to one of the geometrics .
 Abstract algebra deals with a set of objects S and a finite set of operations . Abstract algebra is a form of algebra that deals with objects S, S and operations S .
 Mathematics offers a handshake to humanities and the offer was accepted by structuralism . Thus understood, mathematics offers the offer of structuralism to the humanities .
 Mathematics studies a general design of the world, whether real or imaginary . Mathematical design of a world is studied by mathematicians and mathematicians . The world is designed by the world's designers and engineers .
 There was, however, a serious reason why the structuralism of Levi-Strauss was as static as crystallography . There was also a serious problem with the structuralistism of Strauss' theory .
 Levi-Strauss studied a narrow class of primitive and apparently unchanging cultures subject to rigid rules . He studied a group of primitive, unchanging groups of primitive cultures .
 He drew a line between static culture and the dynamic civilization, and his groups of transformations were designed for the former . He drew the line between the static culture .
 The deeper we go into the mythological woods the less regular it looks, far from the order of crystal lattice or plant nursery . The deeper you go, the more regular it appears to be .
 There are also other kinship relationships between the characters of a certain pantheon, most important of them are brother-sister and parent-child links . The pantheon is one of the world's most famous pantheon gods .
 We may add an additional condition that there is no brother-sister kinship between the husband and wife, which is common for all modem societies . We may also add that there should be no brother and sister kinship .
 We can either conclude that our idea about what is regular was too rigorous or that we can say that the regularity was somewhat relaxed . Then we can conclude that the idea of regularity is too rigorous .
 We can even measure the degree or “strength” of the regularity in percentage of irregular cases, to be accurate . If this degree looks high, we have to change our perception of regularity . We can also measure the ‘strength’ of the irregular cases .
 Jupiter and Juno are children of Saturn and Ops and, therefore, brother and sister, as well as husband and wife . There should not be a brothersister kinship between husband and . wife, but Jupiter and . Juno are . children of . Saturn and . Ops and therefore, as
 Osiris and Isis in Egyptian and Ynti and Qulla in Peruvian Inca mythologies show that there is some degree of regularity even in this deviation .
 We can mention also the eternal conflict between generations, as in the bloody murder of Uranus by his sons Titans . We can also mention also a bloody murder by the sons of the Titans .
 Brothers do not always get along either, like good Glooskap and evil Malsum, sons of the great Earth Mother in Chippewa mythology, and Abel and Cain in the Bible .
 We have made the very first simple steps toward pattern examination of mythology, the most ancient study of their own history by humans . We are making the first steps toward the study of mythology .
 We see a simple pattern of coupled male and female at the very start of social evolution . The pattern was created at the start of the social revolution .
 By repeating similar steps, we can explore the whole intricate webs of tribal mythologies and discover new regularities . We can also explore the complex web of tribal myths and mythologies in the world .
 The inherent irregularity of factual anthropological data, we may guess, anticipated postmodernism, which differs from structuralism only in focusing on disorder instead of order . Postmodernism is not structuralism, but it focuses on disorder .
 We shall take every opportunity, however, to emphasize that chaos and order are not the opposites but, in mythological tenns, the two faces of god Janus . Janus is the god of chaos, and chaos is not the opposite .
 What we can do with patterns is to study their evolution, competition, and selection . We can't predict patterns in patterns, but we can study them for patterns' evolution .
 Of course, this kind of professional work in anthropology is beyond our abilities, but we hope to stimulate somebody’s imagination, says the anthropologist .
 Society is made of the same stuff as molecules, ornaments, ballet figures, etc. In tenns of generators and their bond couples, society is made up of molecules . Society is also made of molecules, ornament and ballet figures .
 This realization may encourage us to import and export knowledge across the borders between scientific domains . This may encourage scientists to export knowledge from scientific domains to other countries .
 The colorful metaphoric language used by physicist Brian Greene for describing quantum fluctuations to a lay reader is an example of such exchange .
 Metaphor and imagery is no more contained to be the utensils of fiction . Metaphors and imagery are no longer contained in fiction, they are now more contained .
 The Pursuit of Power is meant to be a twin to my earlier book, Plagues and Peoples . It's a twin book to my book Plagues & Peoples, which was published in 2007 .
 The latter sought to discern landmarks in the interaction of human populations and microparasites, paying special attention to the relatively abrupt niche changes that organisms undergo from time to time .
 This book undertakes a similar inquiry into changes in patterns of macro-parasitism among human kind . It undertakes an inquiry into the changing patterns of human-kind .
 Disease germs are the most important microparasites humans have to deal with . Disease is the most serious microparsites humans must deal with, say experts .
 Our only significant macroparasites are other men who, by specializing in violence, are able to secure a living without themselves producing the food and other commodities they consume .
 A study of macroparasitism among human populations turns into a study of the organization of armed force with special attention to the kinds of equipment warriors used .
 Pattern theory treats all areas of knowledge as interconnected global community . Alterations in armaments resemble genetic mutations of microorganisms in the sense that they may open new geographic zones for exploitation .
 We need other complementary views of the world to understand the place of the phenomenon in the universe . But we need more complementary views in order to understand its place in the world .
 Globalization of knowledge is as much of a sign of our times as globalization of economics . Globalization is as important as economic globalization of the past, says John Defterios .
 Vilfredo Pareto was a highly original Italian sociologist of the first half of the 19th century . Vilfredi Paretto was a well known sociologist in Italy . He was born in Rome, Italy, in 1903 .
 Crane Brinton thus compacted some of his ideas in a historical context . Crane brinton committed his ideas in an attempt to put them in context of history .
 What does move men in society, and keeps them together, says Pareto, is the residues . What keeps men together in society is the residue, he says . The residues keep men together, he adds .
 These are expressions of relatively permanent, abiding sentiments in men, which may change greatly and even quickly . These expressions usually have to be separated from the part that is actually a derivation, which is actually the part .
 Pagan Greek sailors sacrificed to Poseidon, god of the sea, before setting out on a voyage . Christian Greek sailors a few centuries later prayed, lighted candles, and made vows to the Virgin Mary before sailing .
 The derivations are the explanations of what Poseidon and the Virgin respectively do . Poseidon is the most powerful god in the world . The Virgin and Poseidon are the most beautiful goddesses in ancient Greece .
 The believer in the Virgin thinks his pagan predecessor was dead wrong . He believes in the belief in Christ Christ was wronged .
 Both the pagans and the Christians have the same social and psychological needs and satisfy them in much the same ways, though with very different explanations of what they are doing .
 Two of the major class residues Pareto distinguishes stand out, and help form his philosophy of history . The residues stand out of the residues, which he distinguishes from others .
 This passage could be taken for yet another example of similarity transformation from the pagan to the Christian system of beliefs related to the pattern of securing a safe venture .
 It leads to an idea that everything in society is regular until a change comes, which breaks up the former pattern and establishes a new one . It leads us further, however, to a belief that everything is regular in society until a new pattern comes .
 We pay more attention to the persistence of the pattern, but we could be equally fascinated by the catastrophic change that the transition from paganism to monotheism meant for those who experienced it .
 We can actually see how the stability of some patterns helped to maintain balance when others changed . We can see how stability of patterns helped maintain balance .
 We can see a similar situation in one of the most catastrophic revolutions of the twentieth century, the Russian Communist Revolution . The situation is similar to that of the Soviet-era Soviet Union, writes David Cameron .
 It apparently succeeded in a complete destruction of the centuries old patterns of absolute monarchy and values of a peasant state, physically destroyed the old social generators, but quickly rebuilt .
 Discrimination of women had been regular for most of the twentieth century, but it became an irregularity during the century’s last quarter, when the pattern changed . Discrimination was regular for the century's first quarter, but became irregularity in the last quarter of the century .
 For most of the century, it was unthinkable for business competitors to help each other . Now we witness the phenomenon of bailing out sinking rival economies at home and abroad .
 This brings to the view of evolutionary irregularity as a deep deformation of social template under stress and its subsequent rearrangement . Evolutionary irregularity is thought to be a deep social deformation under stress . The social template is under stress, and it is then rearranged under stress
 A configuration can not only jump from one connector to another but also oscillate between two patterns, as it was with monarchy and republic in France after the Revolution . The configuration can also jump between monarchy and republicanism in France .
 When the defonnation changes the radius of a circle, it preserves the form of the circle . Defonnation is a form that preserves a circle .
 Even the transfonnation of a circle into a triangle preserves some topological properties . Even a circle can be transfonned to a triangle with a circle . The transfonning of a triangle into a circle preserves some of the properties of the circle .
 feudalism was regular for feudalism to provide military service to the king in exchange for the right to possess land and have individual protection . feudalism provided military service in return for right to possession land and protection .
 Monarchy as power became irregular after a series of European revolutions and world wars, but monarchy as a national institution stabilized . Monarchy was stabilized after the end of the first world wars .
 Historical patterns change, and the patterns of national mentality are among the slowest to change . This is how historical patterns change . National mentality is slow to change, says historian .
 Pattern history, therefore, is as much history of regularity as of its reformulation . Pattern history is as important as regularity, says David Low . pattern history is more important to regularity than reformulation, he says .
 Both countries had very hostile relations that changed overnight with the signing of the Hitler-Stalin Pact . Both countries signed the pact in 1945 .
 The following small detail illustrates how much the precious flavor of history is beyond any theoretical grandeur . The following is a small detail .
 Stalin agreed to pay Gennany $7.7 million dollars in gold to keep a tiny piece of land in Lithuania . Stalin also agreed to keep the land that the treaty assigned to Gennan .
 The Gennan invasion of Russia on June 22, 1941, confirmed . It was also reversible, as the invasion was reversible . The invasion took place in 1941 .
 A similar automorphic transformation was mentioned in Chapter 3 in connection with the incorporation of Normandy into France . Normandy was incorporated into France in 1944 .
 Those patterns are patterns of resolving a conflict by initiating another conflict, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 In the Glorious Revolution, the parliament disposed of James II by arranging the conflict between him and William . The parliament arranged the conflict by arranging a conflict between William and James .
 Kuwait easily got USA on its side against Iraq in the Gulf War . Albanians of Kosovo invoked intervention of NATO against Serbia in Kosovo .
 In all such configurations, hardly any two sides feel any love toward each other . "Most of the time, most of the times, the two sides don't love each other," says author .
 Some participants of the anti-terrorist alliance of 2001 found themselves locked in the same triangle . The anti-terrorism alliance was formed in 2001 . Some participants were locked in a triangle .
 Both conflict and dysfunctional marriage are as much repulsion as attraction . "Dysfunctional marriage" is a form of repulsion that repulsion is repulsion .
 In the Muslim world, the draw to American way of life, movies, and pop music easily gets together with political animosity .
 Conflict is a permanent dimension of history, and we will examine it in the next chapter . Conflict is not only a permanent aspect of history . It is also a permanent part of history.
 On the scale of decades and centuries, we perceive history in such terms as big movement of anned people, development of institutions of religion and government, cultural change, modernism of the twentieth century, and life cycle of large ideas such as capitalism, socialism, and individualism .
 History is a sequence of changes more localized in time in space in space . On the time scale of years and decades, history is on a scale of time . History is more localized than in space.
 Some peaceful reforms look as easy as rearranging furniture in a room, while others are conflicts . Some are as mild as the family arguments about furniture, some deadly . Some of them are important peaceful reforms that look like rearranging a room .
 If Plautus is right and man is a wolf to any other man then human relations can often be antagonistic . Human relations are often expected to be an antagonistic relationship, says the author .
 Human history is full of tales about hostile encounters between individuals, classes, and nations, in which rivalry and envy have led sometimes to violent revolution, sometimes to reconciliation .
 They start with drawing a line in the sand between themselves and end with the recognition of a winner . The pair will be able to compete again in the United States for the first time since 2008 .
 Conflict is a bond couple, although it may look that the conflicting sides do all they can to break up . From the pattern perspective, conflict is a bonding couple, says pattern expert .
 The violent conflict usually ends with the elimination of the adversary, which during most of human history used to mean death, slavery, or captivity . During most of the human history, the death of an adversary was often followed by captivity .
 If there is a fonnal draw, it rarely means a complete equality of the outcome for both sides . Any peace treaty leaves the sides with unequal frustration and desire to replay the game .
 Family conflicts can often take extreme forms because the participants, roped-in by the ties of kinship, cannot leave the ring . Family conflicts often take an extreme form because they are roped in by their kinship ties .
 Interested observers of close relationships often peiplexed by seemingly mundane events triggering serious interpersonal conflicts . The author says the relationship is often peaked out of context .
 Historical changes include emergence and elimination of building blocks and whole structures, down to individuals . Historical changes have been made in the shape of individual buildings and individuals .
 Conflict does not always involve ill intent, but on the bloody stretches of history, in secret political decisions, and in criminal novels elimination is a euphemism for death . Conflict is not always involved ill intent but in secret politics, it is often in the dark .
 In international conflicts, elimination may mean total occupation, seizure, subjugation, and acquisition of territory . Elimination means total occupation and seizure of territory, or total occupation .
 In our times it is equally difficult to destroy a national spirit, says David Cameron . "Nations can fuse, hybridize, and split," he says .
 Competition and selection occupy the center stage in Darwinian evolution, economics, politics, and personal relations . Selection is the result of competition and selection in evolution .
 It happens in lottery, when the selection of winning tickets is done at random, and in creative games like chess, where it depends on the skills of the players more than on chance . It also happens in awards, like Nobel Prize and Oscar, where the number of prizes is less than
 Competition in its many forms is inherent part of modem life . We might blame animals for the conflictive nature that they passed onto humans, but it's not a problem .
 Elimination, therefore, or narrowing the set, is the very essence of competition . Elimination is the essence of the game, and therefore, it is the most important part of the sport .
 There should be a general mathematical description for this general phenomenon, says author .
 Mathematically, the essence of the competition is that a subset of a larger set is selected thereby falling into a vicious cycle . Yet we can only say that, mathematically, we are only able to say that . The essence of this is that the selection of a set falls into a
 The causality of the elementary act of selection seems to be beyond mathematics . It is beyond mathematics to explain the phenomenon of selection .
 First, somebody must cast a die, and then the mathematics can say something about it . First, the die is cast, and the mathematics says something .
 "One was to narrow the base of competition and select very few from a few," says the BBC presenter . "I'm not going to be able to compete in the world," she says .
 The development of modern democracies initiated an opposite trend, so that a few can be chosen from a very large base . The development began with the idea that only a few people could be chosen .
 This expansion of the eligibility to compete at the high level has been the major trend in the West since Britain’s Bill of Rights . It has been a major trend since Britain's Bill of Right to compete in the sport .
 We can see the same modem principle of broadening the selection base implemented in the ancient Chinese democratic system of exams for administrative positions . We can also see a similar modem principle .
 We tend to perceive the broad eligibility to social competition as a manifestation of moral progress and good will . But it can be also a simple consequence of the economic independence of the country .
 A voting slave is a contradiction in terms because he depends on his master, says David Frum . Frum says a voting slave depends on a master's will . He says voting slaves are slaves who depend on their master .
 We can conclude that the trend to level the playing field is the general trend of the last millennium as a whole . The trend is similar to the trend in the 1990s .
 Social promotion in schools is an attempt to limit competition in schools . quotas are aimed at warping the game field to achieve certain social effects . For example, quotas in schools are an attempt at limiting competition .
 The idea of equal opportunities can be pushed even further to the idea of equality results . Equal opportunities can't be pushed further to equal results, the author says .
 This is an old Communist and, probably, even original Christian idea, never implemented in practice, but theoretically possible in a society of clones . This is the old Communist . and probably, probably . even Christian idea .
 Communist countries made efforts to standardize individuals by indoctrination, force, and controlled consumption . Not accidentally, enonnous efforts were made in Communist countries to standardise individuals .
 The sides of a conflict are bound with the desire to destroy or damage each other . The word bond associates with a mutual attraction, but the sides are bound to destroy .
 The absence of bond means that the sides are not aware of each other’s existence . ‘The absence of a bond means the sides do not know that each other is alive’.
 Symbols of conflict are symbolic symbols of conflict . We have already mentioned the distinction between positive and negative bonds . We also have a distinction between negative and positive bonds .
 The role of both for maintaining social structures was elaborated by cultural anthropology and social psychology . Social psychology and cultural anthropology have a role in maintaining social structure .
 In our terms, positive bonds require energy or effort to break, while negative bonds need the same to keep the two generators together . Negative bonds need to be broken to keep their generators together, we say . Positive bonds need energy to break .
 Neutral bonds require a very low or no energy to either break or establish . Neutral bonds can be used to create or establish a neutral bond or bond .
 Conflict is a bond and we have to find an appropriate symbol for it, says David Cameron . Conflict is an important bond, he says, and we need to find a symbol .
 Negative bond means that the generators split as soon as there is nothing to keep them together . Negative bond is a negative bond and means that generators split when there is no bond .
 When one side of the conflict retreats, however, the other one pursues it with double energy . When one of the parties retreat, it will be hard to find a solution .
 This range comprises the whole Cain-Abel conflict, although we know only about the beginning and the end of the conflict . This range includes the beginning of the Cain and Abel conflict, but only the end .
 Cain saw that his sacrifice was not as well received as that of his brother’s, he slew Abel . The conflict was resolved by a violent action . Cain slew Abel, resolving this conflict was a violent act .
 In the traditional English story, for example, the first-bom son of the owner of the estate is going to inherit it the principle of primogeniture . The first-born son is expected to inherit the estate from the owner .
 The second son is dissatisfied with this state of affairs and decides to change it . Not surprisingly, the second son decided to change his family's lifestyle .
 Jealousy genealogy and kinship created conflicts and ‘eliminations’ in earlier history .
 The One Hundred Years War can be reduced to the general pattern of kinship conflict represented by the Abel-Cain story, if we consider the stable sub-configurations of entire houses Valois and Plantagenet as separate generators .
 We have no approach, however, to find out why Cain was aggressive and Abel was not, or who was the most probable winner of the One Hundred Years War .
 It is not clear how ambitions can change structure and it is hard to see how such concepts as energy, effort, and work can be defined in the structural framework of pattern theory .
 A dynamic pattern has a set of specific dynamic generators, which can be regarded as operations on patterns involving the change of the connector . We would like to indicate that a dynamic pattern . has a specific dynamic generator .
 REPLACE is REPLACE, which changes one generator into another, for example in royal succession . REPLACE can be used to replace a generator, such as royal succession, with a generator .
 All of them manipulate with a single entity, either identifier or bond couple . Note, that all of them use the same entity as an identifier .
 In this way, we can significantly simplify the problem of transfonnation and analyze it one operation at a time . We can significantly simplified the problem by focusing only on one operation .
 We may assume that every step of a transformation of a complex social configuration is mostly local . We can assume that . Every step of the transformation is a local transformation .
 If stages of complex social processes are sequences of very simple elementary changes localized in a few generators and bond couples at a time, similar to mechanisms of chemical reactions, we would find the Ariadne’s thread leading us out of the labyrinth of complexity, and, probably, right
 Although we follow the sources (Grey, 1960, Hatton, 1968, Scott, 1988) our construct should be regarded not as historically true but as an image .
 What we attempt to assemble is a piece of semantic network translated into pattern terms, and, therefore, we have to start with a short narrative . What we are attempting to assemble here is a bit of a semantic network .
 The theater of war stretched across the entire Eastern Europe from Sweden to the Balkans . Theater of war was centered around Sweden, Sweden, the Balkans, and Sweden .
 It was as much a war of diplomacy as of destruction, treachery, and deceit as of weaponry, clever military engineering combined with the tactics of scorched earth . The medieval mix of both chivalrous respect and grisly cruelty toward the enemy .
 Even France had some hand in the events by prompting the unwilling Turkey to go to war to Russia . France had a hand in forcing Turkey to war with Russia .
 Charles XII, the teenager King of Sweden, Augustus, the King of Saxony-Poland, and Peter I, the Czar of Russia . Charles XII was the teenager king of Sweden . Augustus was the king of Saxonia-Polland, Saxony and Saxon-Pol
 Peter I remains one of a few central figures of Russian history, whose heritage is clearly sensible even today . Peter I is a Russian monarch whose heritage remains clear even today. Peter I was one of Russia's most successful monarchs .
 Johan Patkul was a Livonian baron, descendant of the Order of Teutonic Knights . He was mistrusted by Peter, betrayed by Augusts, and cruelly executed by Charles .
 He made his mark on the European scene, even though at the end of the seventeenth century it was crowded with outstanding men and women . He was the first person to make his mark in Europe .
 "Handsome, powerfully built, and possessing a strong personality as well as great courage and energy," he was a dynamic figure, he said .
 He spoke several languages, could write gracefully in Greek and Latin . He was learned in the sciences of war and politics, as they were then known .
 A fundamental history of Russia written in the Soviet time did not mention him at all . He was a major figure in the history of the Soviet Union .
 Instead of a customary map of the northern skies crossed by meteors and comets, we use a graph reflecting the earthly topology of the various protagonists of the war . If it looks complex, this is exactly the point. The graph reflects the Earth's topology .
 Europe in 1700 was charged with mutual mistrust and animosity . Temporary peace was possible only because of the balance of power . Europe in 17th century had a long history of mistrust .
 Russia was beginning to emerge as a leading power in the region, pushing westwards toward the Baltic, of course . Sweden was opposed by Sweden with its territories in Finland and Courland . Sweden had territory in Finland, Courland and Finland .
 Denmark was also opposed to Swedish interests, especially after Hedvig, sister of Charles XII, had married Fredrik, the duke of Holstein . Denmark also opposed Swedish interests .
 Holstein cut Denmark off the rest of continental Europe . Topology of Northern Europe in 1700 was topology of Europe .
 Sweden, across a narrow strait, was the second of the two close neighbors of Denmark . Sweden was one of Denmark's closest neighbors .
 August II, prince of Saxony and elected king of Poland, wanted to incorporate Livonia in Poland . To complicate the picture, August II wanted Livonia to be incorporated into Poland . August II also wanted to include Livonia into the kingdom of Poland .
 Prussia coveted the Swedish part of Pomerania but stayed away from alliances with Sweden . Prussia wanted to keep control of the region .
 Russia shut off the access to the Baltic Sea by Sweden and to the Black Sea by Turkey . Russia, with her czar obsessed with shipbuilding after years spent in Holland, was shut off by Sweden, Turkey .
 His marriage with Sophia Hedvig of Denmark was postponed until the end of the war . Sophia never married, and Sophia never had a marriage .
 The first stage of the war was as victorious for Charles as the second one was for Peter . Charles was victorious in the first stage, as was the second stage of his war .
 The elements in the fonn of snow and frost helped once Charles, and once Peter, once . The elements helped once, once and once, but not once .
 Between the two stages of war, Saint Petersburg was founded as a new capital of Russia . The city was founded between 1914 and 1918 .
 The Northern War is a dramatic, complex, and fascinating chapter of European history . It can be fully rendered only in a bright dynamic narrative, says author .
 We are interested how a complex situation can be dealt with in pattern terms . More specifically, we are interested in how complex situations are dealt with . We are also interested in looking at how complex issues can be solved .
 We have already seen that semantic network can be extremely confusing and overwhelmingly complex . We are already seeing that semantic networks can be incredibly complex .
 The list of all interested sides is incomplete, but since it would include almost entire Europe, we have to limit our entries . Russia -Poland would be the only two countries in the world to play in the Euro 2016 .
 Lutheran, Orthodox, Roman, rule, absolute, parliamentary, strong, covett. The Bible is a Christian nation of origin and origin .
 In 1699 Hedvig Sophia of Sweden, sister of Charles XII, marries Frederick IV of Holstein-Gottorp, so that Sweden and the kingdom of Denmark are linked closer . Fredrik IV of Denmark perceives as a threat to Sweden .
 We can see the new bond couple of marriage in the left part of the picture . We can also see the newlyweds in the middle of the photo .
 The strained relations between Denmark and Sweden are shown by the double line . The double line is a symbol of Danish-Sweden relations .
 He initiates what in our time could be called shuttle diplomacy, representing interests of Livonia . "Shuttle diplomacy" is a form of diplomacy, he says .
 Sweden under Charles XI started confiscating the land of nobility . Sweden started there confiscating land of noblelandland .
 Patkul tries to build an anti-Swedish alliance including Saxony-Poland, Denmark, and Russia . The alliance is based in Saxony, Poland and Denmark .
 Frederik of Denmark is allied with Peter and August in a powerful alliance . They agree upon war against the seventeen year old Charles who has no allies except tiny Holstein . Frederik and August join forces to defeat Charles .
 England opposed Sweden in the beginning of the war . England was interested in the peace in the Baltics and opposed Sweden . Sweden was the first country to join the war in the region .
 Augustus invades Livonia and Fredrik of Denmark invades Holstein . The state of conflict of interests, true or imaginary, turns into war . Augustus invade Livonia .
 This view of the event sees Charles as the young hero with no aggressive intent, treacherously attacked by his rapacious neighbors . Charles was attacked by the neighbors, but not aggressive . Charles is portrayed as a young hero in the story of Charles and his family .
 The patterns generalizing the above configurations are common among the nationalistic historians . The patterns are common with the nationalist historians .
 It would be of interest to compare them with other doctrines for similar events, to see what differences would be needed for those representations .
 The Russians saw Sweden as an obstacle on the way toward the Baltic . Sweden was not so much as a sworn enemy but more as a threat to the Baltic Sea .
 The bulky configurations represent only a small part of all infonnation about the disposition in Northern Europe in 1700s .
 "As we anticipated, however, the changes occur only in a small part of generators and bond couples," says CNN.com.com .
 This general property of the evolution of complex systems—the locality of change, first noticed by Saussure, greatly simplifies the picture . The locality of the change in complex systems is the property of change . This property was first noticed in the 1800s by the German scientist, first
 The principle, which seems so self-evident, allows chemists to anticipate behavior of very complex molecules . By the same token, the principle, it seems that chemists can predict behavior of molecules .
 "The opposite approach to history amounts to search for some general laws specific to history," historian says . The opposite approach is search for general laws, not general laws .
 Next time we can simply omit the parts of the configurations that do not change . Next time, we can just omit the rest of the configuration that don't change .
 Every change comes from another change, which in our days is called the domino effect . Paraphrasing Rudolf Virchow, who formulated the basic postulate of biology as ‘every cell comes only from another cell”
 The question remains, however, why some wars happen and some not . The war begins in Afghanistan .
 One way to explain it is to take sides, attribute ill intent to one of the sides, and call it evil . One way of explaining it is taking sides, take sides and calling it evil, is to be taken sides .
 The close blood relations between the monarchs of Denmark and Sweden usually spells trouble . Another way to explain the situation is to note the close blood ties between the two countries, which usually spell trouble .
 Charles XI, the father of Charles XII, married Ulrika Eleonora of Denmark in 1675 . Charles XI was the son of Charles XI of Denmark, Charles XII of Denmark .
 The marriage was carefully arranged to establish peace between two rival kingdoms . But a war followed next year, and the war followed .
 Charles XII married princess Sophia Hedvig of Denmark, as was at some time planned, and the two archenemies were tied by multiple bonds of kinship . The royal spouses would be also cousins .
 Another way is to reduce the explanation to psychology, physiology, and particular life circumstances of the evil person . Yet another way is that the explanation should be to psychology and physiology .
 The events of September 11 rekindled a new interest in political psychology regarding the aggressive and destructive personalities of the world's most powerful personalities .
 Another approach is to use the concept of amplification of accidental events in the atmosphere charged with tension . Yet another approach is the idea of amplifying accidental events .
 A different explanatory strategy is to regard a conflict as natural process described in structural tenns. A different approach would be to regard conflict as a conflict described in a different way .
 Finally, we can get out of the labyrinth of complexity, disentangle the semantic net, and look for a set of simpler blocks in intricate historical pictures . We can find a simple set of simple blocks in complex pictures .
 Leo Tolstoy was right in his desire to reduce history to elementary acts . It seems that Tol Stoy was correct in his view of history as history should be reduced to simple acts .
 We can study the snapshots and lasting structures of society, but they may not reveal why and in what direction the change will follow . We can look at the snapshots, but not the structures, but what will change .
 The occasional pilgrimage of humanities to oracles of natural sciences has not yet brought any magic solution because the questions asked were either static or dynamic . The questions asked are either static, dynamic or dynamic, and there are no answers .
 The system rolls down to the final state C, in which one of them lies on the floor, while the other triumphantly raises his hand . After residing in the agitated state for a while, the system rolls to state C .
 You cannot step in the same ring twice, and shaking hands again, they are crumpled, bruised, and sweaty . You cannot shake hands again and shake hands in the ring again .
 History of ideas in sociology and social psychology presents many illustrations of such recurrent concepts as stability, frustration, tension, anomie, dissonance, and other similar concepts of energy in chemistry .
 The main idea is that there is a measure of the tendency of a structure toward change which is its overall extensive parameter . This is the overall tendency of the structure to change, and the structure's overall amount of change is a key factor .
 The chaotic energy of heat or radiation raises the energy of a system to the level of the transition barrier that separates initial and final states . In chemistry, it is often the chaotic energy .
 States of a system are separated from each other as valleys by mountain ridges . The states of each other are separated by valleys by mountains and ridges.
 In the physics of quantum objects, events seem to happen on their own and the decay of an individual atom is unpredictable . In radioactivity, the decays of an atom are unpredictable and unpredictable .
 In fact, there are metastable states when only a slight excessive force is needed to start a transformation . The metastable state is a state that is metastable when a slight excess force is required to transform .
 A rock on the edge of a precipice is in metastable state, and a push can send it tumbling down . A rock is in a metastable condition, and it's metastable . A push on a rock is a push that could send it down, experts say .
 Heat is chaotic, blind, and destructive while work is creative, selective, and organized . Heat is chaos, blind and destructive, but work is creativity, selective and organized. Heat is a work of chaos, but not chaos, it's creative and selective work .
 Our next task is to show how pattern theory performs the synthesis of the split identity . The next task will be to show that pattern theory can be used to synthesise the identity of a split identity.
 The development of a unified view of the world, since its Greek inception, has been moving like trains on parallel tracks along the thennodynamic and structural lines, with only occasional exchange of whistles . To summarize the previous chapters, the development of this view has moved along parallel lines,
 The only science where both views were integrated has been chemistry . Chemistry is too selfcontained to launch any mission outside its borders . It is the only science that has been integrated is chemistry .
 Neither pattern theory borrows anything from chemistry, nor vice versa . Chemistry is a good model for some ideas of pattern theory .
 Chemistry somehow integrates both structure and thermodynamics in a very simple and efficient way . Chemistry is an efficient way to integrate structure and temperature in a simple way .
 We can now overview some chemical concepts not so much for the sake of chemistry as for the purpose of pattern illustrations .
 Energy is the measure of the ability of the system to change spontaneously . Energy is a measure of how quickly the system can change spontaneously, scientists say .
 The higher the energy, the more probable that the system will drop lower on the energy scale . The higher energy is more likely to be used to power the most efficient system .
 It can be closed with release of energy and broken with absorption of energy . It can also be closed and broken by release of the energy .
 The products of the break-up store the consumed energy, and, therefore, are highly unstable and inclined to get rid of it . This is possible if they recombine in the original or a new way, or if they are recombined .
 Chemical transfonnation reminds a business cycle when money is borrowed in the bank, invested, and returned with either profit or loss, without the entire loan being transferred as bags of cash . The entire loan is not transferred in the form of cash, but the investment is invested .
 The chemical reaction consists of steps that are mostly strictly local in space and follow each other one at a time . Besides, the chemical reaction, like history and evolution of life and language, includes steps that have been local to space in space .
 As soon as the system is at the foot of the hill, the energy is returned, usually, with a surplus or deficit . The system is returned to the system, usually with a deficit or surplus .
 The chemical reaction looks even more similar to the way banks do business by keeping a smaller amount of cash for holding huge accounts in the fractional reserve system .
 The problem with chemistry is that in most cases it is impossible to deliver energy to an individual molecule or its selected part . It happens, however, in biochemistry and some other areas of chemistry, it happens, though .
 The pattern message of chemistry was first noticed, not surprisingly, by the Gennan poet Johann Wolfgang von Goethe .
 Goethe was a great universalist in the sense that he, like Leonardo da Vinci, could freely breath the air of both sciences and humanities . Goethe could freely breathe the air in both science and humanities, he says .
 Statistical mechanics is a part of mathematical physics related to thennodynamics . But this assertion is also reminiscent of the language of statistical mechanics, which is related to statistical mechanics .
 A weak bond is more probable and a strong bond is less probable to break . A strong bond should be more likely to break than a weak bond, says the author .
 A superhero often takes a beating in a movie, but his final defeat is certainly improbable . The final defeat was certainly improbable in the film .
 "So far, we have only insisted that the configurations should be meaningful but we have not said anything about how much we believe in them," says the government . So far, the government has only said that they believe in the configurations .
 If we accept a configuration as regular, we ought to believe that it describes a situation which is at least possible in principle in principle . We should also believe that the configuration is a regular .
 That does not mean, however, that we think of it as necessarily true or even likely . That doesn't mean that it is necessarily true .
 In the natural sciences we can express evaluations of likelihood through probabilities for which there exists a centuries old and well established theory . The probability theory is based on a centuries-old theory of probability .
 The philosophical issues in probability theory are far from being resolved to everyone's satisfaction . But it nevertheless serves as an indispensable tool in the everyday practice of science .
 When it comes to social science and humanities it is less clear what the tenn ""likely"" should mean . Social science is not clear what it means .
 probabilities are fractions from 0 to 1 and can be estimated, at least in principle, by repeated observations . Let us see how probabilities are understood and operated in the natural sciences and technology .
 Say, "It rains in Providence, Rhode Island, on June 15. Say, we are interested in some event E, for example that it rains in Rhode Island on June 16. That event E is that it's June 15 .
 If we have access to observations of the weather for that day from several years, we just calculate the percentage of days that it rained and get some number, perhaps 17% or 0.17% . We just calculate how many days we have been in rain .
 This is an estimated probability and may have its uses when we decide on how to dress on the morning of June 15 this year . Then this is an estimate probability .
 Consider two particles, let us not specify what sort, just enumerate them as i and j, and let let Ey denote their combined energy . Let Ey denote the combined energy of two particles . Ey is Ey . Ey .
 Of course, it will depend upon their velocities, the distance between them as well as on other characteristics . The speed of the race will depend on the speed and distance of the vehicle .
 The energy values fit the already familiar square table of binary relations, similar to graphs, with the energy values written into the cells of the table instead of 0 and 1 .
 By varying i and j we run through all possible pairs of particles . Here i means any particle and j means any different particle . By varying j, j means a different particle, so that by varying i, j, we can run through any pairs .
 In such a case, it would be impractical or impossible to follow every particle as it moves through the container .
 The physicist is forced to give up the Laplacian determinism and take recourse to a statistical mode of thought, he writes .
 Starting with Boltzman and Gibbs, the discipline of statistical mechanics was developed and applied to an abundance of systems . The discipline has been applied to many of the world's systems .
 A remarkable relation between energy and probability permeates this theory . A remarkable and mysterious relation between . energy and probabilities permeates the theory .
 Systems prefer to be in states of low energy since they are the likely ones . Hence, systems prefer to stay in low energy states .
 Instead of energy, probability is universal and is equally applied to all systems—quantum, inanimate, alive, manmade, social, economical, and mental . If they satisfy certain conditions, they will be different from physical systems to mental .
 Opinion can be measured by a poll, and economic data is processed statistically . Thus, opinions on an issue can be gauged by an economic survey .
 The conditions require a large number of entities that can be different in a certain aspect, but otherwise probability is as object-blind as any number . The conditions need a lot of entities to be different .
 It was used to signify the ability of elements, such as sulfur and iron, to react vigorously with each other . The word was used in the 1920s and 1930s to signify a reaction between elements .
 Later it meant the ability to fonn a strong bond, and today it can still be found occasionally in the literature . Today it means to say 'yes' or 'no' and 'yes', and is still used today .
 For example, electron affinity is a term that has survived in chemistry and semiconductors . It means the energy released when an atom gains an electron .
 Speaking poetically, it is the measure of the atom’s love for the electron—some atoms love it, some hate it, and some are indifferent . Some atoms are indifferent to the electron, but some love it .
 History keeps records of many human affinities that greatly influenced the course of events . History keeps a record of how people influenced events in the past .
 The Russian Empress Catharine II and Prince Potemkin, Napoleon and Marie Walewska . Mary Stuart and Lord Bothwell were married to Prince Bothwell .
 Charles II and Nell Gwyn were not much elective, as well as Charles II, for example . Sometimes the historical affinities between the two monarchs were not as elective .
 Let us think of some recent affinities that are still fresh in memory but with all their emotional overtones are already history . Let us remember some of these affinements that are already past and are still relevant .
 Captain Hewitt has been eliminated from the picture of the World Cup final . The picture ends with the elimination of captain Hewitt from the competition .
 We would feel that the breakup would be very likely, while some other observer of English royalty might feel equally certain that the liaison would last the year out . We would also feel that some of the relationship would last a year or more .
 It can be done, for example, by a public poll, and in Chapter 26 we will return to this idea . In Chapter 26, we'll return to the idea of a poll of public opinion .
 The fact that two observers of the same event come to different conclusions is not troublesome by itself . That would actually make sense if they had access to different sources of information and hence operate within different knowledge domains .
 Few were prepared for the actual tragic end, although some could have prophesied even that . Yet few were prepared to see the end of the war .
 We still do not know how the stressed configuration is going to behave in the future but stage D remains an option . Stage D is still an option for the first time .
 The fleeting pattern in a young White House intem’s imagination influenced the actual dramatic events . ‘The fleeting pattern’ in the White House imagination influenced events,’ says historian John Sutter .
 Relationships in a family, however tangled, are not as complex as in large social systems . This is why their breakup can be mended, and this is why they can't be broken up .
 The important thing is that it would not be unreasonable to say, within one knowledge domain, that one outcome was very probable or not probable, or that one event was more likely than another . "The important thing to say is that the outcome is very probable," he says .
 In such a case, we do not attach numbers, percentages, to the probabilities, but make less precise statements . In such an instance, we don't attach numbers to the probability of certain things, but instead we attach probabilities .
 The system of school grades, before multiple choices had been introduced, was an example of an approximate measuring without any scale or gauge . The system was used in school grades before it was introduced .
 percentile scores could be used to rank objects without attaching an absolute value of something that has no objective means of measuring . Instead of absolute value, percentile scores should be used for ranking purposes .
 Percentile scores express the position of the value among other values . Percentile score is based on the relative relative value of a value per person .
 Quantitative history comprises mostly research based on statistics or converting one format of data into another . Currently, quantitative history comprises mainly research based upon statistics .
 The area per slave was usually five to six sq. ft., much lower than the eight square feet decreed by law . The calculations showed, to no surprise, that the area perslave was usually 5 to 6sq. ft.
 The actual purpose of Sorokin’s grandiose undertaking was to show that as long as the system of values within a society is clear and coherent, the society is in peace . Sorokin: As long as a society has a clear, coherent, it's in peace,
 This is why he needed a quantitative measure of social and international turbulence . This is the reason he needed to be measured in terms of social, international turbulence, he says .
 Sorokin’s approach to the modern period, the advent of which he witnessed before his death in 1968, we could probably say that we had a good chance of global peace, both international and social, because the whole world seemed to embrace the unifonn system of values
 "A remarkable personal story is as good a representation of history as painting, novel, or memoir" A remarkable personal . personal story can be as good as a . representation of . history .
 Antoine Lavoisier's life ended tragically in the death of the late French artist . The clash of the runaway history with the creative person with a creative person ended tragically . The death toll from the clash of history and creative person ends in tragic tragedy .
 Pitirim Sorokin, an active anti-Bolshevik during the Russian Revolution, was luckier . Sorokin was a member of the Communist Party in Russia, but he was lucky not to have suffered .
 He was committed to the prison at Veliki Ustyug and fully expected to be executed any day . He is expected to die any day, despite being committed to a prison in the country .
 Lenin was released on December 12, 1918, on direct orders from Lenin himself . He was released from prison on December 11, 1918 .
 Lenin had announced a major change in the government's policy concerning the intelligentsia . Lenin argued that it was important to gain the allegiance of the educated, especially those from the peasant strata who had turned against the new regime .
 The Communists should cease to persecute them, Lenin argued, and attempt to convert them into allies . Lenin argued that the Communists should stop persecuting them, and instead convert them to allies .
 It was in pursuance of that new directive that Sorokin was released and sent to Moscow . Sorokin has since been released from prison .
 It turned out that one of his former students, now a Commissar, had pleaded with members of Lenin's cabinet who knew him well . Lenin's former students pleaded with the members of his cabinet .
 Sorokin’s idea is a helpful illustration to our qualitative mathematics where the exact numbers do not matter . Notwithstanding sociological applications, Sorokin's idea is helpful illustration of our quantitative mathematics . The idea is an example of how quantitative mathematics can be used to make a point .
 Any two entries in the list have either MORE or LESS relation . What matters matters is that any two entries have more or less relation to each other .
 In the language of mathematics, the entries in Sorokin’s tables form partially ordered sets . Sorokin's tables are a table of partially ordered lists . The entries in the tables form partial orders .
 The mathematical notion that underlies this sort of reasoning is called a partially ordered set . It is a mathematical notion underlies the notion of a partially order set .
 For some pairs, however, we may be in doubt, because ‘size’ is somewhat subjective property . “Size” is a very subjective property, so we may not be able to say size .
 The result of our evaluation will be not a sequence of individual apples but a row of piles within which the differences are not observable . The result will be the result of an evaluation of the best apples in the apple tree .
 The largest piles will be in the middle, the smallest in the beginning and the end, conforming to the bell curve of natural distribution . The largest pile will be at the center of the largest piles .
 Let us generalize and consider the pattern, not the particular configuration in the examples . Now let us consider the patterns in the example examples .
 Then it seems sensible to ask for probabilistic evaluations. Then it's no longer seems sensible, asks for probablistic evaluations .
 It seems presumptuous to assume that we know so much about human nature that we can rationally evaluate or compare the likelihood of different events in such great generality .
 In our own endeavor we run the risk of trying to become too general, too allencompassing, and we shall continue with the caveat that our discussion be kept as concrete as possible . Actually, in our own endeavors we run a risk of becoming too general and too all-en
 We have offered only a very brief and superficial glimpse of how we can talk about the counterpart of the thermodynamic energy or bond strength as applied to patterns .
 We can summarize now the entire approach in the following recapitulation . We can sum up the approach with the help of the following .
 Equip generators with bonds in order that rules can be stated allowing some generators to be glued together . Equip generator with bonds .
 Define bond relation that will rule whether a combination is locally regular or not . Define a bond relation to a relationship that is local or not.
 Express the over all logical architecture, the global regularity, of the doctrine by a family of graphs, a connection type . Express the . over all . regularity of the . doctrine by using a family . graph type .
 The configuration space is the configuration space of all configurations that are both locally and globally regular . Formed the space of global configurations that can be used locally or globally .
 Applying similarity transformations to the configuration space, induce patterns to express the constants of the doctrine . Applying the similarity transformations, the doctrine was found to induce patterns .
 The last point means that we differentiate between more strong and less strong bonds or, to put it differently, between different degrees of affinity and repulsion . We differentiate between strong bonds and strong bonds, or between less strong ones .
 The remaining problem is how to reflect what people have in their minds with what they historically have been doing to each other, from self-sacrifice to royal scandals to wiping millions of people from the face of the earth .
 To approach this difficult subject of relation between human ideas and actions in a historical aspect, we need to pay more attention to the structure of energy itself . To approach the difficult subject, we must pay more .
 History is as much about actions as about thoughts that prompted people to act, historian says . History is more about actions than thoughts, not thoughts, it's about thoughts .
 In history of civilizations, simple ideas such as that there is only one God, the monarch can rule with the consent of people, or that all people are not only born equal but are equal, brought about major social transformations . Of course, sometimes we are irrational, act first, think
 A full range of views have been expressed in the literature on the relation between the hidden thoughts of the leaders and masses and their actions .
 The parallel between social sciences and chemistry is based on the somewhat superficial similarity between large ensembles of interacting but otherwise free molecules and large groups of interacting and partially free individuals . The social sciences are different from the social sciences to chemistry .
 Cognitions bound together in a complex latticework of social communication . Cognition is a social network of social networks .
 Chemistry turns to atoms for reductionist explanation . Sociology turns to psychology for the same reason. Sociology and chemistry turns to atomic physics for same reason as psychology .
 This is not a social structure but a network of cognitions, i.e., such mental units as idea, belief, opinion, knowledge, conviction, etc. This is the network of mental units such as idea and belief units . This is such as belief, belief and opinion,
 We suggested that the more information held about a complex or inclusive object, the more numerous and varied are the cross-referencing ties that organize it with respect to other cognitions . We also suggested that . the more . information held . about an object, we also suggested .
 These ties might be thought of as something like those that link balls in lattices, in models of the arrangement of atoms in complex molecules .
 He may quit for a week and then resume smoking for a couple of days, and so keep swinging between the two states, each of them giving only a short comfort . He may . keep swinging from one state to another state, each giving only short comfort.
 The relation of liking between a student, a teacher, and a certain object, fits one of eight configurations, two of which are shown in figure 21.2. For example, a student likes a teacher and a person who likes a certain thing, a person likes to be liked by
 It may not be quite clear why a student who likes the teacher, but not the object of liking, should feel any discomfort or why the student who dislikes both feels much better .
 The one-way relation of liking is not what we regard as positive bond couple but simply a link in a semantic network . The one way of liking has been described as a 'one-way relationship'
 In our language they all imply the varying stability of a configuration as function of the bond couples . The reason why we mention this class of theories is because in our language it all imply stability .
 We find in social psychology counterparts of many basic chemical ideas . Social psychology is similar to many of the chemical ideas, scientists say . We find that social psychology is a form of a chemical idea .
 atoms without a positive bond together can be immediately separated by molecular chaos . Chemists call them antibonding and non-bonding molecular orbitals (or molecular chaos)
 Consistency theories derive their name from the end states that individuals are presumably seeking to attain . Consistsency theories have their name in the name of consistency theories .
 When one looks at the antecedents of consistencies, however, then these theories are all conflict theories . When one . looks at antecedments of consistency, however . then these . theories are conflict theories, but when one looks . at them, they are not .
 All consistency theories have one basic conceptual property in common . They must invoke at least two elements that stand in opposition to each other . By that we must mean that all consistency theories must invoke two elements .
 Robert K Merton’s theory of net balance of a social system incorporates positive functions that keep the system together, dysfunctions that are counterproductive, and, most remarkably, nonfunctions which are irrelevant, probably, like a second spout would be in a kettle . We
 The degree of discomfort or frustration, F, is plotted against X, X, which is a non-numerical axis of progressing change . F is the degree of frustration or discomfort or discomfort, plotted against F .
 If we take one thousand smokers who want to quit and actively try it, then, probably, a significant part will achieve the goal . It depends on the relative degree of discomfort in both S and Q .
 The discomfort of Q is lower than that of S, as the diagram shows . It would mean that for them the discomfort is lower that that of Q, as well as S .
 T of such attempts over the population would give teacher, S student, O object, + like, dislike. us the actual heights of S and Q, quite useless in any individual case . Statistics over the individual over time would give another estimate of S. and Q .
 The process goes through the transition state of high discomfort D, where the two opposite ideas do not fit the same personal doctrine and are logically incompatible . The process is known as high discomfort .
 The degree of D may be so high, that some non-smokers will never try to smoke . Some smokers will never stop smoking and some smokers will not try to stop .
 If not for the intermediate state of a great discomfort D, the smoker would be able to quit immediately and as easily as to drop a match burning his fingers . D is a state of discomfort D .
 As soon as we smoker’s dilemma present thoughts as configurations, however, the parallel with chemistry becomes very close .
 The reverse transition from the smoke and ashes to the match is impossible . It must be struck, i.e., elevated to the transition state D .
 The diagram does not forbid it, but it would require immense scientific and technological efforts to recreate the match, not even exactly the same, from the smoke and ashes .
 As an example of social re-interpretation, S is the state of the British colonies in America before the revolution . Q is the British state after their independence . S is state of British colonies before revolution and Q is state after independence .
 It then entered a period of bloodshed, after which the energy was released and the independence established . The energy was then released, and the country's independence was established .
 It may seem now that the movement for independence had such a powerful momentum that the opposite route to the colonial state was impossible . It may now seem that the independence movement had such an overwhelming momentum that it was impossible to imagine the opposite .
 The similarity of the mind of the undecided Americans with the torments of a smoker is obvious, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 This time the pattern transformation , but not the vacillations of the mind, is observable . The pattern transformation is observable, but not in the mind .
 The history of the French people trying to quit their addiction to absolute monarchy is remarkably similar to the smoker’s behavior . While the colonists lost their doubts in one of one of their attempts, the history of French people is similar to that of the smokers .
 The long traditional split between the pro-westem and pro-Slavic gravitations of Russia can be followed from Catherine the Great to the present Russian Duma . Another example is the long tradition of a pro-Westem split between Russia and Slavic .
 If chemical configurations are regular in stable state, they become irregular in transition state . In pattern terms, if chemical configurations become irregular, they are irregular in the transition state.
 The transition state in chemistry is short-living— fractions of a millisecond . It is a short-lived state in the transition state of chemistry .
 Chemists can in many cases draw a rough sketch of its configuration, which is very different from the state of a chemical quietly sitting in ajar on a lab shelf . Nevertheless, chemists can still sketch the configuration of the chemical, which they say will be difficult to draw .
 Power struggle in the mind the same reaction and predict which one is more probable . Power struggle between the mind and the mind is more likely .
 SMOKING is both idea and behavior . While GOOD and BAD are ideas nowhere to be found in a physical fonn . SMoking is both an idea and a behavior .
 While the struggle with the pun is resolved with laughter, the predicament of a smoker or a split nation is by no means a joke .
 Cognitive dissonance means a presence of strong negative bonds in the unobservable transition configuration . In pattern terms, cognitive dissonance is a strong negative bond that is not observed .
 It is the hidden process of thinking that lies between the two observable actions. It is a hidden process, thinking, that lies in between the observable and observable actions .
 We, like chemists, can speculate on what people thought before acting . Yet we can speculate about what we think before acting.
 This kind of mental transition state is typical for wars and reforms, while the latter is more complex, protracted, and largely observable . The latter, more complex and protracted, is typically for revolutions, is typical of revolutions .
 The mood of the crowd or legislative assembly can also change dramatically through a transition state initiated by an eloquent speech or a charismatic act . A charismatic act can change the mood of a crowd or assembly assembly .
 Idea influences behavior and vice versa, often in very roundabout ways . Idea influence behavior, and vice vice versa . Idea and behavior can influence behavior and behavior .
 Only psychologists know how it happens, but historians are well aware of the result . Only psychologists can explain why it happens to happen .
 X Jldea Ideology Behavior zsi Social action lldeas Circumstances B Ideas and circumstances are the two ends of a stick . Social action is a key part of a social action strategy .
 If our ancestors believed that similar attracted similar, there could be something to it, it could be possible .
 The next question we want to pose is the key to the problem of interaction between thought and action from the pattern point of view . We want to ask if the next question is what is key to solving this problem?
 We have nothing to say about its psychological or physiological mechanism . We have no way encroach on the territories of hard sciences, says the scientist .
 One reed is easy to break, while a bunch of them can be strong enough to build a raft and travel over the ocean . A reed can be used to build rafts, but it can also be used in rafts that travel over ocean .
 mediation of an international dispute is good for strengthening ties between the sides because it adds another tie . Mediation of a dispute can strengthen ties between two sides, experts say . Among historical examples, mediation of international dispute has been successful in the past .
 All this could be interpreted in tenns of probability as well as energy . All this is interpreted in probabilities and energy .
 Configuration M has internal stress, it is not too probable, and its energy is high . Configuration M, in other words, has internal stresses, it's not too likely, and it's high energy .
 Next, we want to compare this picture to something very much alike in chemistry . The picture was taken in the same way as something very similar in chemistry.
 We have to emphasize, however, that we do not derive our vision of history either from chemistry or from mathematics . We must emphasize that we don't derive history from chemistry, mathematics .
 If both history and chemistry look similar as points and lines, it's because we illuminate them with the same light of pattern theory . History and chemistry are similar to pattern theory, says John Defterios .
 Both cucumbers and oranges are red in the red light or blue in the blue light and all the cats are gray at night . All the cats in the book are gray in the night .
 After the bond has been fonned, the catalyst can disengage and be available for another pair A and B . Its role can be compared with a clergyman who performs the marriage ritual on many couples .
 A chemist may not notice a contradiction in the previous paragraph because it is visible only in the pattern light . A chemist might not notice that a contradiction is visible in the light of a pattern light.
 If A and B are capable of forming a regular positive bond, it means that the probability of the bond is already high and it can hardly be increased by the catalyst . The probability of a bond being formed by a catalyst is already very high, so the catalyst cannot be increased .
 For the same token, a couple who wants to marry will do it anyway even without the religious ritual . For those who want to marry, it's not a matter of religious ritual, it is not a religious ceremony .
 It is based on the properties of physical energy, which follows from properties of the physical space very distinct from the “historical” space .
 Chemical particles can form connection only if they are at a close enough distance D and are oriented toward each other in a favorable for connection way . Chemical particles must be at a near enough distance to form connection D .
 The catalyst holds the particles together at a distance close enough to fonn the connection and at a favorable orientation . It also increases the overall probability of the bonding .
 The transition state, which is the complex of the catalyst with both A and B, has a lower energy than the transition state in the absence of a catalyst . More precisely, in terms of energy, in . terms of . energy, the . transition state is the . complex complex of
 Obviously, a catalyst that contributes a negative bond increases the transition barrier and is called inhibitor . Obviously, the catalyst contributes a . negative bond . increases the . transition barrier .
 In the world of generators, we cannot draw too close parallels with the physical world because the abstract configuration space has no metrics and no physics . The world of generator generators is a world of no metrics, no physics and no physical world .
 All we can say about positive bonds is that the bonded state has a lower energy than the non-bonded one . The bonded state's energy is lower than the state's in the state of the other .
 The configuration of disconnected A, B, and Catalyst, therefore, has a higher energy than A-Catalyst-B, and the final triangle is even more stable .
 The question is how C can get out of the picture after it has done its job . The chemical explanation involves the concept of equilibrium .
 In most historical cases, it simply fades away due to the non-conservative properties of the pattern world . It becomes irrelevant, is forgotten, or is overridden by a new, more powerful catalyst .
 While matter and energy are always preserved, information is not, information in general is not . Information is preserved in the digital age of information preservation .
 There is yet another important difference between the physical and pattern world . There is a difference in the physical world and the pattern world.
 In chemical events, the rate of the transformation from S to Q depends on the height of the barrier D . The final result --equilibrium --depends on the difference between energies S and Q . If Q were much above S, then there would be no stimulus to quit smoking,
 This is almost always true in chemistry, but never true in life and society where all the processes are irreversible in the sense that the return to the preceding state is impossible . This is not true in society and society, but in chemistry . The return to a previous state of the previous state
 Transition pathways for direct and reverse transformation are usually different . Even if it seems that history makes a step back, the transition pathways are often different .
 The counterrevolution is never the videotape of the revolution run backwards, says George W. Bush . Bush: "The counterrevolution never happens to be the videotaped revolution run backwards"
 The best source for explanation of the difference between classical and non-equilibrium thennodynamics, physical world and the world of life, can be found in books by Ilya Prigogine .
 The almost millennium old monarchy in France was overthrown by the bloody revolution of 1789-1799 . The revolution overthrown the almost millennium-old monarchy .
 Napoleon Bonaparte simply proclaimed himself an emperor in 1804, and the new monarchy was approved by popular vote, not by another revolution or counterrevolution . The new monarchies were approved by the popular vote .
 Monarchy restored by allies in 1814 after the military defeat of Napoleon . Monarchy was restored by the allies in the aftermath of Napoleon's defeat in France .
 Louis XVIII, a brother of the executed king, was theoretically a monarch as absolute as Louis XVI . However, major accomplishments of both the revolution and Napoleon were preserved .
 The new revolution of 1848 overthrew Louis-Philippe, but the popular vote elected Napoleon’s nephew who in 1851 proclaimed himself emperor . In 1851, through a bloody coup d’etat, he proclaimed himself Emperor Napoleon .
 In 1870, after the insurrection in the besieged by the Gennans Paris, in view of a military defeat, the provisional republic was restored . The provisional republic of the French Republic was restored in 1870 .
 We return to swinging between monarchy and republic through transition states of war and revolt in Chapter 23 . We will return to the above record .
 A similar roller coaster could be appropriate to characterize Israeli-Arab and US-Soviet relations, the swings between reaction and progress in Russian and Latin-American histories, and the history of internal American politics .
 In chemistry, most reacting molecules do not reach the energy of the transition state . Most reacting molecules don't reach energy of a transition state, scientists say . The reaction state is a state of energy, not energy, in chemistry .
 Only a part rolls over it to the final state, while the rest falls back and then tries to climb back . Among those that do, only a part roll over it, while others fall back .
 Most important, we see history as a natural process based on the same foundations as the material world . Most important is that history is not about the material, but about the history itself .
 Chemical events in a living cell remind the real roller coaster of an amusement park . Chemical events are in the cells of a living cells .
 In the biochemical version of the roller coaster, the energy of food or light brings molecules to the upper level, from which they roll down through a series of smaller bumps . Food or light bring molecules to a higher level of energy, from where they roll .
 On a larger scale, the turnover of matter repeats in the entire biosphere . The turnover in the biosphere repeats in every biosphere, scientists say .
 In history, unlike the amusement park, there is no return to the previous point, and one cannot have a second ride . History is not over, but history is over and over .
 It was the deep mistrust of republicanism in France, as well as the memory of the imperial glory of Napoleon, that made the road of history so bumpy for France . The jolts reverberated throughout Europe, reverberating throughout Europe .
 The role of the catalyst in this framework is to decrease the free energy (discomfort, agitation, tumult) of the transition state, i.e., to lower the barrier between the start and finish . The catalyst is the catalyst to decrease free energy, agitation and tumult in the transition
 The social catalyst, for example, propaganda, works globally over the entire society . Propaganda is a social catalyst that works globally, says the author .
 This is a cardinal distinction and we still have no satisfactory social thennodynamics . This is the case for the first time in a long-term society .
 All mechanical and infonnational tools fit this pattern, too, too . Enhance a transformation without changing itself .
 They play the same role in evolution of society as enzymes do in the evolution of life, scientists say . They play a similar role in society's evolution as enzymes .
 'What is reversible to a certain extent is the transformation of patterns,' says the author of the book . "What's reversible is the ... the transformation in patterns," he says .
 The rise and decline of culture, democracy and despotism, hot war, cold war, trade war, code of law, nihilism, separatism, cooperation, etc., may be reversible . While the overall complex configuration of society can never be restored, partial social patterns, such
 Wade, affirmative action, capitalism and socialism in Russia in Russia, nationalization and privatization of industry in Europe, etc. etc. The author also discusses the role of capitalism and capitalism in Russia .
 The reason for the frustration of the smoker is that both struggling sides --GOOD and BAD --are of an equal or close strength . "Good and bad" are of equal strength, says the smoker .
 Action toward the most stable state would quickly follow. Be it otherwise, action toward the best stable state .
 There is also the antagonistic influence of pleasure, which comes not from any idea but from the act of smoking . Pleasure comes from smoking, not from an idea, but from smoking .
 The upper part of the drawing symbolizes the shift of balance that triggers the action . This picture portrays the transition state displaying inside the smoker’s mind, and the lower part symbolizes a shift .
 As soon as the balance is shifted, frustration eases and action follows . As soon after the balance of the balance eases, action follows, says CNN.com .
 The following example illustrates the ways of decreasing the frustration of he transitional state in decision-making . The following is an example of how to decrease the frustration .
 It is probably difficult for him to convince himself that either his pacifist attitude or his act of joining the Marines is unimportant .
 He may join the Marines as a way of defending his country and the free world . He may decide that joining the Marines is a defense of his country .
 This belief is consonant with the act of joining and would educe the total amount of dissonance in the situation . This belief would have led to a total lack of cognitive dissonance .
 If he has been offered a bonus of $10,000, special training in electronics, and a high rank, these also are good reasons for joining . These also are consonant with the behavior of a soldier, says CNN's John Sutter .
 His act is still inconsistent with his belief in pacifism, but the total amount of dissonance he feels is reduced . His act still inconsistent, but he says it's still consistent with his pacifism .
 "When he discovers that the car is uncomfortable, he experiences dissonance," he says . When he discovers he is uncomfortable in the car, he experienced dissonance .
 The car handles extremely well, is economical, and attractive, these consonant elements reduce the amount of dissonance he feels . If the car handles well, it is economical and attractive it reduces the dissonance .
 What is going in somebody’s mind is as much hidden from us as the transition state of a chemical reaction . What's going in someone's mind is still hidden from the public eye, he says .
 The information about the lung cancer or artery constriction plays its role and is not needed after the stable state is achieved . The information is not necessary to diagnose lung cancer .
 Like the promise of a politician, it can't be easily forgotten after the election . Like a politician's promise, it's easily forgotten .
 This pattern is very general and applies to any decision making, including political decisions, effects of propaganda, change of allegiance, voting and consumption patterns, etc.
 We would like to emphasize the ability of pattern approach to see how the li nk s between generators transcend borders between ideas, actions, and circumstances .
 This is crucial for history where invisible acts of mind are as important as the movements of people, new institutions, and even the atmospheric extremes . The Invisible Acts of Mind are important for history, says historian .
 French Revolution was neither planned nor started by a single mind . Russian revolution, Nazi aggression, and modern terrorism were strongly personalized . Modern terrorism was strongly personalized, says author .
 The decisions of the leaders are still a powerful factor of history, but they can be shifted by the catalytic effect of events that are insignificant on the historical scale . The leader's decisions are still powerful factors of history .
 "We cannot dwell here on the relation between probability and infonnation," says the author of the book . We cannot dwell on the fact that probability is probability .
 We will touch only upon the definitive property of information to change the probabilities of events . The probability of events will not change the probability of an event taking place in the future .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots of vacation destinations for next week's featured travel destinations .
 Trips to Yellowstone Park, Grand Canyon, Florida, and Alaska are being considered as options . Alaska, Florida and Alaska also being considered .
 The opinions of parents and children are split and the debates are hot . Parents and children share their views of the world's first child .
 The family has decided to toss a coin when a TV news report about the Yellowstone fire comes on . The Yellowstone fire is currently burning in Yellowstone National Park .
 The bit of information that changed the outcome of the discussion worked only once, once, in the end of the debate .
 For a couple weeks, the media keep reporting on the fire, but there is no relevant information because information, by definition, can only be new . For a few weeks, there will be no new information because it is new .
 Paul Goebbels, Hitler’s Minister for propaganda and national enlightenment, believed that a lie repeated many times would become truth . He believed that repeated lies would lead to truth .
 It seems to contradict our thesis that the repetition of a statement does not add any information, it seems to contradicts our thesis . The repetition of such a statement doesn't add to any information .
 The effectiveness of totalitarian propaganda, however, is increased by the absence of alternative and conflicting information which otherwise would shift the trust into the propaganda, says the author .
 This is why in the Orwellian world the sources of information and history in particular had to be constantly rewritten . This is the reason why in Orwellian society, history is constantly rewritten. This is because of the need to constantly change the facts .
 In Soviet Russia, even the historical photos in archives had to be reworked after the next purge . Even the photos were re-worked after they were found in archives .
 If we believe that the probability of the stock market rising next day is over 0.5, the information about a high-scale terrorist attack brings it down close to zero . The probability of a stock market rise is less likely than a terrorist attack, the authors say .
 The information about the bombing the Chinese Embassy in Belgrade or landing an American spy plane in China drastically decreases this probability . If we expect the improvement of US-China relations within two months, the information suggests this is less likely .
 It all translates into the energies of the corresponding bond couples in the configuration of international relations . The energy of the bond couples is also reflected in the structure of the world's relations .
 If there are good reasons for the improvement of US-China of U.S.-China relations, they will be improved sooner or later, says CNN's John Defterios . US-Russia relations will improve, he says .
 The ideas of the French philosophes existed before as well as after the Revolution . The French philosopher's ideas existed before and after the French Revolution .
 The birth of the royal infant was a catalyst that was thrown into the historical test tube, but then was eliminated from it . Taking the example of Glorious Revolution, the birth of a royal infant is a catalyst for the revolution .
 Social psychology helps us join two spans of the pattern bridge, from chemistry to human actions and further to historical transformations . But it does it very differently from reductionism .
 We completely omit genetics, physiology, . physiology, brain chemistry, geography, geography and geography, and economics . We also omit .
 Nothing can substitute for reductionism as the hard scientific explanation . Nothing can replace reductionism with reductionism, the author says .
 It only means that along with the theory of chaos and emergence of order, there is an additional angle of view, the mathematical one, which humanities have been trying to bite anyway . The humanities have bitten anyway, it only means .
 This book may or may not be such catalyst, but the authors hope it will . The authors hope that the book will be a catalyst for the future .
 In the next chapters, we will approach some large historical events and institutions as patterns . We will look at some of these patterns in the next chapter .
 A protracted modem war is in itself a transition state from the pre-war to post-war state . A protracted war is the transition state of the modem war, a transition of war is itself .
 WW1 was a transition state from the self-confident pre-war Europe to the weak and disillusioned postwar one . WW1 is natural to regard WW1 as the transition state between the two sides of Europe .
 The period from WW 1 to WW2 is a transition period from the ‘age of innocence’ to the nuclear age . On the other hand, the entire period between WW 1 and WW2 was a transitional period . The entire period is transition period between the “age of
 In this chapter we are interested not in the course of war but in the transition state from peace to war . This is similar to our experiment with the Great Northern War in Chapter 19 . In Chapter 19, we will try to understand the transition between war and war .
 WW 1 is a classical example of a complex and still debated maze of motives and reasons for its outbreak . WW 1 was a classic example of an attempt to explain the origins of the outbreak of WW 1 .
 The concept of transition state as applied to history is very relativistic . The concept is very relativistic and the transition state is very much more relattistic .
 "We have some reasons to regard the entire history, unlike any chemical reaction, as a transition state to yet unknown future," he says .
 Transition state is anything that happens between two stable states about which we have sufficient infonnation . Here by transition state we mean anything we have to do is transition between stable states and stable states .
 In practical tenns, transition state is a quickly changing and somewhat fuzzy situation where developments can take various directions, and the overall instability is in the air . Transition state is the state of the transition state .
 It is essential that the transition state requires an increase of energy called stress or tension, which is difficult to measure quantitatively . The transition state is essential for the transition to a state of tension, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 In Chapter 26, Chaos-order, heat-cold we will discuss how it might be done . Chapter 26: Chaos-ordered chaos-order is possible .
 Industrial Revolution was transition state between steady states before and after having all mineral fuel of the earth burned up . Industrial Revolution is transition state of transition between steady state and steady state of burning up .
 The First World War was the beginning of a dramatic transformation of the world into a global civilization . The conflict was the conflict that signaled the start of the global revolution in 1914 .
 The globalization of the world went on for the entire twentieth century in the areas of military strategy, transportation, communication, politics, ideology, economics, and culture . The globalization went on in the  19th century in many ways .
 We understand globalization not as unification as unification but as the constant decline of the geographic factor, i.e., speaking mathematically, reduction of the topology of international relations to full graph . iReporter: "We understand globalization as unification, but as a constant decline in the geographic
 The Internet is the topology of the Internet, where anybody can connect to anybody . Speaking technically, it is the . topology . of the internet where anybody . can connect . anybody . anybody.
 All or almost all nations are neighbors and have direct access to each other, regardless of distance and fonner spheres of influence . It simply means that all—or almost all—nations are neighbors .
 War is a process running along with its own regularity, very much pre-determined by the initial conditions, like a candle . The quantity of heat and light energy obtained from a candle is detennined by its size and shape . War is not a war, but a war
 The outcome of the American Civil War was in agreement with the larger resources of the North . Thus, the outcome was agreed with the North's larger resources .
 There is always room for chance, as in any game, for error and good luck, but in big and protracted processes it is rarely significant . In big and long-running processes, chances are rarely significant in the Premier League .
 The contemporary perception of initial conditions, as well as all subsequent developments, strongly depend on the bias of the sides . Any consensus is possible only after the conflict is over, says author .
 Contrary to popular belief, history is made by historians, not by people like you and we . History will be made by the historians, and not by us, says historian .
 After WW2, in a new kind of war with politicized ends and means, resources do not matter anymore, and the very notion of victory and defeat becomes ambiguous . In a new sort of war, resources are no longer important anymore .
 Examples of major powers in Vietnam, Afghanistan, Chechnya, Persian Gulf, and Serbia . Examples are wars of major power in Vietnam and Afghanistan .
 Historians usually note the spirit of doom and tension in Europe on the eve of WW1, like heavy clouds before a thunderstorm . Historians say the atmosphere of the 1914-1919 conflict in Europe was ominous .
 If we compare the accounts of contemporary and later historians, the former are inclined to see the war as inevitable . The former is inclined to think the war was inevitable, the historian says .
 For obvious reasons, they were tempted to judge the sides in terms of guilt and responsibility, often influenced by the preexisting nationalistic penchant . The jury was drawn on the sides of the two sides, and the jury was unanimous .
 Later historians might be influenced by new geopolitical antagonisms . The view of later historians might also be influenced .
 Any dominant point of view in humanities sooner or later generates a dissident opinion . Any dominant view of humanities sooner than later generates dissident opinions, says John Sutter .
 In his book Why Nations Go To War, John G Stoessinger, denies the historical fatalism surrounding the perception of wars, and especially WW1 . Stoessingers denies the fatalism of the perception that wars will end in war .
 Austrian Crown Prince was murdered by a Serbian nationalist in 1918 . Serbian nationalist killed him in 1918, Austria's Crown Prince died in 1918 after a war broke out .
 He is most interested in the transition from the state of peace to the states of war . He is also interested in transition between peace and war .
 His main theme is how self-image and the perception of the adversary push the sides to a conflict, only to be changed by new facts . The main theme of the book is self-images and perceptions of the adversaries .
 The gap between things “as they are” and their perception is a millennium old philosophical problem . The gap is a mile wide and a million years old .
 It has been also an issue in mathematical logic, a study of a mathematical formalization of reasoning .
 Tarski had shown how the notion of 'truth' as being applicable to statements that correspond to facts could be saved by speaking of both statements and facts in a metalanguage .
 This metalanguage, however, is not available to the sides of the conflict . The metalanguage is not known to either side of the war .
 Creating the United Nations has been an attempt to use such a political Esperanto . Creating the U.N. has been a political effort to create the world's most powerful body of power .
 It can probably be developed only by a historian who is not personally involved in the conflict or its aftermath . It can't be developed by anyone personally involved with the conflict .
 Until the full story is known, we cannot understand it, as we saw on the example of the smoker, is not enough . Understanding alone, as well as understanding alone, not enough is needed to understand .
 Even if we understand that smoking is harmful and the casino always wins in the end, we may engage in smoking and gambling for irrational reasons . Vilfredo Pareto called residues.
 In tenns of energy, the initial pre-war state of Europe was clearly stressed, so that the relative height of the transition barrier did not seem too high . The transition barrier was not too high, but it was not very high .
 There was no reason to fear the next one more than any of the previous ones. Concerning the transition state, war has always been essential part of European history, and there was no need to fear it more than the previous one .
 The wars always ended with peace, the fields were somehow tilled, and the stock of cannon fodder somehow replenished by the European women . The European women's role in Europe's wars ended in peace, but ended up being the most successful .
 The stress of the pre-war situation was a result of the preceding formation of the united and powerful Gennany, united but not strong enough Italy, diminished Austria-Hungary, and weak Ottoman Turkey . The stress was the result of a united but weak Italy, weakened Austria-
 The last big European war was fought between France and Prussia in 1870-1871 . It ended with the fonnation of united Germany .
 The balance of power was shifted as a result of the Franco-Prussian war, 1870-1871 . The balance was shifted in the wake of the war between Germany and Germany .
 Germany claimed superiority in Europe and the world, which the Communist Russia claimed later . America apparently does at present, and China is a promising candidate to claim it in the future .
 The chain of events culminating in the transformation of Gennany and her claim for dominance is fascinating in itself, but cannot be considered here . The chain-of-the-events is fascinating, but can't be considered .
 WW1 was the first big war after the technical revolution, with high concentration of destructive power, mobility, and momentary communications . The war was the most destructive war in the world after the technological revolution .
 For the first time the military technology included chemical warfare, automobiles, tanks, submarines, airplanes, and telephone on the mass scale . The first time chemical warfare was used on a mass scale, it included cars, tanks and airplanes .
 A layer of professionals was firmly positioned between the masses and the leaders whose white horses were reserved for parades . The white horses are reserved for the parades.
 The ideological arsenal included monarchy, nationalism, ambitions of world power, Slavic solidarity . All still alive and well one hundred years later, with monarchy in the form of authoritarian rule .
 There was a strong network of positive bonds in Europe based on historical, cultural, and dynastic links . There were strong links between Europe and the Middle East .
 Old cultural links between Russia and France survived Napoleon’s invasion and the Crimean war . Financial links strengthened by financial links, while Germany and England were clinched in global rivalry .
 Kaiser was of a mixed Danish and Russian royal descent . King Charles of Rumania was Kaiser’s relative, wife of Greek King Constantine was his sister . King Constantine of Greece was Kaiser's sister .
 Alexandra, widow of Edward VII, was from Schleswig-Holstein, annexed by Germany . Alexandra was the queen of Germany, who died in 1903 .
 Frederick of Denmark and King George of Greece were brothers of Edward’s wife Queen Alexandra . Frederick and George of Denmark were brothers . Queen Alexandra was Queen of Denmark .
 King Ferdinand of Bulgaria was a prince of the house of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha . He was born in Vienna and died in 17th century .
 Czarina, bom Alix of Hesse-Darmstadt, was Gennan princess and Edward’s other niece . Alix was Alix, the daughter of Edward's other niece, who was born in Hesse Darmstadt .
 Europe has climbed into a metastable state, writes CNN's John Sutter . Europe has become a cancer-stricken state, he says .
 The speed with which events followed was, likely, due to the long advanced planning of the war, the clear intent, and the high impetus of imperialist expansion . The speed of the events followed is likely to be the result of the long-planned planning and clear intent .
 As a new factor, the nationalist tension could be quickly raised by propaganda spread by the newspapers . The nationalist tensions could be raised by the papers' propaganda .
 High-speed communication via telegraph, telephone and emerging radio allowed for fast exchange of information so that events could trigger each other like chain reaction . Events could be triggered by events like chain reactions .
 The factor of speed, probably, probably played an important role in preventing the gradual dissipation of energy . The speed of speed probably played a major role in stopping the process .
 The stress was released as mass hysteria and destructive power of explosives . Instead, it was released by mass hysteria .
 William II and Nicholas II exchanged telegrams after the Serbian crisis, trying to find a way to prevent the total war . William and Nicholas tried to prevent total war after the crisis in Serbia .
 The telegrams show a clear intent to stop the thrown stone right in its flight . With the differences between the rational, focused, matter-offact William and the emotional, wimpy Nicholas .
 Peter's Court Palais, 29 July 1914 . Sa Majeste l'Empereur Neues Palais am glad you are back. Am glad to see you back.
 I foresee that very soon I shall be overwhelmed by the pressure forced upon me and be forced to take extreme measures which will lead to war . I foresee . very soon . soon I will be overwhelmed with the pressure . and be . forced to . take extreme steps which will . lead to
 I beg you in the name of our old friendship to do what you can to stop your allies from going too far . To try and avoid such a calamity as a European war, I beg .
 July 1914 I received your telegram and share your wish that peace should be maintained. July 1914 . July 1914 was the first time I received a telegram from the U.S. President .
 I cannot consider Austria's action against Servia an ""ignoble"" war. But as I told you in my first telegram, I cannot . consider Austria’s action against . Servia . Austria's attack on Servia was not an "ignobly" war
 Austria knows by experience that Servian promises on paper are wholly unreliable . Austria has had to rely heavily on Servian's promises of promises of paper . Austria knows it is not easy to rely on paper promises .
 I understand its action must be judged as trending to get full guarantee that the Servian promises shall become real facts . I understand that its action is judged as . trending . It is not a guarantee that it will become .
 Austria does not want to make any territorial conquests at the expense of Servia . This my reasoning is borne out by the statement of the Austrian cabinet that Austria doesn't want to . Austria wants to protect Servia from further conquests .
 Russia would be looked upon by Austria as a calamity we both wish to avoid and jeopardize my position as mediator which I readily accepted on your appeal to my friendship and my help . Of course military measures on the part of Russia would not look upon Austria . Austria would be looking
 We can only hypothesize that the fast exchange of messages created an amplification instead of relaxation, like the positive feedback in a microphone . Willy Willy .
 With every mobilization, energy goes up because a mobilized army is like a compressed spring, says President Obama . With every mobilized army, energy increases, says Obama .
 It seems that Russia entered the war exclusively for sentimental, humanitarian, and ideological reasons . Russia's entry into the war was for sentimental and humanitarian reasons, the Russian president says .
 Kaiser asked Moltke to stop the movement of the troops toward France . There was a moment when Kaiser asked for the troops to be stopped .
 Moltke refused to reverse 11,000 trains and direct them against Russia . He said he would not reverse the trains, direct them to Russia .
 General von Staab, the chief of the German Railway Division, wrote a book after the war proving that it could have been done . The book was published by the German railway division after the end of WWII .
 It is much more difficult to reverse several actions simultaneously. Besides, it is much harder to reverse the actions of several people simultaneously .
 Confrontations between a statesman and a general were typical in the breaking war . Confrontation between statesmen and generals was typical in this war .
 The French Commander in chief Joseph Joffre refused to follow the attempt of French Premier Rene Viviani to stop the war by unilateral retreat . The French commander in chief refused to retreat .
 The American defeat in Vietnam had the same imprinting effect on the subsequent U.S. military strategy . Similarly, the loss in Vietnam also imprinted the subsequent United States military strategy, the author says .
 Franz Ferdinand, the Austrian Crown Prince, was assassinated by a Serbian nationalist . Assasination of Franz Ferdinand by Serbian nationalist. Franz Ferdinand .
 German Pledge of Niebelungtreue support,e.e. unconditional obligation of support to Austria, is a pledge of support .
 Serbian response, rejected in less than 30 minutes, and, probably, misread, probably misread . Serbian response to Serbian response was rejected in 30 minutes . Serbia's response to the U.S. request for a visit to Serbia was rejected by the Serbian government .
 Kaiser reads Serbian response, is satisfied, and attempts to restrain Austria . Kaiser reads the Serbian response and is satisfied . Kaiser is satisfied with the response . Kaiser tries to calm down Austria .
 In contrast with the lively Willy-Nicky correspondence, we shall try to represent some aspects of the transition to WW1 in the language of patterns .
 "The entire conflict flares up because of internal stress created by accumulation of attraction and repulsion," says the film star .
 Seen with an eye of a chemist, it could be taken for a transfonnation of a geopolitical molecule . Seen with a chemist's eye, the molecule could be seen as a geopolitical weapon .
 The double arrows signify negative relations, the solid and broken lines symbolize positive and neutral bonds correspondingly . The opposing arrows mean the state of war .
 The murder in Sarajevo destabilized the situation due to its catalytic effect . The murder was a catalyst for destabilizing the situation in the country .
 We attribute it to Serbia and mark by a star, although it happened on the territory of Austria-Hungary . We attribute the incident to Serbia, but it is not Serbia . We mark by the star .
 The shots shift the balance of indecision toward clear division into friends and enemies . The shots shifted the balance from indecision to clear division between friends, enemies .
 The barrier between peace and war was high because there was no strong immediate motive to start a war . The barrier is high because of there being no strong current motive for war, the author says .
 An act of an individual, although directed against a prominent figure, was physically (not ethically) insignificant in itself, as compared with all the physical energy and millions of lives wasted during the subsequent war . The act was physically insignificant, but not ethically, in itself .
 "This act, however, strengthened the negative links in the configuration of mutual perceptions," says the author of the book . This act strengthened the relationship between the two countries, he says .
 It is my conviction that, during the descent into the abyss, the perceptions of statesmen and generals were absolutely crucial, for the sake of clarity and precision . A leader’s perception of himself, his perceptions of his adversary’�s character . His perceptions of the adversary
 All the participants suffered from greater or lesser distortions of their images of themselves . The participants were asked to fill in on a questionnaire to find out how they felt .
 They tended to see themselves honorable, virtuous, and pure, and the adversary as diabolical . The adversary was diabolically evil .
 The leaders of Austria-Hungary probably provide the best illustration of this . Austria-Austria was one of the world's most powerful statesmen .
 Berchtold and von Hotzendorff perceived their country as the bastion of European civilization . The two men saw the country as an example of European civilisation .
 The possibility of losing prestige and of sinking to the status of a second-class power was anathema to Austrian leaders . Austrian leaders were concerned about losing prestige .
 They perceived as essential the need for a firm and fearless stand that, in their minds, would make a potential enemy back down . Hence, they perceived as . essential the . need for an essential stand .
 We could show all that by building more detailed configurations for all the participant nations, like we did it for the Great Northern War, but we already know that decisive events are always local . We could . show that by . building a more detailed configuration for each nation, like . we did
 We use the names of the countries as labels of generators in our diagrams . The names of each country are used as labels for generators .
 Strictly speaking, we cannot substitute terms Gennany, Austria, and Russia for the paranoid attitude of Kaiser Wilhelm to the Slavic people . Kaiser Wilhelm's paranoid attitude to Slavs, German and Austrian contempt for Russia’s military power, Austrian demonization of Serbs
 All three monarchies were authoritarian monarchies with voiceless masses . Not accidentally, all three were dictatorships with a voiceless majority .
 Our labels for the generators in the configuration do not identify the leaders with the people but simply reflect our distance from the detail . We are happy to clarify that they are not the leaders of the people, but the people of the country .
 Montegu-Capulet-Romeo-Juliet rectangle in configuration 2. Interestingly, we can see the ominous Montegu and Capulet rectangle . In configuration 2, the rectangle is the same shape as the Montegu, Capulet and Juliet .
 The instability of a single person made Russia and Germany active, instead of passive, enemies . The conflict between Austria and Serbia might not have violated the peace for many years, but the instability of one person made it worse .
 This is the typical irregularity of the transition state reconciling opposite forces . The transition state is reconciled by opposite forces, say scientists .
 We associate the pre-war hysteria with the rising temperature, and, therefore, high rate of chaos and impulsive decisions made in the heat of the moment . We associate it with the rise of the temperature and the chaos caused by it .
 At the same time, the invisible walls of the transition became lower because the new information made guns even more appealing . The terrorist act of a Serb . made guns seem more appealing.
 People make decisions in many ways, but most often they are driven by the image of themselves enjoying the result of their actions . Most often people make decisions based on image of enjoying their actions, rather than enjoying the results .
 Next the neutral bonds within Entente become positive because of the activated treaties . The neutral bonds between Entente and the West will become positive .
 The black wedges symbolize the big split and the state of war in the Eastern part of Europe and the following war on the western front . They symbolize a big split in Europe .
 In configuration 6, Russia withdraws from the war as result of the October Revolution . Russia withdraw from the conflict in configuration 6 . Russia withdrew from the Soviet Union in configuration 5 .
 The barrier to the revolution was lowered by the war and the information about Russian defeats, the historian says . The revolution was a success in Russia, but it was not until the end of WWII .
 The Bolsheviks lowered the transition state further by the promise of the peace and prosperity, but the Russian Revolution is a different story . The Russian Revolution was a very different state of transition state .
 The narratives, however, are different for all conflicts on earth, while the patterns are much more general . The narratives of all conflicts are different, but they are very general .
 The interpretation of the transition state as the final state perceived by the sides of the conflict is, probably, not too original either . It is not the first time a transition state has been interpreted as a final state in the conflict .
 It lies within the boundaries of social psychology, and theory of cognitive dissonance, in particular . The study was published by the University of Cambridge in 2010 .
 WW2 was the first war of modem times fought over ideology, not just the spoils of war or mutual misperception . The war was fought over ideologies, not spoils or misperceptions, it was over ideology .
 It was not the first time abstract ideas were moving people toward war . In earlier times it was about religion, as in the Crusades of the eleventh and twelfth centuries . It was also about religion .
 More than any other modem war, WW2 was triggered by a single-minded decision . WW2 triggered by the decision of the U.S. President Roosevelt .
 The potential barrier on the way to war was much higher than for the Fiihrer . William L Shirer in The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich lists many cases of the opposition, sometimes effective, of Hitler’s generals .
 We still do not know how much of the Nazi drive toward WW2 could be attributed to the paranoia of Hitler and how much to cold calculation . Hitler's paranoia was likely to be behind the decision to go to WW2 .
 "As we have said many times, our goal is not the factual truth but a possible vehicle to reach it," says CNN.com.com . "We are trying to reach the truth, not the truth but the possibility of reaching it," she says .
 We are tempted to characterize Hitler’s imagination as inflamed, but his pattern temperature was below freezing point . Hitler's imagination was less inflamed than that of his imagination .
 Hitler was bom in 1889 and wrote his Mein Kampf in 1925 as a program that he followed till his end with a remarkable rigidity and consistency . Hitler followed his program until his death in 1925 and died in 1945 .
 He regarded Russia as the direction of expansion, and this mental configuration finally pushed him against his own doppelganger Stalin . Despite warnings of history, he pushed against Stalin .
 The pattern of the absolute dictator in this transitional period of European history was fatally complemented by the pattern of totalitarian structure of society, giving the dictator a historically unprecedented power .
 The concepts of victory and defeat are linked as all polar opposites . The vision of the German defeat in WW1, which greatly depressed Hitler, activated the easily imaginable image of victory . Hitler's image of winning was activated by the image of defeat .
 If it is possible to lose the modem war (which means somebody’s victory), than it is also possible to win it . If you lose modem war, you can still win it, says John Defterios .
 The image of victory was a promise to restore the imbalance caused by the defeat in WW1 . The image was a comfortable promise to replace the imbalance created by the loss of the war .
 This pattern of artistic then rational approach to war seemed to be followed by some charismatic leaders of Northern Africa and Middle East, and, probably, even by the United States in the Far East after the defeat in Korea .
 Since perseverance is an individual virtue, it is hard to deny it to anybody . Anyway, since perseverance can be a virtue, I'm not sure what it means to say .
 Their perception was influenced by the historical pattern of a strong and unified national state capable of expansion and guarding its possessions . Their perception is influenced by historical pattern .
 The tempting pattern of an ancient empire annanning with modern weapons has been an inspiration for many dictators . The temptation of a modern empire has been a tempting pattern for dictators .
 West European nations, as well as Turkey, Iran, Iraq, Egypt, Poland, Lithuania, Russia, and Israel, had sweet historical memories of greatness going far back in time .
 The unique place of China in the world can be strongly defined by history, size, and memories of greatness and humiliation for a long time . China's unique place in world is defined by its history and size .
 The absolute majority of old European nations, as well as the offspring of WW1, were weak economically and politically . Czechoslovakia, Poland, Hungary, new Balkan and Baltic states, and Austria— were still in the aftermath of WW 1 and were weak .
 The absence of a strong will, personified by the absolute monarch, was also a contributing factor to weakness . Paradoxically, as it may seem from today’s view, the absence of strong will also contributed to weakness.
 The Gennan society worked smoothly as a computer with all the bugs extenninated . The society was a computer that worked smoothly .
 We can see how the whole structure of the Nazi ideology was built from simple straight rods . We can also see how a simple straight rod can be used to build a Nazi ideology .
 In both Germany and Russia the combination of three factors created historically unique conditions for the amplification of an individual will against the background of developed industry and technology . The combination of these factors created historical unique conditions .
 Historically new apparatus of a single and unopposed political party with military discipline, free of the election headache . The new apparatus is free of an election headache. It will be a new state of state with a single political party .
 In Orthodox Christianity, the Czar is not only the political head of state but also the head of the church and the father of the people . The Czar's role is important in Orthodox Christianity as head of church and father of people .
 It is a literal translation of the medieval idea of caesaropapism, i.e. combined secular and spiritual power . The idea is a modern translation of a medieval idea, of combining secular power .
 Czar-father or the Gennan Fiihrer is the national leader who personifies not only power but also the right way of thinking and behavior . The Czar owns the lives of his subjects and owns his subjects, writes CNN.com .
 Stalin’s name was, too, combined not only with “leader” but also with ‘father” and “teacher” by the Soviet propaganda . Stalin was also known as ‘leader’ and ‘teacher,’ by
 President was expected by some to be an infallible squeaky-clean role model, i.e. a man with qualities attributed to a moral leader of the nation . In the democratic outdoors, that makes the leader a moving target on the shooting range .
 Britain and France declared the war when Hitler invaded Poland in 1939 . France and Britain declared war when Poland invaded Poland .
 The Nazi scenario failed from the start because the flagrant aggression mobilized resistance and made the national states strengthen their bonds in triangular patterns . The Nazis failed because of the way they made their aggression mobilize resistance . The war was the result of a triangular pattern of statecraft .
 In WW2 the aggression was predictable, one-sided, but spread over time, so that it provided some relaxation and adaptation, as well as plenty of time for the Europeans to vacillate before the anti-Nazi coalition was created against all odds .
 The configuration of WW2 was very archaic, as far as its motives and outbreak were concerned . To summarize, the configuration of the WW2 is very archaic . The World War II was very much more primitive than any other major war .
 It followed the prehistoric pattern of aggressive attack, invasion, conquest, and plunder that dominated ancient and medieval history as well as epic mythology .
 Every empire grew in this way and was beaten in the same way either by Hyksos, Goths, Vandals, Huns, Vikings, or by another empire .
 In looking back on these events, one is struck by the private and personal nature of Hitler’s war against Russia . Hitler's war with Russia was personal and personal, and Hitler's personal .
 WW2 was, probably, initiated in the dark nature of the powerful absolute dictator more by the internal tensions and historical and mythological catalysts than by anything else .
 WW2 illustrates the timeless vitality of patterns that can survive in an encapsulated fonn in the historical soil for long periods of time and then spring up as an epidemic . Albert Camus in his parable The Plague describes the situation described by Camus .
 Britain, USA, and Russia by that time were free of major internal stress . The result achieved by different means in Russia than the other two countries .
 The Western Roman Empire in her last century was torn apart by internal hostility between the privileged and impoverished classes . As a counterexample, the Western Roman empire was driven apart by . internal hostility .
 Britain, USA, and Russia were able to form a temporary military coalition despite their ideological rift . Most important, contrary to expectations, the coalition was formed in spite of the differences .
 The initial result was not only the breakup of the colonial system and even some nations, but also the polarization of the entire world between capitalism and Communism . The first result of the revolution was the end of colonialism and communism, the author says .
 The Cold War was presented by propaganda as a typical metastable state because of the fingers on the nuclear buttons . But its energy was dissipated in enormous military spending instead of a world fire .
 The top point of the transition barrier had not been reached and the hot WW3 never happened not because the barrier was too high . Instead, the top point was not reached and WW3 was not due to be reached .
 We believe it was an excellent example of the power of historical experience as well as of direct interactions of patterns of ideas with patterns of action . As well as historical experience, we believe, it was a great example of how history shapes the world today .
 John Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev were WW2 veterans (Khrushchev was veteran of two world wars and one civil war) Both leaders had unlimited power in military matters .
 At the same time, it was still the period of the Soviet thaw, when the autocratic pattern of Stalin’s rule was denounced and denounced . There was a kind of collective decision-making in the ruling oligarchy .
 The thaw ended in 1965 with the first political trials of dissident writers . It ended with the thaw ending in 1965 .
 For the first time the big gun smokers were tonnented by the terrible smoker’s dilemma . The terrible smokers’ dilemma is now a reality .
 In the entire previous history, war meant either victory or defeat or a draw . War means either victory, defeat or draw . In the past, war was either a victory or victory or a defeat .
 The WW3 was averted because of an extremely high transition barrier in combination with the democratic or quasi-democratic pattern of society . The leaders could not simply follow their basic instincts . Therefore, the transition barrier was extremely high .
 The liberal Kennedy was forced to be tough and militant Khrushchev, not a hawk by his nature, was weak . Kennedy was not the hawk by nature, but he was a liberal by nature . The two sides were forced to compromise, but Kennedy was the hawk .
 Stoessinger’s empathy is a recipe against the war, the good old self-interest works well, too . However, it might be true that the Stoessingers’ empathy is not a recipe for the war .
 If WW1 could be considered a historical accident, two such wars in a row were already regularity . World War II was an accident, but it was already a regularity in the world .
 " charismatic leaders playing less and less role in history, for better or worse," says Julian Zelizer . "They caused even more fragmentation in the world, but the fragments started moving toward a new integration and a new geopolitical topology"
 The leaders are now presidents and CEOs of companies, often in charge of resources comparable with resources of many nations, and with income well above those of state leaders . Few of them try to run terrorist corporations .
 "In this book, however, we deliberately evade the extremely important economical aspect of history because of our limited qualifications," says the author of the book .
 It could be a rewarding terrain for a pattern historian to compare patterns of classical heroes and villains with their modern transplants into corporate life sanitized .
 Researchers in history of modern corporations may find someday that the pattern of world wars was repeated on a smaller scale by large corporations, and Microsoft comes to mind first .
 World markets seem to be still in the “medieval” pre-United-Nations stage when territorial conquest is possible . World markets still seem to still be in the "medieval" stage of territorial conquest .
 Looking back at the twentieth century, we may see it as the century of the single Antiwar Revolution, comparable to the Industrial Revolution . The 20th century was the year of antiwar revolution, compared to that of the Industrial revolution .
 The pattern paradigm provides some means to shuttle between major components of historical process and ideas without changing the tenninology .
 The concept of transition barrier and the factors that influence its relative height needs professionals and not amateurs like ourselves . To be seriously explored, the concept of the transition barrier needs professionals like ourselves.
 Each of the three pre-world-war situations were preceded by a new major factor of radical historical novelty, the authors say . We would like to share the observation .
 It was the new military technology and means of communications before WW1, the modern totalitarian apparatus before WW2, and nuclear weapon before the aborted WW3 . It was also the new technology that enabled the rise of totalitarianism in the world .
 If we are destined to face WW4, albeit on a mini-scale, we owe it to wireless phone and Internet . We need to be able to use the Internet to make sure we don't have to rely on our phones .
 Whether the next phenomenon of electronic globalization can lead to the next crisis, shall be seen, but history sadly teaches us to keep the reconciling distance and beware of your own kin .
 Conflicts are less likely if the overall level of social frustration is low, if the sides are not constrained by uncomfortably tight bonds and bear hugs, and if there is neither czar nor father of the nation, nor, most important, a combination of both .
 The main conflict of the revolution is that between the leaders and the masses, which we are going to explore on the example of the French Revolution . We will explore the conflict between leaders and masses in the new book .
 It means anything from short and fast-pacing violent event within national borders to a fundamental change, not necessarily violent, toward a new stage in the course of global evolution .
 Examples include the religious revolution of Akhenaton in the fourteenth century B.C., the Iranian Revolution of 1978-79, and the Industrial Revolution spanning over centuries and still going on in some countries . Examples are as different as the Iranian revolution of 1978/79 and the industrial revolution
 The term was also applied to almost any modem change, such as sexual, technological, information, computer, Republican, and other revolutions, sometimes tongue in cheek .
 The overall pattern of radical change repeats itself not only in history of nations but also, on a smaller scale, in the life of institutions, corporations, and even families, sometimes, violently, as divorce, bankruptcy, loss, takeover, etc. etc. The patterns repeat itself in history
 Only the revolution of 1640-1660 in England can match the French Revolution . On any scale, only the revolution in 1640 and 1660 can match that of 1660 in France .
 The Industrial Revolution, not a violent disturbance, had even greater magnitude . Industrial Revolution was not violent disturbance . Industrial revolution was not a disturbance, but a larger magnitude .
 In the twentieth century, decolonization of Africa and Asia, emancipation of women, and information revolution are the top picks . In the 20th century, the Russian Revolution, decolonialization of Asia and Africa are the most important issues .
 Russia, America, and China knew only one successful social revolution each . Russia, U.S., China, Russia, China all had successful social revolutions each .
 Luther was, probably, probably the greatest revolutionary, humbly called reformer, of the Gennan-speaking people . Gennany is relatively young as a unified nation, and Luther was probably the most revolutionary .
 The French Revolution, however, meant not only a cardinal cataclysm of social structure, but a series of events involving large number of people over long time and considerable distance from Paris . The revolution was not only social structure but also a long-term social structure .
 Emperor Meiji who transfonned Japan into a modern state, holds both titles . Big changes initiated from the top are usually called reforms, not revolutions .
 Political revolutions do not prove anything and rarely accomplish their goals . Political revolutions rarely accomplish anything, say the U.S. president .
 After the Lutheran Revolution, Catholicism underwent a self-purification and revitalization . After the Protestant Revolution, Catholics underwent a re-evaluation of their faith .
 After the Communist Revolution in Russia, Communism became discredited all over the world . Communism was discredited in the Soviet Union . Communism is now discredited around the world.
 After the French Revolution, monarchy was not only restored but invigorated by Napoleon . Napoleon was Napoleon's first monarchist king .
 We can only guess how the spirit of American independence will survive the tests of global economy and global threats . The spirit of Communism may be resurrected when energy, food, and water become scarce in the world .
 American history has been controversial historical interpretation, less so in America . All that time it has been a matter of controversy historical interpretation .
 The nations whose fonnative revolutions have not failed tend to be sympathetic to all revolutions . The nations that have succeeded in revolutions tend to have been sympathetic to those who have succeeded .
 The French Revolution was a relatively short sequence of violent acts within a nation, and on the other hand, it was a process with global consequences and major aftershocks in other countries for more than more than a century .
 Most revolutions increased freedom and made the bond relations more relaxed . Most revolutions increase freedom and increased freedom, according to historians .
 The revolution itself cannot happen unless a certain degree of chaos is not already present . But the revolution itself can't happen unless the chaos is already present, he says . He says .
 Le bourgeois gentilhomme by Moliere, written a century before the Revolution, may serve as an illustration of the comic aspect of the relaxation of the rigid structure of the estates . Moliere's work is an example of the relaxed nature of the French estates .
 National Convention France is declared a Republic . 1793 Execution of Louis XVI War against Britain, Holland, and Spain . 1794 Fall of Robespierre .
 We should fully appreciate the art of a historian who reads the hard beads of facts on the string and turns them into a captivating narrative . We should be fully appreciating the work of historian .
 Here is our own extract of many thousands of pages written about the ten turbulent years . Here are our own extracts of the decade .
 By the end of the eighteenth century, France entered a crisis which took a form of a violent conflict . France was an absolute monarchy plagued by many long-term and accidental problems .
 First a constitutional monarchy and later a republic were proclaimed, the King was beheaded . Then a succession of more and more radical and violent groups and individuals came to power . At the peak of the terror moderation took over and, in a sequence of steps, monarchy was restored .
 Unlike seasonal flood, epidemic, forest fire, or disease, the system that produced the catastrophe is forever changed . Unlike seasonal floods or epidemic, it is not a natural disaster, it will be a disaster .
 The Black Death of the fourteenth century killed at least 25 million Europeans but it did not change Europe politically . The French Revolution with its 40,000 victims meant a radical turn for the continent .
 We may regard the decade between 1789 and 1799 as a transition state between two monarchies . The decade may be best described as the 'transition state' between the two monarchs .
 Each shorter event within this period, for example, could also be split into initial, transition, and final states . The period of Jacobin terror or Bastille could be divided into initial and transition states .
 Historical events have the same fractal character as many other natural phenomena . Historical events are fractal-like fractal phenomena .
 The horizontal axis is the historical time measured not by the clock and calendar, but in the spirit of Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz and Ilya Prigogine, by the sequence of events, so that if nothing happens, the time does not move .
 The vertical axis means abstract temperature or degree of chaos . Vertical axis means  chaos or temperature or temperature . The energy profile of the French Revolution .
 Regularity is relaxed at high temperature, positive bonds tend to break up, and negative bonds, for example, law and order, are difficult to maintain . What is important is regularity at high temperatures, and regularity is not important .
 If normally regicide is an extraordinary and unthinkable event, the fatal decision can be made easier in the heat of the moment . Regicide is a suicide suicide, but it is often made easier to commit it in the first place .
 The agony of the Great Depression lowered the windowsill for the desperate . Thus, the agony of . the . Great Depression lowers the . windowsill .
 Although France was a monarchy in both 1789 and 1799, the two situations were radically different . The French monarchy was abolished in 1799 and 1789 .
 The process of the transition was violent and intense, culminating in the inhuman, cruel, and apparently irrational Reign of Terror . The process was violent, intense and intense .
 The words like “inhuman, cruel, irrational” make sense only in the modem interpretation . The words ‘inhuman’ and ‘cruel’ are made only in modem interpretation of the words, the modem .
 We do not allow public executions and cruelty to animals, but the physical elimination of the enemy has been a norm throughout millennia . We are not allowed public executions or cruelty to animal, but we are not allowing public executions .
 The French Reign of Terror, so repugnant to many of us, was highly praised in Communist Russia . The copycat reign of Terror was established after the Bolshevik Revolution of 1917 . The French reign of terror was established in 1917 .
 Many streets in Russian cities are named after Robespierre and men named after Marat . Men are also named after the French revolutionary .
 The origin and evolution of patterns of cruelty could be an important subject in our times when they resurface time and again . The origin of cruelty is an important topic in our modern times .
 Historians often address the personalities of such people as Robespierre, Hitler, and Stalin, but we cannot dwell on that . Looking for reasons of the terror, historians often address, and with good reasons, such . reasons, but . well . reasons .
 The barrier from a peaceful life to terror seems extremely high and difficult to overcome . The barrier between peaceful life and terror is extremely high, the author says .
 An average person cannot jump over ten steps of a staircase, but everybody can walk it up step by step . While an average person can't jump over 10 steps, everyone can walk the stairs up step-by-step .
 During a stepwise ascent through intermediate steps, each smaller step is separated from the next with a low barrier . Each smaller step has a small barrier separating them from each other with the next step .
 The Jacobin terror could not start right after the beginning of the Revolution because the jump would be too high to accomplish . The jump would not be able to be started in the first year .
 What would seem unthinkable after the peaceful beginning could be natural against the background of the previous tumultuous state . The peaceful start of the peaceful start could be a natural reaction to the previous turbulent state, says CNN.com .
 The Reign of Terror under Robespierre was just another increment over the terrors of the war and the atrocities of the Montagnards under Danton . Thus, the reign of Terror in France was just an incremental improvement over the horrors of the War and atrocities of Danton under D
 History of modern time contains many examples of escalation, as well as that of de-escalation . This phenomenon is known as escalation, and history of modern times contains examples of it as well .
 The rise of Nazism, the Vietnam War, the violent rise of Communism and its long decline, break-up, and return to a quasi-bourgeois state also fall into this category .
 The gradual pacification of the Middle East is another example of a stumbling de-escalation, writes Peter Bergen .
 The anti-American and world terrorism, too, present a perfect case of escalation over three decades . The U.S. has been involved in the fight against terrorism in the past 20 years .
 A series of successes in acts of increasing magnitude encouraged the Islamic extremists to scale up the destruction . The Islamic extremists are known to have carried out a series of attacks in the past decade .
 "Everybody had to make his or her own decision during the fast pacing times," says the team .
 Both those who voted for the death sentence and against it were signing their own sentence . They were punished later at different moments as sympathizers of either monarchy or republic .
 Many voters had anticipated the double outcomes and the National Convention made its difficult decision only by a narrow margin .
 If the spontaneous stonn of Bastille can be described in terms of generators and bonds, those would rather be the stones, bricks, and mortar, with hardly any social structure involved, more like breaking glass .
 Spontaneous mass movement is rarely structured but it raises the energy of participants to a height not achievable in normal life . The spontaneous mass movement was rarely structured .
 Social energy can be both constructive and destructive, like work and heat in physics . The fact that social energy can also be constructive gives more substance to our vague understanding of energy in pattern transformations, says author .
 The diagrams in figures 23. and 23. tell us something about the transformation and its direction but not about what is transformed . Figure 23. tells us something of the transformation but not what it is about .
 "Our next objective here is to express the narrative in terms of generators, bonds, configurations, and patterns," says the author .
 When we built the semantic network for the Great Northern War in Chapter 19, we did it from our general knowledge about the subject and the result was hard to manage . The result of the network was hard-to-manned, and it was hard for us to manage, we say
 With striking awkwardness, the government offered with one hand what it withdrew with the other . The government offered to the British public with a one-handed deal .
 Tax reform efforts, never completely carried through, offended privileged groups without pleasing the underprivileged . Tax-reform efforts never fully carried through .
 Bonds are oriented and the bond values are indicated on the arrows . The bonds are oriented . The bond prices are indicated in the arrows of the bonds .
 For example, “offend” applies to the outbound bond and it means ‘offended by” for the inbound bond . “Offended” means “not offended” by the bond, and the bond is not offended by .
 From the short piece of the narrative it is impossible to tell whether the intellectuals and progressives are components of ‘France’ or just belong to a common social group, etc. etc. But from the short part of the . narrative, it is difficult to tell if they are .
 Turgot was part of the government, but our text keeps silence on this matter, as well as on many other things . The text says: "Turgot is part of a government, and our text has no comment on the matter"
 In a larger context, we could find the link ‘approve’ between tax-refonn and intellectuals, but there is no such hint in the piece of the text . In the larger context we could . find the . link “approve . by tax-
 We include progressives and intellectuals into ‘France,’ but this does not follow from the text, either . We include progressive intellectuals and intellectuals but this doesn't follow the text . We also include progressives, intellectuals into "France"
 This clearly shows, as we have already noted, that semantic networks are confusing and inappropriate for historical analysis in pattern terms, and, by the way, so could be their original narratives because of the brevity, or contradictions, or gaps .
 The number of bonds is the highest around the “measure by the government,” and this is where everything starts . Anyway, we can see that the number of . bonds is highest around . the ‘measure” by the . government .
 What follows from this observation, is the possibility of fonnal approach to evaluating political situation . What follows is an observation of this observation .
 Generators with the largest number of bonds could be the focuses of attention and possible sources of controversy . Generators are expected to be the focus of attention in the coming weeks .
 We will talk more on the ways to measure political temperature in Chapter 27, History and Computers . We also talk about the ways of measuring political temperature .
 A to E we present configurations of selected stages of the revolution, based on our textbook sources . A to D we show how the revolution evolved from the birth of the republic .
 The basic pattern change takes place locally, i.e., in small subconfigurations . After our pattern experiments with the Great Northern War, we already know that the pattern changes take place locally .
 The simple picture does not reveal the extreme feudal complexity later to be simplified by the revolution . The simple feudal complexity was later reduced to the simplicity of the revolution, the revolution.
 Three areas of internal stress depicted by negative bonds are those between the tax burden of the Third Estate and tax privileges of the nobles and clergy . The inequality of land ownership between the two groups, and the innate dishannony between them, exacerbated by unequal representation .
 The idea of equality of all people before the law implied equal representation, taxation, and the right to own land . One of them was the idea of equal representation and taxation .
 That idea implied a kind of regularity incompatible with the existent pattern . That idea was incompatible with a pattern, he says . He says .
 The ideas of philosophes —mental patterns, we should say, were by no means new by 1789 . The Old Regime was a form of state of mind .
 A society can live with uncomfortable ideas for a long time because of the transition barrier between thinking and action . B A society must accept uncomfortable ideas and accept them, the author says .
 The temperature of the flames is rising as the flames burn at particular points . The temperature is rising in the area around the world .
 In this picture we can see a new generator—Estates-General—which only adds to the internal tension because of the inequality of representation . In this image we can also see the image of a new generation: Estates General .
 We probably have to go back to his upbringing, upbringing, heredity, physical problems, and influences in order to get more information . But the element of chance is always present, and we need to find out more about his upbringing .
 In France the years preceding 1789 are marked by a series of measures which united previously antagonized groups . In France, the years before 1789 were marked by measures which unite previously antagonistic groups .
 With striking political ingenuity, the government passed a set of profound reforms . The government passed the reforms in a series of reforms .
 They decreased the power of privileged groups and improved the position of the underprivileged, according to the study . The study was conducted by the University of New York City .
 Turgot’s attempted introduction of laissez-faire failed, but his overall success reconciled both the intellectuals and the progressives with him .
 Government needed to be efficient because it required a high efficiency of the government, which was not the case, as we saw . The government was supposed to be more efficient, but it was not, as seen by the public .
 If in 1788 we expressed the above statement as a political prognosis, it would contradict the facts . If we expressed it as an opinion, we would have been wrong . We are happy to clarify the facts.
 The entire system of our knowledge would be stressed, “frustrated,” like the poorly designed kettle, according to Christopher Alexander . Alexander says negative bonds in its configuration would make it unstable by negative bonds .
 Let us consider this as an illustration to the problem of truth that we have been avoiding until now. Let us . Consider this as a . illustration to . the . problem of . truth that has been avoided until now, we have . been avoiding . until now .
 Truth is a representation of knowledge, facts, opinions, and theories with minimal overall number of contradictions . Truth is represented by knowledge and facts, facts and opinions . Truth should be a representative of knowledge with minimal amount of contradictions. Truth must be presented with minimal contradictions .
 The truth has a limited life. Taking to account the dynamic nature of social and individual patterns, the truth has limited life .
 There are usually good reasons why history takes its course. History is history, but there are reasons for history to take its course .
 We can imagine a plausible counterfactual scenario, but this would require an alternative previous state, which in turn would make us play mental games with its previous state . And so on. We have to imagine a new state of the universe, which would require us to think about a new
 France moved another level up on the scale of energy and ladder of violence . Instead of a glorious and velvety resolution of the conflict, France moved a level of energy, violence . The French government has been accused of corruption in the past .
 The unsettled question of how to vote, by estates or by individuals, separated the Third Estate from other estates and made it the dominant force in the world .
 The power shifted from the King to the Assembly and the mob . Therefore, the power shifted to the assembly and mob . More tension, more heat .
 The exodus of the fonner privileged estates and an attempted flight of the King ended up in the outbreak of popular hostility toward him . The exodus was the exodus of privileged estates .
 The king was executed, the reign of terror began, and Robespierre moved closer to dictatorship . The king's execution was the start of a new era of terror in France .
 At this stage, without monarchy, the pattern of despotism in France dominated despite the presence of the National Convention and the most democratic Constitution of 1792, postponed by the Convention .
 The real power was in the hands of the Committee of Public Safety, aided by the Committees of General Security and Revolutionary Tribunal . The real powers were in the real power of the committee of public safety .
 If we refonnulate ‘the age-old French principle’ as pattern, we can vividly see it twisted and torn by powerful invisible hands to reshaped into a completely different template of equality and representative democracy .
 Even though we see the republic on the surface, however, the new despotism grows underneath . Even though . We see the . republic on . the surface of the . surface, but the . new despots grow underneath, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 France was destined to swing between strong executive power and democratic elections for two centuries . After many painful experiments, after many painful attempts, the hybrid hybrid of strong . executive power with democratic elections was achieved . France's current hybrid of democracy and executive power is achieved .
 We can see the same evolutionary struggle of traditional centralization and new democratic forms in the history of Russia in the twentieth century, with the centralization taking fonn of Stalin’s despotism .
 Russia started to swing between freezing and thaw, with declining amplitude, along the timeline of Stalin . Stalin tried to reconcile democratic and authoritarian principles, but still moving through the erosion of despotism toward democracy .
 Pictures still complex, involving many bond couples and simultaneous events, but at the same time, to be understandable, they need a lot of explanations outside the pictures, actually, the full narrative . They are still complex .
 Pattern theory regards revolution as a sequence of small elementary steps, almost as Leo Tolstoy would like to see history, but by no means infinitely small . Pattern theory, because of its atomistic nature, regards revolutions as small steps .
 The quantum of history is a change in a single generator or a single bond couple, says historian . "Quantities of history are the result of a single change in single generator," he says . He says .
 When we start minimizing the configurations of the narratives and excluding the subconfiguration that do not take part in a transformation, we come to a few elementary generators of transformation . We come to an elementary generator of transformation, such as the sub-configuration of a narrative .
 In a dramatic play, even of Shakespearean magnitude, the characters practically never talk all at once . In Shakespearean plays, characters rarely talk at all once . The play is set in New York City .
 In opera more than four voices rarely sing different parts in an ensemble . In opera, four voices sing together in a large ensemble .
 Both historical and chemical transformations, however complex, are sequences of small-scale events which can be perceived one or two at a time . Similarly, both historical and . chemical transformations are in fact sequences of . small, but complex, events can be seen as sequences of 'small-scale
 This kind of simplification by breaking a complex whole into fragments is typical for natural sciences, from calculus to chemistry, biology, and sociology . As Jose Ortega y Gasset said, “If the world is composed of things, these will be given me one by one
 Pattern Theory, with its focus on interaction of fragments and the concept of global regularity, combines both analysis and synthesis . Pattern Theory is a theory that focuses on interaction and synthesis of fragments .
 Structural changes can be compared to hiking from one valley to another on a certain energy landscape . Structural change can be seen as hiking from a valley to a different energy landscape with valleys of stable states and the crests of the transition states .
 From every point of the valley there are several possible passages to various nearby valleys over the separating ridges . Several possible passages are possible from the valleys to the surrounding valleys . The valley is located in the middle of the two valleys .
 The energy landscape does not exist in the 3D background space . The analogy, however, should not be taken literally because the energy landscape doesn't exist .
 Any planning—economy, political, military, or personal --involves a mapping of alternatives . Any planning involves mapping out alternatives, and it's essential to do so, experts say .
 Every move may instantaneously change the landscape if we act against adverse circumstances or an intelligent adversary whose logic we cannot comprehend . Usually not only most of the alternatives are unknown before the action, the action is unknown before it takes place, but every move is instantaneously .
 The artist imagined individual development of an organism as a ball rolling over a descending landscape . He imagined individual . development . over a . ball rolling .
 Shallow terrain makes a change of direction or divergence more likely . Landscape pattern shallow terrain makes changes in direction more probable .
 The developmental topography of human behavior is enormously broader and more complicated, but it is still a topography . It is still the topography, and it's still a very complex topography. It's not just a topographic topography but it's a very broad and complicated top
 If he starts with the genes or other early physiological influences that predispose him to the left hand, that branch of the developmental channel can be viewed as cutting the more deeply .
 If no social pressure is exerted the ball will roll on down into the channel for left-handedness . The ball rolls in most cases when it is left handed .
 The landscape for schizophrenia is a broader network of anastomosing channels, more difficult to trace . But if parents train the child to use the right hand, the ball can be nudged into the shallower channel for right-handedness .
 Social psychology provided a lot of insight about the intimate mechanisms of social pressure . Social psychology also provided a great insight about social pressure in the world .
 Chess player can see a large area of the energy landscape, and each neighboring valley means the opponent’s possible response to the move . In the game of chess, the role of chance is strongly minimized, and the player can also see the player's possible response .
 Theoretically, the entire landscape of the game pre-exists, but it is so large that even a computer cannot see it all . Even a computer will not be able to see the landscape in the game .
 In the modern science of history it is usually a good style to outline major historical alternatives . In this case it is a good way to outline historical alternatives to historical events .
 Each historical development is an interaction of the crowd with its outstanding participants . History is made not only by masses and historians but also by individuals and their choices, says historian .
 In the language of natural sciences, history displays in a chemical substrate where some molecules have no duplicates and their behavior can be described only in quantum and probabilistic terms . The behavior of molecules can only be described in quantum terms .
 There is a multitude of exciting—as well as eternal—questions, which are mostly a matter of definitions . There are many exciting things to ask: "What do you do? What do you think? "
 Patterns do not take into account the difference between masses and individuals, things and ideas, nations and chemical substances . Patterns don't take into consideration the difference in people and things, things .
 The enemies attempt to move strictly along the valleys, although they may not have the right map . The enemy attempt to follow the map, but they may have the wrong map .
 In the revolution, the high temperature pushes the society to the unstable position on the edge of a plateau, from which there is more chance to fall down than scale another height . The society is more at risk from falling down than scaling another height, says the author .
 The pattern of authoritarian rule emerging from a mass revolution plays the same role as the equipment of a mountain climber to secure the position . The pattern is similar to the equipment used by mountain climbers to secure positions .
 The authoritarian rule uses energy in the form of work for freezing its own pattern, preserving it from defonnation by the chaotic heat of the opposition .
 How far this use of society as a refrigerator can go we will see from the next chapter . How far it can be used as a refrigerator?
 The fall of the Soviet Empire Russia of the last decade of the twentieth century seemed to confirm its reputation of a nested doll of mystery, conundrum, enigma, riddle, and puzzle . Russia's fall of Soviet Empire confirmed its reputation as one of the world's greatest unsolved mysteries
 A brief historical overview would be helpful to help explain the history of this chapter . The first chapter is entitled, "History of the American Revolution"
 Two lively books by David Remnick, Lenin’s Tomb and Resurrestion, seem to be the best American account of the collapse of the Soviet Union . Remnick's Remnick: Lenin ‘s Tomb is the best account of Soviet Union collapse .
 Russia entered the twentieth century as an ossified absolute monarchy with no parliament and civil liberties whatsoever . The country entered the 20th century as a state of absolute absolute monarchy . Russia entered that century as Russia had no parliament or civil liberties .
 Russian czar Alexander II was killed by revolutionaries in 1881 . Alexander II had made important steps toward liberalization in Russia since 1855 .
 Lenin’s brother had been executed as a co-conspirator, which greatly contributed to the shaping of Lenin's personality . Lenin's brother was executed in Russia in the 1920s as a result of his brother's murder .
 For the west-oriented Russians, autocracy and czar were blood enemies . For the self-oriented ones the strong centralized power was the foundation of society . The self-orientated ones were self-centered .
 The murder of the czar had derailed reforms, and the subsequent history of Russia of the twentieth century unrolled as a “what if’ spin-off from the French Revolution’s French Revolution . The murder . of the . czar led to the death of the
 The unlimited political power and spiritual authority was combined in the person of the czar . The czar was the head of the Soviet Union in Russia .
 After Peter the Great, the Russian nobility as a whole did not try to limit the power of the czar . The clergy was no rival either, and the clergy was not rival .
 This pattern explains the famous Russian patience and stoic acceptance of fate, as well as the rebellious spirit compensating for the compliance .
 A Russian, treated by the authorities like an immature teenager, combined obedience with suppressed anarchy . A Russian who was treated by authorities like a teenager combined obedience and suppressed anarchy, he says .
 The instinctive challenge of law and order has been wide spread at all levels of society, which contributed to the post-Soviet disarray . Law and order is a challenge that has contributed to post-Russian disarray.
 The Russian peasants and craftsmen unknowingly implemented the Jean-Jacques Rousseau’s principle of general will . Rousseau's principle was the basis for the idea of a general will, according to Rousseau .
 The education of the upper class stood out against the illiteracy of the peasants . The education was the difference between the educated and the illiterate peasants .
 Nobility and peasants in Russia could be taken for two different nations, so different their culture and even language were . Nobility in Russia was so different that it was difficult to understand how different they were .
 A sharp contrast between the upper and lower classes, combined with ethnic diversity, was a pattern shared by Russia with the late Roman Empire . Russia's sharp contrast was similar to that of the Roman Empire, which saw ethnic diversity .
 A handful of domestic Russian philosophes used to be punished for dissent by the czars and later by the Communists . The Communist Party punished them for dissent .
 The patriarchal traditions of the Russian society were eroded by socialdemocratic ideas and progress of the bourgeoisie in the Western Europe . With time, the patriarchal traditions in Russian society was eroded .
 By the beginning of the twentieth century, Russia swarmed with a wide range of democratic, socialist, anarchist, and terrorist organizations, with Bolsheviks among them .
 It took a couple of powerful detonators to overcome the height of the transition barrier of the first Russian revolution of 1905 and trigger explosive developments .
 Second, it was a bizarre massacre of a peaceful demonstration of Saint Petersburg’s workers by the czar . The czar was responsible for the massacre of the demonstration .
 The first Soviets, i.e., municipal councils, were organized in major cities . Spontaneous strikes and riots followed and the first Soviets were organized . The first Soviet councils were organized by Soviet-era Soviets .
 The czar responded with a Manifesto promising a constitutional monarchy with civil liberties and a representative Duma . He responded to the request with a manifesto promising a representative assembly .
 The revolution followed the path of the French Revolution but with much less success . The revolution was followed by the revolution of the 18th century, but failed .
 The actual control was in the hands of the czar who had the right to dissolve the Duma . The czar was the only person to have the power to dissolve Duma.
 Russia is moving toward both industrialization and a new political crisis . Russia was moving toward industrialization, but also toward a political crisis, experts say . Russia's political crisis has deepened in recent years .
 The next most probable outlook of Russia could be a vigorous European democracy . From 1905 to 1914, Russia was a relatively stable period between 1905 and 1914 .
 The second Russian Revolution of 1917 got a boost from the ongoing WW1 . The Russian Revolution was the result of the ongoing conflict in the world .
 Russia, populated mostly by peasants, became a democracy, although only for several months . Russia's democracy was only a few months before it was overthrown .
 The experience of both French revolution and the Commune of Paris of 1871 was a pattern template used by the Bolsheviks led by their charismatic leader Vladimir Lenin . Lenin referred to French history in his strategic and tactical works .
 His way to power was in many aspects different because the Bolsheviks had been in the underground for many years, and were banned even after the overthrow of the czar . The Bolsheviks were banned in Russia after the revolution .
 The Marxist ideas and goals pursued by the Bolsheviks were alien to the absolute majority of Russian people . The Bolsheviks' goals and goals are alien to most of the Russian people, he says .
 The promise of land distribution in WW1 attracted the majority of peasants . However, the promise of peace in the war attracted many of them .
 The French Revolution at its Thermidor stage rejected the communist ideas of Gracchus Babeuf . The Russian Revolution proclaimed abolition of private property as one of its goals, which was later accomplished .
 The first practical steps taken by the Bolsheviks were to end the war, consolidate power, get rid of opponents and fonner allies, feed the population, teach literacy, and restore the nationalized industry .
 We venture to suggest that they won not only by cruel repressions but also because they fit the Russian pattern of patriarchal centralization and dependence on the master .
 Lenin considered the weakness of the terror the major flaw of both the French Revolution and the insurrection of the Commune of Paris in 1871 . Lenin considered it a major flaw in both the revolution and the uprising of Paris .
 Only twenty years after the Bolshevik Revolution, the Soviet Union was ruled by a dictator in command of a military-style party organization controlling all aspects of life in the country . Only 20 years later, a dictator was in charge of the military-controlled government .
 This social pattern known as Russian Communism was new and unprecedented in history . The elimination of private property, most often together with the fonner owners, was unprecedented .
 Every resident of Russia received his or her sustenance from the government . The government de facto owned the giant country and controlled the movements of any person .
 The pattern is partially familiar for Russia with its experience of serfdom . The pattern was partially familiar with Russia's experience with serfom .
 In modem language, Russia was a combination of a perfect welfare state with a perfect police state . Russia's welfare state was a 'perfect police state' with a police state, says Alexander Vatanka .
 The rulers sincerely wanted to improve life of their subjects and achieved significant success . Nevertheless, the rulers sincerely tried to improve their subjects' lives and achieved success .
 By no means the population was unhappy, taking hardships with the traditional resignation . "By no means were unhappy," says one of the country's leaders .
 The internal tensions in Russia were minimal and limited to the struggle for power in the ruling elite . Russia's internal tensions were minimal, according to the Russian media .
 The overall pattern of Soviet life was, paradoxically, very close to the pattern of a large, privately owned, and paternalistic American or Gennan corporation, with the hierarchical structure of subordination, monetary compensation, pension plans, vacation vouchers, and work as the only meaning of
 The Soviet system allowed a small degree of fluidity and initiative inside its units . While an American corporation is often a rigid pyramid, the Soviet system was more fluid and more flexible .
 A typical conflict at a Russian institution could be a conflict between the superior and his subordinate . This is why a typical conflict is hopeless in America and modem Japan but typical for feudalism .
 The production unit was property of the government . Management had a chance to prove their points to a higher authority, something like going to a court .
 Soviet writers, also members of a production unit, were even encouraged to take the vertical conflict as a plot for a novel . The Soviet writers were encouraged to write a novel in the Soviet Union .
 Type I presumes a relatively free horizontal interaction, type II makes vertical interaction possible, at least theoretically, theoretically . Type III forbids any horizontal interaction of subordinates . Type II presumes vertical interaction .
 Antagonism and dissent were kept in control by simply eliminating generators with negative bonds . Antagonisms and dissent was kept out of control, as in a typical Western corporation .
 The connector graph was a tree of subordination with the leader and the small group of his top deputies supervising the lower levels . Lower levels were organized along territorial and industrial principles .
 In the Soviet Union this tree of subordination was doubled and tripled . The Soviet Union was once one of the world's most powerful statesmen .
 The dominant system of command was the party represented in any enterprise, organization, and locality, including science, education, and arts . The dominant party was the dominant party represented by any enterprise or locality .
 The party perfonned the function of a powerful enforcement of the existing social configurations . The party was created to enforce existing social arrangements, the party said .
 Its main goal was to take care of the posts and beams of the social structure, inspect it daily, test the material strength, change the defective parts, and tighten the loose nuts .
 The second hierarchy was the government, i.e., the system of professional management in industry, services, education, arts, and entertainment . The government was the second hierarchy, with the government .
 Two sergeants, one from the party, the other from the management, were barking commands down the soldier’s neck . The soldier was ordered to obey orders down the neck of the soldier .
 The third and less conspicuous system was the State Security that also tried to penetrate every unit of society through their agents recruited from all groups of society . The State Security was the third and the third system .
 The three systems were designed to prevent any irregularity in the social functions and turn society into a clockwork mechanism set by the Politburo . They were designed by the Communist Party to prevent social unrest .
 It can be, for example, a system of metal-producing plants, or higher education, regardless of location, or civil administration of a reion . A reion can be a civil administration, or the administration of an institution .
 Every party organization of a certain region covers also all the other industries in this region, plus local government, medical service, education, media, and arts . This means that every party organization covers all the industries in the region .
 It would be difficult to draw the complete three-dimensional social structure of Soviet Russia, says author .
 Everybody is watched by the omnipresent State Security organized geographically. The State Security is organized geographically . It is a state of mind, organized by the State Security .
 A person in the Western society also can have two allegiances, as an employee of a business unit and as a resident of a locality . But the pyramids of subordination are small and independent, the allegiance can be easily changed . One can be self-employed and live in a
 In the Soviet society, all the allegiances converged to the single top leader who could decide the fate of any single individual, and in fact did . In fact did. The Soviet society .
 It was a huge muscular body with a small head where all major decisions of economical, political, and ideological nature were made . The society was tied together by an unprecedented in history sponge-like multitude of li nk .
 An approximation of the social connector oriented toward victory toward victory at any price . An approximation to a social connector .
 The fall of the Soviet Empire came as a great surprise. In view of the redundant engineering of the society, the fall was a surprise, he says .
 "There was no mass discontent, no organized opposition, and all dissidents were exiled or imprisoned," says Maoist leader Maoist . Maoist Maoist was Maoist's first leader in China .
 The system had no visible signs of internal tension, no hunger, riots, and no spontaneous drive for ethnic independence, except in the Baltic republics . The system was designed to prevent internal tension and hunger .
 The USSR seemed to be in a deep pit of stability . With any dissent punished as a severe crime, the army under the party control . Civil war excluded, civil war excluded .
 Few Russians could imagine that the collectivist system where even prices and salaries were fixed would ever collapse . No wonder, very few Russians can imagine that they would ever be able to live under such a system .
 The rigidity of prices and salaries had its historical precedent, however, that could reveal a much finer similarity . It could reveal the similarities between the two .
 Diocletian's main goal was to cool down the Empire overheated by invasions of Barbarians, famine, riots, and exorbitant taxes . One of the earliest examples is the Roman Empire under Emperor Dioclettian whose main goal is to cool the Empire .
 Diocletian fixed prices of commodities, wages, and cost of transportation by an edict . Some historians compared his rule with totalitarianism .
 In the former USSR all teachers of any subject were allotted same salary, the salaries of high school teachers, physicians, and lawyers were among the lowest . Public transportation and apartment rent was merely symbolic .
 Diocletian pursued an absolute order, declaring the priority of the state over individual and using even a kind of secret police . He did not go as far as to abolish private property, but not as far .
 He was draining the resources of the population, while the Soviet system assumed that the government had to provide meager food, clothing, and housing for everybody . Whether they produced anything of use or not, they were given meager food and housing .
 Diocletian tied the coloni, the tenants of the landowners, to the land, turning them into serfs . The coloni were the tenants and the land's owners, but were turned serfs by the landowners .
 He expanded the serfdom to basic professions and made them hereditary . Moreover, he expanded it to include the professions of basic professions .
 Stalin did the same by withdrawing the internal passports from the peasants . Stalin established control of the residence of every citizen so that the unwanted movement from one city to another in search of better life was prevented . Stalin withdrew internal passports for peasants .
 President Obama's program arrested the decline for a time but did not reverse it . Yet, at most, his program arrested decline for most of the time .
 The novelty was that all the divisions were equal and none of them, even Italy, had a fonnal advantage over any other . Even Italy, the birthplace of the empire and its metropolis, had an advantage over all others .
 Moscow was the dominating metropolis and the rest of the country was a quasi-colony . Moscow was Moscow's dominant metropolis . The rest of Russia was the country's quasi-colonial capital .
 In frozen authoritarian systems the temperature is the highest at the top, writes David Frum . Frum says the temperature of power struggle is highest in authoritarian systems . He says power struggle, intrigues and rivalry is staged .
 The frustration, limited to the ruling class, was intensified by the war in Afghanistan and the American Strategic Defense Initiative . The Initiative could potentially make USA secure against a possible Soviet missile attack .
 About five years before the change, the party, for whatever reason, started a campaign against corruption, which destabilized the ruling elite . "About five years ago, [Ruling] party, [the party, started] a campaign ... against corruption," he says .
 Mikhail Gorbachev experimented with easing the monopoly of power and opening a crack in the door to free competition for power and ideas . The Soviet Union was founded in the early 1980s .
 In fact, as soon as the new Soviet leader made clear that freedom of thought might not be punished by prison, internal rifts crisscrossed the political configuration .
 Configuration A shows symbolically the two duplicate connectors of government and party . Configuration A is symbolically a duplicate connector of government, party and party. Configuration A was designed to connect government with party and government . Configuration B shows the two connectors symbolically .
 He made peace in the Cold War, limited the terror of the State Security, and encouraged some civil liberties . He also made peace with the U.S. in the 1950s and '60s .
 The elite ( nomenklatura) had a double allegiance to both party and government . The elite had special entitlements and privileges, like the nobles and clergy in old France . It could easily capture some key positions in government .
 From the very beginning of the historical transition Gorbachev and Yeltsin had been locked in a conflict of demonic proportions, which once again illustrates conflict as a bond couple . From the start of the . historical transition, the . history of the conflict between the two sides illustrates conflict .
 Their personal battle had gone on so long that it contained so many seriocomic incidents that they seemed paired in eternal tension and dependence . The couple's personal battle was so long and contained many incidents .
 Party pyramid was thrown away like a scaffold after the completion of the building . The party pyramid was built in the 1960s and 1970s in the style of a pyramid .
 The building without the scaffold, however, was on the verge of collapse . The building was without a scaffold when it collapsed .
 For the first time in over half a century, the apparatus of power accumulated internal tensions . The first time since the first half of the century, internal tensions have existed in the country .
 It was a velvet revolutions of a kind, compare with other two in Chapter 13, Two velvet revolutions . The two velvet revolutions were a velvet revolution of the past two .
 Gorbachev was the leader of the USSR consisting of fifteen republics . The USSR consisted of 15 republics. The USSR was one of the largest economies in the world .
 The Russian Republic and USSR were different hierarchical entities . Formally, the Russian Republic was a Russian Republic . The USSR was a Soviet Union .
 The Russian Republic within the Soviet Union, in spite of its domination, had a historically confused legal status . It was known as the Russian Republic in the USSR .
 Russia was the Soviet Union with all the other republics as walking distance dominions independent de jure but not de facto . For a long time Russia was independent de facto but de facto, it was a Soviet Union .
 Only during the last decades of the USSR the Russian Republic was given a kind of nominal self-government . Only during those years of the Soviet Union was given the right to self-governance .
 Moscow, the center of power, was the capital of both USSR and Russian Republic . The central fatal circumstance for the pattern of the collapse was that Moscow was the city of power . Moscow was also the capital for the USSR and the Russian Republic.
 The essence of the conflict was competition for the capital city of Moscow . Whoever was on top in Moscow, was . on top within the borders of the USSR, the USSR .
 The location of the U.S. capital seems from this perspective very wisely chosen . Washington, D.C. was chosen to be the capital of the country .
 The one thousand year long existence of the Eastern Roman Empire was, probably, made possible by the administrative reform of Diocletian that equalized the components of the empire . The administrative reform was probably the creation of the Roman Empire .
 As we will see in Chapter 25, The circuitry of Imperial China, the same wisdom might have preserved the unity of China for thousands of years . We will see how the wisdom of the ancient Chinese wisdom preserved China .
 In the imperial Rome it would be equivalent of scraping the position of the Emperor and removing the Roman provinces from the empire . The move would have been equivalent to scrapping the Emperor's position .
 In American terms it would be equal to the unanimous vote of the Congress to dissolve the Union by eliminating the Federal Government and the Congress altogether . The vote would be equivalent to a unanimous vote to eliminate the Union .
 The coup boosted Russia in the transition state in which all kinds of previously unthinkable actions were possible . On the one hand, the coup boosts Russia in a transition state, writes CNN's Peter Bergen . The coup was a coup that boosted Russia, he says .
 The Soviet Union was dominated by the Russians and after Stalin no other ethnicity was allowed to the very top of the Soviet Union . After Stalin's rule, no other ethnic groups were allowed to be allowed to top the country .
 The dissolution of the USSR increased the number of top positions from one to one . The number of spin-offs from the Soviet Union increased from one top position to one in a number of positions .
 The self-beheading of the Soviet Union was originally agreed upon by the leaders of three Slavic republics—Russia, Ukraine, and Belarus . Russia, Ukraine and Belarus agreed to do so in order to save their Soviet Union .
 Unbelievably, it did not contradict the Constitution, which had a clear and fateful provision about the voluntary character of the Union . The Constitution, however, was not contradicting its mandate, it said .
 "As far as we can judge, the voluntary character of the American Union is not that unambiguous," the author says . The American Union was founded in 1903, but it was not voluntary .
 In large scale historical terms, the Bolshevik Revolution was a change of dynasty . Gorbachev-Yeltsin revolution finally accomplished the transformation of Russia into democracy, however imperfect .
 "This elegant transformation, driven by the quest for power, was completed without a shot," says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "This is not the first time I've seen this kind of transformation in my life."
 The dissolution of the Soviet Union eased the competition for power because it gave uncontested power to 14 more leaders, who used it in different ways . The dissolution gave the power to fourteen more leaders .
 Some resurrected the totalitarian pattern, others turned to nationalist or pragmatic democracies . Some resurrects totalitarian pattern . Others turned to nationalism or pragmatic democracy .
 The transformation did not bring peace to the new Russia because some of her ethnic provinces, like Chechnya, claimed little pyramids for themselves .
 This time, however, the land was disputed by nested dolls and not by neighbors . The land dispute was settled on by a nested doll .
 "The transition barrier toward total internal bloodshed was too high for him," he said . "I don't want to see any more bloodshed. The transition barrier is too high."
 His indifference and weakness meant that the upper structural elements of the system could be treated as neutral bonds . They were disassembled quietly with a wrench and not a sledgehammer, he says .
 The pattern of the cutting the top of the pyramid worked all the way down through the floors of the building . The system of business management was split along territories and industries, with many of fonner nomenklatura becoming mini-czars .
 Russia stepped on a new path with great hopes for mass prosperity but without the tradition of the rule of law . Russia, the biggest chunk of the former Soviet Union, stepped on new path without tradition of rule of the law .
 Free elections changed the political system, but the pattern of thinking in terms of pyramid remained . Free elections have changed the way the country's political system is now .
 Yeltsin, the man at the top found himself fighting opposition, being unable to destroy it . The position of an American president in a conflict with the Congress is similar to that of the U.S. President .
 The social pyramid in Russia is gone but it sits in the national memory as a persistent pattern, catalyzing new attempts to restore it . Russia's social pyramid is gone, but it is still a strong national memory .
 To compare with ancient Rome, both empires were melted by a hot external source . Rome and Rome were both melted by an external source, according to experts .
 For Rome, Rome was the invaders, for USSR it was the pressure of the West waging the Cold War and waving the nuclear stick and the technological carrot . For USSR, for Rome, for Russia, for the West, the pressure was the threat of the nuclear war .
 In both the subversive carriers of new ideas joined the governments in the end . In both cases, the carriers of radical new ideas were successful .
 Next we would like to compare Russia and USA with China, the biggest and oldest authoritarian system ever known . Russia and the U.S. have the biggest authoritarian system in history .
 In Chapter 7, The King and the pear, we have already touched upon some roots of past tension between China and the West . We have also touched upon the roots of some of the tension between the West and China .
 We emphasize the tentative and abstract character of our constructs. Here we are interested in some internal patterns of old imperial China, and as everywhere .
 History of China should be left to professional historians, says historian . They should be regarded as an exercise in pattern thinking and not in history of China, he says .
 Charles O Hucker is an almost exclusive source of diagrams . The diagrams are based on Charles O'Hucker's diagrams .
 China knew periods of fragmentation and unification, numerous wars, some victorious, some lost, as well as occupation and liberation . China knew alternating periods of fragmented and unification and unification .
 For most of its life span China was a vast unified empire which in modem language could be called an absolute totalitarian state . In modem language that could be said to be called a totalitarian state, China was an extremely powerful state .
 Confucianism is one of the most influential traditional ideology of China . It is a traditional Chinese religion .
 Confucianism, with its idea of harmony and the Middle Way, would be the best candidate for a polar opposite to Marxism . Marxism is the idea of class struggle and class struggle . Confucanism is the best way to deal with the world's class struggle, he says
 Even if the country prospered, their duty was not discharged; morality had to be ensured as well . Indeed, even if the nation prospeered, it had to ensure that morality had also been ensured as also .
 What modem Westerners think of as welfare-state ideas were commonly preached, accepted, and put into practice in Chou China . Chou China's welfare state ideas are commonly preached and accepted in China .
 The ruler was administrator, military leader, judge, judge and manager of the economy, priest, educator, and moral exemplar . He was also a military leader and a priest .
 As the Cultural Revolution in China demonstrated, the same correction was made in Maoist China . The same correction has been made in the same way as the same mistake was made by Maoists .
 The list of Confucian virtues might present a problem for loyal Chinese because of a possible conflict between loyalty to family and loyalty to the ruler . Loyalty to family may conflict with loyalty to ruler .
 We know that terrible situations when a choice had to be made were typical not only for both cultures but for practically all dictatorial regimes . And yet we know that horrible situations were typical of both cultures .
 We are tempted to recur to a “patternization”—being fully aware of its ultimate vulgarization— of the classical Chinese philosophy . We are also aware of the ultimate vulgarizedization .
 Taoism is Taoism, which we would simplistically characterize as cultivating neutral social bonds, and Legalism . Legalism meant maintaining order through the law, under the threat of punishment, i.e., by enforcing negative bonds .
 Legalist idea asserted the primate of the state interests over the individual ones as consequence of the inborn faultiness of humans . The legalist idea asserts that the state must protect its interests over individual ones .
 In practice, the three concepts could be compared with the three basic colors that being mixed in varying proportions produce all the other colors and hues . The three concepts are used to create different hues and colors .
 Confucianism regarded people as basically good, Legalism saw them as basically bad . Legalism considered people to be basically bad. Confucanism saw people as essentially good. Legalism did not see people as bad .
 Former Soviet society relied on both the law and the standard of thinking, unknowingly imitating the Chinese pattern of mixed Legalism and Confucianism . The former Soviet society used to rely on both law and standard thinking .
 Europe, with its competitive geopolitics, has always had a traditional glue of positive bonds in the form of nationalism . Europe has a strong tradition of nationalism, especially in Russia and Ukraine .
 American society does not seem to care much about ideology, except individual freedom . American society seems to care more about ideology than individual freedom.
 We can certainly see elements of legalism, without its philosophical generalizations, in the Western idea of law and order . The Western idea is based on the notion of law, not philosophy, but law .
 In America it struggles with the individual, corporate, partisan, ethnic, feminist, adolescent, and scores of other visions of order . In America, it struggles .
 We would half-seriously characterize the American society, with its reliance on law, as Legalist-Taoist . The American society is a somewhat stressed combination of law and law .
 To ease the stress, the society lets the lawyers fight legalism with its own weapon . The society is letting lawyers use their own weapon to cope with legalism .
 The goal was achieved by increasing the number of bonds in the connector, i.e., the same way as in the Soviet system . The goal is to increase the amount of bonds between the connector and the connector .
 Thereafter all imperial governments resembled a pyramid, with the emperor at the apex and groups of ever more numerous agencies in central, regional, and local strata under him . Each level of the pyramid had three faces—one for general administration, one for military command, and one for cens
 The three-faced pyramid is remarkably similar to the triple pyramid of the Soviet system . The pyramid is similar to that of Soviet-era Soviet pyramid .
 The circuits were the units of the central government, not local ones . Note that the circuits were not the ones of the local government .
 Local power started below the double line, was distributed geographically, and had a tree-like connector . The local power was distributed across the country, and was connected by a single line .
 The local share of power was limited because of the large number of local units and, therefore, their small size, was limited . The local power of the local units was limited due to the size of the units .
 By the end of the Early Empire, large regional rulers, similar to governors, evolved from circuit intendants . Circuit intendants were circuit rulers .
 The borderline between the central and local governments moved up one step, to the double dotted line . Circuit intendants became powerful governors, and circuit intendants become powerful governors .
 The intermediary zone between prefectures and central government was kept under firm control by dynasties . Regional governors and warlords had repeatedly gained autonomy during the early imperial age .
 The main obsession of the Chinese concept of the government was the reliability of the system and the control over the reciprocity of the obligations of the ruler and his subjects . This makes a cardinal difference from the Soviet or Roman systems of domination .
 The system of censorate was, ideally, independent from other government agencies and worked both upstream and downstream . The censorate should be independent of other agencies .
 System of Chinese government in Sung times was employed so that no one could monopolize power . Circuit intendants, functionally different and territorially overlapping in different ways, were employed . Circuit intendants were functionally different .
 The connector of the enonnous government, however, looks overwhelmingly complex . It's not easy to connect, but it's not always easy .
 The administrative division of the later imperial China displayed at the lowest levels of the governmental pyramid, so that the distance between the imperial government and local events was minimal .
 The Chinese connector was not pyramidal, and there were no leaders of the next down level . "There was no leader in the next level," says a former Chinese diplomat .
 After this superficial description of the old Chinese system of government it is reasonable to compare it with the Soviet system, which had fifteen republics . The Soviet system had 15 republics—a number comparable to the thirteen Chinese provinces .
 The pattern was inherited from the old Russia with governors appointed by the czar . It was the pattern inherited from old Russia and was the same pattern .
 At every level there was local government that had all the power over the lower levels, and it was duplicated by party offices . Party offices had power over lower levels of local government, it was said .
 The USSR was a conglomerate of nominally equal republics, but the dominant Russian Republic was much bigger than the other 14 combined . Like the imperial China and Diocletian’s Rome, the balance of power was skewed in the Soviet Union .
 Dozens of largest territorial units in Russia of the czars were comparable in resources . Dozens of czars of Russia were comparable to czars' resources .
 Peter I and subsequent emperors could not anticipate Lenin and Yeltsin, however . Peter I, subsequent . emperors, however, could not . anticipate Lenin or Yeltsins, however.
 The former added yet another level, the republics, to the pyramid, and they used the fatal imbalance to undo the empire . The republics added yet more levels of the pyramid to add to it .
 The numbers are approximate Yugoslavia, although different in nature, were stimulated by the same imbalance between the industrially developed and densely populated Serbia and other less developed or less Panslavic regions . Yugoslavia .
 Once bom, patterns do not die, which follows from the very nature of patterns as abstract mathematical constructs . Pattern patterns are an abstract mathematical construct, and patterns are abstract constructs .
 Fatalistic platitudes would not help us recognize when one pattern is ripe to undergo a metamorphosis and what is going to crawl out of its dead skin . The pattern will be ripe for a change, but we need to know when it's ripe for change .
 There must be some basics of pattern transformations independent from their particular structure, and if so, we could use them for incubating the desired patterns and refrigerating them .
 In this chapter we return to such aspects of pattern dynamics as energy, temperature, heat, work, and other parameters unrelated to structure . This chapter is the first chapter of this chapter .
 We have already encountered them in Chapter 15, Invisible walls of events . Chapter 15 is Chapter 15 .
 The problem is whether the use of the thermodynamic terminology to something as immaterial as patterns is legitimate, he says . It's not clear whether it's legitimate to use thermodynamic terms to describe patterns .
 In Chapter 20, Probability and energy, we drew a parallel between probability and energy of patterns . The patterns of patterns can be traced to probabilities and energy in patterns .
 We borrowed it from statistical mechanics, an area of mathematics applicable not only to physical but to abstract systems as well .
 In all such systems we have a very large number of independent and interacting microscopic entities, each with its own tiny value of a certain changing parameter . In such systems, we have to deal with a very small number of tiny, interacting microscopic particles .
 The total energy of the ensemble is the sum of all its microscopic values . The energy of an ensemble can be summed up in a single atom atom .
 Examples of large collections of microscopic entities are molecules, insects in swanns and colonies, and humans exchanging money and work in national and global economy . Examples of such collections include molecules, insect colonies, molecules, and human exchanges .
 Spherical particles of molecules of gas moving chaotically and exchanging energy at each collision are pretty close to this model . The model is based on a model of the movement of molecules in a spherical sphere .
 Neither are in the equilibrium required for the statistical model . Neither are they in equilibrium required to be in equilibrium .
 Classical thermodynamics as a crude approximation, but we can accept it as an approximation . We never lose from sight the non-equilibrium properties of real systems, the slow pace of their change, and the typical for complex systems phenomena .
 The idea of the statistical approach to physical systems was to calculate macroscopically measurable values of energy, pressure, and other parameters . Not by following the position, velocity, and mass of each particle and then adding the individual values, but from statistical averages over the entire crowd .
 We do not derive social energy from physical one, as we do with a human from an ape, but regard them both coming from a common source . We don't derive a human or an ape from a physical source, but we regard them as a human .
 We must make sure that those concepts do really apply, and this is where we encounter multiple problems . We need to make sure, however, that these concepts really apply to the world .
 To speak about probabilities, we need a reproducible system in which a large—the larger the better—number of events with different outcomes can be observed and counted . The larger a large number of events, the better, the larger a larger number of outcomes, can be seen and counted
 In a coin tosses, heads and tails fall out equally often, i.e., their probabilities are close to 0.5.5 . For example, if the event is tossing a coin, then in a very large number of tosses the odds are low enough to determine the
 The probability that the coin falls flat is 1, which means that no matter what, either heads or tails always come out . For example, the probability of a coin falling flat in a coin is 1 .
 This is not so simple when tossing a coin over sand where it can not only fall flat but wedge into the sand . A coin tosser over sand is not easy to toss over and must be careful not to wedge .
 We cannot use a rigged coin in statistics, but humans in the small leadership groups, which are usually responsible for historical decisions, are always bent on something, and, worst of all, like Louis XIV, sometimes fall neither heads nor tails but on edge .
 When we attribute a probability to a bond couple in quantitative applications of pattern theory such as image processing, the probabilities can be calculated by observing a large number of images .
 Analysis of frequency with which a certain word follows another word in the text is one of the oldest examples of text analysis .
 To obtain these numbers, many chunks of text should be statistically analyzed and to speak about probability is perfectly permissible . To obtain this data, the author of this article uses the term "possibility"
 "In pattern history we deal with unique events that can never be repeated," says David Cameron . In pattern history, "unique events that never can be repeated"
 There is no place for probabilities, unless we have statistical averages, and often we indeed have them . Strictly speaking, there is no room for probabilities in the game .
 The statistics of divorce, one-parent families, and domestic violence tell us about the average strength of family bonds . The statistics are taken over a large population at different moments in time .
 We feel uncomfortable, however, speaking about the strength of the bond between the king and his subjects in terms of probability . The king's bond with his subjects is unlikely to be broken .
 The kings and dictators themselves kept a mental index of probability of the associate’s betrayal, taking preventive measures if the index spiked . Yet the kings themselves had no qualms about that .
 Odds are that chances are that our predictions will be proved wrong, says historian . Of course, we could keep silence about probabilities and talk only about the strength of bonds, as historians do, but with the kings and their subjects, as well as with presidents and democracies .
 When we have a certain pattern of past behavior, based on an extensive record, there is a good chance the prediction will come true . Nevertheless, when . We have a pattern of . past behavior . based on . an extensive . record, it is not a prediction that it will come
 Political analysts predicted before the first term elections that Bill Clinton as president could flip on his words . That was certainly the case when political analysts had predicted that Clinton would flip on some of his promises .
 Strength of any physical bond can be expressed through the probability of its breaking under stress . Strength of a physical bond is expressed by the probability it breaks under stress. Strength is expressed in the strength of a bond that can be broken under stress, such as a bond .
 Usually the material strength is expressed in the minimal load that breaks it . The material strength of a material is expressed by the minimal amount of load it takes to break it .
 We cannot escape probabilities even using the tempting euphemism of bond strength . We are not going to be able to escape probabilities, even if we use the term 'bond strength'
 The strength of the bond couple is a more general and universal concept than probability of its breakup . Nevertheless, without any intent to undennine the foundations of science, we can make a wild conjecture that the strength of a couple is more general than the probability of a breakup .
 We must acknowledge that we are at the starting point of the evolution of our understanding how social patterns develop and we cannot satisfy even most liberal requirements of scientific theory . We are at a point of evolution, and we are not satisfied with scientific theory. We must accept that we cannot satisfied even
 "We have to remind again that we are not developing a sociological theory. We have to remember that we're not developing sociological theories. We're not in the process of developing a sociology theory," says Ms. Laura Ling .
 "What we are trying to do is to find a way to speak about society in terms equally applicable to any natural phenomenon," he says .
 In the following quotations from a reference book on physics, the italics are ours . The italicized quotes are from the book on the subject of physics . We are happy to clarify that physics is not a matter of science .
 Energy is a certain abstract scalar quantity that an object (either matter or wave) is said to possess . Energy is an abstract quantity that a person (or object) can say to possess. Energy is the quantity of an object that it possesses .
 It is not something that is directly observable, although in certain cases, the behavior of the object possessing a particular amount of energy> can be observed and the energy can be inferred .
 In more complex processes, which may involve mechanical as well as thermal interaction, the heat transferred is more difficult to identify . Heat transferred in complex processes such as mechanical and thermal interaction is difficult to reveal .
 Much of the history of thermodynamics concerns the slow evolution of concepts of heat, energy’, and entropy, and of the distinctions between them .
 Statistical physics feels uncomfortable about macroscopic values, too . Not only that, statistical physics is uncomfortable about microscopic numbers . But it's also uncomfortable about the value of a person's life, too.
 If we calculate the pressure of gas in a corked bottle from its temperature, we do not have a multitude of bottles with gas . We calculate pressure of a bottle from the temperature of its temperature to determine its pressure .
 The pressure is an average over many imaginary bottles identical with this particular one . This is why the physicist says that the pressure is not an average . The pressure in the bottle is the same as the pressure in a bottle .
 To construct an ensemble for a particular calculation, we consider an arbitrarily large number of independent replicas of the system . We used a similar cop-out when presented our pattern history as related to an imaginary planet like ours .
 Our England, France, Russia, and China are to be found as independent replicas on other planets similar to our Earth . We say that since we are not historians, we say that our England, . France, . Russia, China, and . Russia are to . be found on
 In fact, the sociologist Peter Blau illustrated his concept of sociological structure with the help of an imaginary society on the planet Stellar 8R . The Aytars come in two colors, blue and green, and vary in height from ten to thirty inches .
 Nevertheless, these simple beings developed an amazing social complexity . Nevertheless, they developed an incredible social complexity, says the author .
 We decide to simply cut the Gordean knot, use probability and strength interchangeably, and do what we intuitively consider right . And so we decide to use probability, strength and probability as a guide .
 The next problem is that in physics the distinction between heat and work, is cardinal . The distinction between two forms of energy is cardinal, according to the physicist .
 Work is the transfer of energy from one object to another by a force from one on the other . When that second object is displaced by the force, the second object will be displaced . Work is a transfer of work energy from an object to an object .
 Often the nature of the first object need not be specified if the force doing the work is known . The nature of a first object must be specified in the work .
 Work can be calculated without knowing anything about the person pushing . The work can be done without the knowledge of the pushing person .
 Heat is chaotic energy which rattles all bonds indiscriminately and tests their strength . Heat is chaos energy which . rattles . all bonds and tests them indiscriminately, tests them strength .
 In times of war and revolution, people act as they would not under normal circumstances . People act differently in times of unrest or war, or in a state of agitation, says historian .
 The individual development of a human being from egg and sperm is a lot of work and no chaos, says Dr. John Sutter . Dr. Sutter says the development of an infant from egg to sperm is "no chaos"
 Social construction, too, needs a certain mechanism, which is what is what the society is all about . Social construction also needs a mechanism, and social construction, also needs to be built .
 "In times of social chaos this machine functions with deviations from its expected performance and can break down," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 In pattern terms, we say that the rules of regularity change and we have to look for a new pattern and a new template . The rules of the regularity of the world's most successful politician change .
 The similarity between society and machine is the cyclical character of its function . The similarity to society and machines is the same as the function of the machines .
 Like the crankshaft of an engine, it makes a daily turn and comes to the almost the same state next morning . The crankshft of the engine is like a crankhaft that makes daily turns .
 The difference is that the machine needs a source of energy and the universe goes on its own . The universe goes to its own, but the machine does not need a source .
 It is much more difficult to do complex job a state of agitation or under barrage of irritating impulses. It is difficult to work in such a complex job, he said . He said: "It's much more than difficult to deal with complex job than it is to do simple job a
 The negative bonds require complex and organized efforts to stay in lock . "Negative bonds" require complex efforts to keep in lock. "Negotiations" need to be made to avoid a repeat of the bond crisis .
 The long-time systematic trends of society, like the movement of the American frontier westward, were driven by systematic work at a low degree of chaos, and along conscious patterns .
 In the process, some bond couples are locked, some broken, and some made neutral . Some bond couples have been locked and some have been broken .
 We start with a simple triangular pattern (it could be a love triangle) with three generators and three positive bonds between them . The pattern is based on a simple triangle pattern .
 To show different strength of the bonds, we use lines of different thickness . We use lines to show different thicknesses of bonds .
 Politicians can counteract the action of other politicians and working on the same nut with two wrenches in opposite directions . During this process, politicians can counteract other politicians' actions . Politicians are trying to counter each other's actions with wrenches .
 In 2001, terrorists clearly wanted to trigger national psychosis and break down the mechanism of normal life . Terrorists wanted to 'trigger national psychosis' and 'break down normal life'
 The United States counterattack in Afghanistan used the relentless bombardment to break down the cohesion of the Taliban . The U.S. counterattack was used to break Taliban cohesion in Afghanistan .
 In terms of Nietzsche’s Apollonian-Dionysian dichotomy, we can call pattern work Apolloni and pattern heat Dionysian . Pattern work is pattern work, pattern heat is pattern heat, and pattern work is heat .
 If social thennodynamics is to be developed, Nietzsche will be remembered as its founder . Nietzsche is the founder of the first class of then-nontodynamics .
 In a stable world, some probabilities should be close to one and some others close to zero . In a more or less stable—Apollonian—world, some probability should be closer to one, some others to zero.
 In the real world, the probability that our mail with bills and checks will be delivered on time and to the right address is pretty close to 1 . The probability that an asteroid collides with our planet tomorrow is rather low. For example, in our real world the probability of an asteroid
 The probability of the Earth being hit by an unknown near-earth-object within a year is roughly one in 100,000 . Some estimations say the probability of an object hitting the Earth is one in a year . Some estimates say the chances of an asteroid hitting Earth are one in
 If two airplanes strike two skyscrapers within two hours, there is no place to chance and there must be a lot of careful work behind . If two planes strike, there are no places to chance, says CNN.com's Tom Charity .
 There is a non-negligible probability of an accident tomorrow in which both improbable events can happen . Yet, there is no doubt that tomorrow's accident will take place in a different way .
 We decrease this probability by increasing our attention while driving, which in a dense traffic or poor weather can be an exhaustive work, as we all understand without any physics . We increase our attention when driving in dense traffic, poor weather or dense traffic .
 By driving carefully, we increase the strength of the bond between the wheel and the car . We also keep the bond from the door edge and the body neutral neutral .
 We increase the probability of the accident by reckless—Dionysian—driving and maximize it by literally Dionysian drinking . We are more likely to drive recklessly and more recklessly .
 The Nietzschean thermodynamics is an interesting subject in itself, and the original text gives a lot of material to a pattern sociologist, but we have to move on . We have a lot more material for a pattern sociology researcher .
 Work should be capable of creating order at constant temperature . Therefore, we should specify that work is capable of . creating order . We should specify . that work should be able to . create order . At constant temperature.
 A social revolution has a good chance to win when the government is weak or separated from the army, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer says a social revolution can win when it is separated from government .
 The state of war was often used by both dictators and democracies to freeze the society, limit the degree of freedom of speech and movement, control consumption, etc. State of war often used to freeze society .
 This may seem to contradict our interpretation of war as a heater for society . It may seem that war is not a warm-up for society, but it's a good thing for the nation .
 The government needs the martial law to cool down the military machine so that it could function reliably and win the war . What we mean is that the government needs to cool the military to function reliably .
 The propaganda li nk nk s the desirable victory with the need to sacrifice the benefits of peace . The propaganda lk s is the desirable . victory with a need to . sacrifice the . benefits of the peace .
 During the unpopular Vietnam War even harsh measures could not maintain the link between the war and the justification of sacrifices . Even harsh measures failed to maintain the connection between war and sacrifice .
 The plight of the ethnic Japanese in USA during WWII drew little attention because of the war was popular . The Japanese in the U.S. in the United States during WWII was a relatively small minority .
 Since the Industrial Revolution, our civilization has been driven by our ability to burn fuel . We convert chaotic energy of heat into organized forms of energy capable of performing work .
 The use of energy in the form of heat, cold, mechanical work, electricity, and food is the ultimate source of social life . Energy in form of heating, cold and mechanical work is a key to social life in the world .
 Limited to food as the only source of energy, the society can revert to its tribal forms . The society can also revert to tribal forms.
 We cannot say whether social energy is conserved or not because we cannot measure it . Social energy conserves or conserves because we can't measure it, he says . We can't say whether it conserves, he adds, because it's impossible to measure it.
 What we borrow from physics is the consequence of the principle of conservation, says physicist . "What we borrow is a consequence of conservation," he says .
 If they initially have different energy and are isolated from the rest of the world, the principle of conservation says is that it is impossible for both of them to increase or decrease energy simultaneously because it would change the total quantity .
 This principle does not tell us that this would indeed always happen within certain time . This principle, however, does not always always always tell us of certain things .
 There is a gap in classical physics because life and society had never been its objects . Life and society were never the objects of classical physics, he says .
 We can convert B into A by placing the refrigerator in the wall between chambers so that it heats one chamber and cools the other . Thus, we can convert A into B .
 Not all systems are capable of exchange of energy at a simple contact but only those that store it in the form of movement such as heat, radiation, or mechanical impact .
 Living organism is the only natural invention of this kind to transform the energy of food stored in chemical bonds into work of walking, hunting, and thinking . Living organisms are only natural inventions to transform energy stored in . chemical bonds .
 What follows from the tendency of all systems to equalize their energies at contact, provided they can exchange energy, is the direction of a spontaneous process, i.e. The process is not induced from the outside .
 On its own, a system tends to decrease its energy by transferring it to another system with lower energy . The energy is transferred by transferring energy to a lower energy system .
 Why this does not happen had been a mystery for physics until the concept of entropy, i.e., measure of chaos, was introduced only a few years after Darwin’s On the Origin of Species by Rudolf Clausius and Ludwig Boltzmann .
 In short, the conclusion of classical thennodynamics was that in an isolated system the degree of chaos could only increase . In short of the conclusion, the . conclusion of the . enriched classical . thennodynamic was that the . degree of the chaos in the . isolated system could only
 In order to maintain order in a dynamic system, energy in the form of work should be spent constantly . Energy should be constantly spent constantly in order to keep order .
 Society is a system that indefinitely postpones the fulfillment of the prophesy of classical equilibrium thennodynamics . Society is an indefinite postponement of the prophecy of classical equine equilibrium . Society will not be able to be fully satisfied with society's success .
 It is often symbolized as G, from the name of J.W.Gibbs who introduced it around 1870 .
 G is minimal when it reaches the state of the ‘non-change” the physical Nirvana of equilibrium . It is the free energy that always decreases when an isolated system spontaneously changes . Free energy always decreases .
 Ludwig Boltzmann was the link between energy and probability . Willard Gibbs and Ilya Prigogine also worked on the discovery of the link .
 Most imaginable changes in the world were impossible as spontaneous processes . Humans and other living beings could perform improbable changes by spending free energy .
 Both biological and social evolution, therefore, are records of improbable events made possible using the energy of food (i.e., transfonned energy of sunlight) and mineral fuel . Evolution is made possible by transfonning energy from food and minerals .
 "The requirement for such course of things, as we know, is the absence of equilibrium," says the author of the book . "We know that equilibrium is not possible"
 The changing seasons, day and night, tide, climate, winds, volcano eruptions, etc. were most probable sources that kept evolution awake, far from the mortal sleep of equilibrium .
 There had always been plenty of turmoil on earth even without the restless humans . There was always plenty of chaos even without humans .
 The energy of food and mineral resources could be spent by the social engine in two basic ways . The social engine could spend the energy of the food and minerals in two simple ways, says pattern historian .
 One is to change its temperature in either direction, i.e. freeze the society by more regulations or heat it up by more freedom, and . do it indiscriminately . One of the options is to freeze society with more regulations, or freeze it up .
 The work of a politician is to fonn new bonds in new alliances and to break others that stand in the way, says David Cameron . Politicians must "fonn" new bonds and alliances in order to win back votes, he says .
 We hope that our illustrations helped clarify the difference between social heat and social work without making it too clear to be a target of devastating criticism .
 We must say that the parallel between thermodynamics of an engine and a social system is extremely limited . The parallel between the thermodynamics and the social nature of the engine and the power of a human society is very limited .
 Thermodynamics study systems full of constant internal movement . Thermodynamic systems are capable of coming to equilibrium very quickly. Thermological systems are very slow to come to an equilibrium .
 A very slight jolt knocks the system off and it falls down, releasing its energy . The system is released when it is hit by a small jolt .
 Living systems are rich with locally metastable states, especially in muscles and nerves, kept in the state of readiness and capable of firing at any moment .
 After discharge, they are pumped up back to the previous state by biochemical mechanisms . They are then pumped up again by biochemical processes .
 A living system as a whole, however, may stay metastable for a long time, as a snake waiting for prey . The living system is metastable as a living system, but it may be metastable .
 Physics has no means to predict when a metastable system will release its energy because physics is outside history . Physics can't predict when the energy will release because it is outside of history .
 Metastability could be illustrated by two examples, curiously, at the same geographical location . The two examples could be seen in the same location .
 One is the San Anreas Fault, a stressed geological formation capable of releasing its energy in an earthquake . Another is a stress-stracked geological formation that could release energy in a quake .
 Society, as any living system, is not governed by the laws of classical equilibrium thennodynamics, because of the phenomenon of memory . Society is not even governed by non-equilibrium thennodynamic laws of fluid systems, as is fluid systems .
 We wanted to offer some ideas how both aspects could be combined in the concept of ‘solid’ but labile pattern subjected to uncertainty and change . All we wanted was to offer . ideas how . both aspects of the “solid” and “labile”
 While using physical tenninology we always need to keep in mind the limitations of our analogies . We need to always be aware of the limitations in our analogs .
 Answering the question of legitimacy asked in the beginning of this chapter, we would say that the world as a whole, comprising physical, biological, mental, social, and computer phenomena, probably, preserves the laws of thermodynamics under a certain transformation .
 It is hard to define what kind of a transformation it is, but in a tentative manner, it is from one pattern system to another . It is a tentative way to get around the world, but it's not clear what it is .
 We do not need to go into further details because we neither identify social energy with physical energy, nor can present any quantitative data without which there is no science . We are not going to go further .
 A cubist, metaphoric, and blurred study for a picture that could be completed by future enthusiasts . Until then, all we can do is to paint a cubist and metaphoric study for future .
 Its mapping on pattern theory is an enormous and exciting subject that by no means can be reviewed here . The mapping of patterns on patterns is a huge and fascinating subject .
 The mutual echo of Max Weber’s ‘ideal types’ and our snapshot diagrams can be heard, for example, in Chapter 19, Testing the Ariadne's thread . There is a more than visual similarity between George SimmeTs ideas of distance and our bell
 It is a relatively short review that combines both conceptual and evolutionary projections of sociology with clarity and attractive organization of the material .
 "It pays attention to concepts off mainstream and offers a rich collection of sociological building blocks," says the author .
 The reader could find there a history of sociologists’ intuitive drive toward the principles that govern society as natural system . Socialists have a long history of trying to find out how society is governed by natural principles .
 One could see many of our pattern bones underneath the textual flesh of sociological constructs . The pattern bones of the American society are visible in the social constructions of our society .
 The borrowings from mathematics, physics, biology, and even chemistry have never produced a satisfactory and universally acceptable sociological paradigm . The question is why the borrowings of mathematics and physics have never been a satisfactory .
 The answer is, probably, that theory in natural sciences is inseparable from its predictive power and experimental test . The answer to the question is: Theory in natural science is inseparably linked to its prediction power and test .
 It is a different and yet unclear problem where the limits of predictability are . It is not a different problem for the government to predictability, it is a problem .
 In the next chapter, we will discuss the possibility of expanding the limits of the limits .
 There are Association for Computers in Humanities, The Journal of the Association for History and Computing, journals History and computing and Computers and the Humanities . There are also Association for . Computers . in Humanity .
 Among the suggested directions was creating virtual historical reality to familiarize students with art and culture of the past . Students also suggested creating a virtual history of art and history .
 In this chapter we would like to suggest some new ways to refresh the marital routine . This chapter includes suggestions for a new way of getting married .
 Historians agree that such technological inventions as stirrups, gunpowder, book printing, steam engine, telephone, contraceptives, TV, etc. changed the course of history .
 Technology is a powerful, if not the most powerful, factor of modem history . Technology is also a powerful factor in modem history, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Industrial revolution was, probably, the largest twist of history on a large scale, comparable with the emergence of primates in biological evolution . Industrial revolution is, probably . comparable with emergence of primate in evolution, says author .
 TV was considered largely responsible for the victory of John Kennedy over Richard Nixon in the presidential campaign of I960, as well as for the public opposition to the Vietnam War, the bloody images of which were brought by TV .
 The apocalyptic TV images of September 11 had a different effect, generating a unified response at all levels . The apocalyptic images of the 9/11 had a similar effect on all levels, CNN's Tom Charity says .
 On the dawn of the twentieth century, radically new technology used to create euphoria and complacency . On the bright dawn of 20th century, the technology created euphoria . It was used as a weapon of war for the first time .
 Artists may come who will portray the marvel of the wires that quiver with electrified words, and the romance of the switchboards that tremble with the secrets of a great city .
 Francis Poulenc composed an opera basing on the drama La Voix Humaine by Jean Cocteau . Not long after this amazing prophesy, Francis Poulenc commissioned an opera based on the story .
 On the stage a young woman was saying the last adieu to her lost lover who was inaudibly cutting the remaining threads of hope over the telephone . The young woman said the last goodbye to a lost lover .
 She and the apparatus were the only visible characters of the opera, and with the sound of the replaced receiver came the final dead silence .
 The tapes of yet another American President revealed a drama of national deceit . Already in the twenty-first century, the discovery and publication of the tapes revealed a national deceit, writes CNN's John Sutter .
 Computers ushered into the limelight with a warning from Norbert Wiener, the creator of cybernetics, who thought about a possible domination of computers over humans . Computers, unlike the previous radical inventions, were ushered into .
 His cautionary parables influenced a non-stop flood of sci-fi books and movies . The fragments of the tenn he coined were used as building blocks for cyberspace and cyborgs .
 Computers are not the only major invention that has irreversibly changed our life . Computers and other inventions have also changed the way we live our lives .
 The difference is that computers do not just perfonnn a certain ancient social function, like calculation, communication, and transportation, but stick to literally everything . Computers penetrate every human occupation, including that of historian and writer .
 Computers are increasingly becoming an omnipresent pervasive aspect of civilization . Computers increasingly becoming a pervasive part of the world's society .
 Global economy is perceived as a fluid aggregate of a multitude of interacting business entities . When we are talking about global economy, it is seen as an 'fluid aggregate' of interacting businesses .
 Other components of society, such as national government, education, religion, business, institutions, culture, are globally multiple, fragmented, variegated, competitive, and localized . Other components and functions of society are also globally multiple .
 There is no single company controlling global communication, transportation, education, health, and finances . There are no single companies controlling global communications and transportation .
 Computers are fonning a single uncontested global system, resurrecting, in some eyes, the totalitarian utopia on a global scale . Computers, however, are fonging a single . system, resurrected, some eyes say, by fusing together uncontested systems .
 We euphorically expect computers to bring the entire world to our senses and fingertips . We are euphorically expecting computers to be able to access the world with our fingertips .
 As the backside of this achievement, they established themselves as a two-ways interface and, conversely, they can bring our individual life to somebody’s ill eyes and fingertips . As a backside, they establish themselves as the two-way interface .
 The probabilities of some events may change the probabilities of other events or information may change behavior . It is simply another way to say that probabilities of events change the probability of certain events .
 The electronic bonds between generators of the inner circle are all close to neutral and need a merely symbolic quantity of energy to change . The bonds in the outer world require ‘real’ energy to be changed or maintained .
 This gives an unprecedented social power to the mediator as collector, processor, and distributor of information . The mediator is a powerful social power in the social arena, says CNN.com .
 Even the human brain does not have this kind of a mediator power over the body because with all its biochemical efficiency it requires a lot of energy and time to select a task, acquire infonnation, develop strategy, follow its execution .
 At this point we cannot say that the brain has opened its loft to consciousness, but the subconscious basement is up for rent . "At this point, we can't say that . We cannot say ... that . the brain is open to consciousness," says the author .
 In a sense, computers have increased the distance between us and the real life, making more room for a shadowy world where abstraction, fantasies, and facts could be difficult to discern . The world of computers has become an abstraction, fantasy, and reality .
 The acceptance of what is seen on the surface, the sign, as the only reality is typical for the postmodern culture, is typical of the post-postmodern culture .
 It is commonly believed that computers assist our logical thinking, but, as it turns out, their combinatorial potential is equally great in creating monsters and chimers .
 Computer anthropologist Sherry Turkle in her Life on the Screen describes the imaginary world of collective computer games over the Internet where a young person can develop a virtual personality different from his or her own and live in a surrogate of real life .
 There is a certain parallel between the new, still off-mainstream, cyber-culture and the postmodern trend of smearing the razor-sharp dichotomy between true and false .
 Our task in this chapter is not speculation on the future of humankind, however, but some insight on the role computers may play in pattern history .
 A sudden wealth can fall from the skies and a nuclear accident can devastate a large area . Nuclear accidents can also devastate large areas of the world .
 A war with the participation of Switzerland or Sweden is improbable, while violence between different ethnic and religious conclaves in close contact is on the cards . A war is unlikely to take place in Switzerland, Sweden or Sweden .
 Historians would find dozens of reasons for what had happened . Post factum, historians would find plenty of reasons .
 The act of a collapse of an empire is a typical act of history which has been repeated throughout millennia . On the one hand, the very act of collapse is typical of history, the author says .
 It is as typical as the fonnation of an empire, and we can say about any political and industrial empire that it will end badly . It is a typical of any political or industrial empire, it ends badly, we say . We can say that any empire ends badly .
 The dubious property of computers to create virtual reality may come very handy for pattern history where we need to compare arrays of final states and transition pathways to them .
 If the world is driven by divine will, it is only natural to look for signs of it, such as facial expression . We read the mood by facial expression, like we read moods by facial expressions . If you want to know more about the world, contact CNN iReport .
 Oracle, diviner, augur, clairvoyant and astrologer have been performing a certain social function up to present . Oracle and diviner have performed a number of social functions in the past .
 "It did very well because of the incompleteness of its predictions. Ambiguous and enigmatic" The film was "ambiguous" and "introspective"
 Crane Brinton predicted the unification of Europe based on the long-tenn European pattern of unification that could be traced through its history . The American historian predicted that after WW2 .
 European nations were reminded that they belonged to a larger entity and were not allowed to kill each other . European countries were reminded they were members of a larger organisation .
 Andrey Amalrik predicted the dissolution of the Soviet Empire along the ethnic cracks . The other prophet of the past is Andrey Andrey, a Russian dissident who predicted the end of Soviet power .
 The time of evolution, as Ilya Prigogine argues, has nothing to do with the clock and calendar . Yet this is exactly what we want the oracle to tell us .
 We associate science with a set of established principles that can be tested experimentally or by observation of predicted phenomena . Science is based on established principles, such as the principles of science .
 We can successfully formulate the laws of history as a sequence of banalities, like any empire is doomed, or any political leader is a liar, or Eastern ways are different from Western ones, or a mass discontent ends up in a revolt . But we can't successfully formulate history into a
 If we want to go beyond the all-I-need-to-know, I-learned-in-the-kindergarten type statements, we need to specify time and place . If you want to know more, you need to know when and where .
 Universal principles have little to do with the need of the moment and the immediate future because they are too general . By definition, however, universal principles don't have to be based on need of moment and immediate future .
 We tend to think condescendingly about our ancestors thousands of years ago, afraid of the world with its frightening gods, and trying to solicit their benevolence with sacrifices . We often think of our ancestors as being afraid of world with frightening gods . We're afraid of gods, but
 Not long ago educated people of Europe and America used to call the tribes without metal tools and agriculture, agriculture, and literacy savages .
 In 1910, Norman Angell argued against the possibility of a prolonged and destructive war because it would have no winner . As and example of an apparently wrong prediction, not long before WWI, in 1910, a book was published— The Great Illusion .
 Europe easily slid into the next war . It was achieved, however, and in fact, it was so high that Europe slid into next war.
 The prediction was wrong concerning WWI, but it was prophetic regarding the world after WW2 . Many believe the nuclear weapon, as many believe, started playing a deterring role in the war .
 We do not have a proof and the situation may quickly change if the weapon proliferates among relatively small states under dictatorial rule, but the prophet was right, as far as reasonable people were concerned .
 Niall Ferguson starts his The Pity of War with the analysis of pre-WWl prophetic literature . Ferguson's book is based on the work of a British historian . He also discusses the impact of the War of the Cold War .
 One Derobespierre turned into De Robespierre . Right before the French Revolution one Danton changed his name to d’Anton .
 Feon Festinger quoted in his book on cognitive dissonance . A less trivial example is quoted by Festinger . Feon's book is called "Cognitive dissonance"
 During World War II, some Japanese in the United States, when given the opportunity, requested that they be repatriated to Japan at the end of the war . Some Japanese Americans in the U.S. requested they be returned to Japan .
 For all of them, citizen or not, the request for repatriation was an irrevocable act . "For all of these people, it was an irreversible act. For them, it's not only for them to be repatriated, but for them it was a life-saving
 Many believed the outcome of the war would have been the end of World War II . Many did not request repatriation and a few who did did did not believe the outcome .
 The two Frenchmen could just look at the gauge and see that the time was not right for snobbery . If it were, the two men would just look back at the time .
 The picture of tomorrow immediately influences our decisions to accept or avoid it, says David Cameron . "Picture of tomorrow" is a key part of today's decision-making process .
 Barometer invented in Italy 1643 by Evangelista Torricelli, Galileo’s secretary and successor in the Florentine Academy . Barometer was invented in 1643 .
 Aided by new technology and computers, the art of predicting a catastrophe such as hurricane or earthquake has been slowly developing . We may wonder whether social prognosis could follow meteorology .
 With hindsight we understand that the escalation of Islamic terrorism was heading to its catastrophic culmination in Manhattan . With hindsight, we understand the escalation was heading for its culmination in New York .
 With so many social functions perfonned electronically, someday we may be able to click on the Internet button of the world social weather . The Internet button could be the world's social weather button .
 We certainly do it today by accessing the news button, watching TV, or reading the newspaper . We do it by accessing our news button or using our mobile phones .
 The gauge to measure the tension in the air has been the font size of front page headlines . For the entire twentieth century, the gauge of the tension was the size of the front page headline .
 Worldwatch Institute publishes periodical data about the vital signs of the earth . One of them is the World Watch Institute, which publishes periodicals .
 Production of automobiles, bicycles, spending on advertisement, use of wind power and solar cells, life expectancy, and number of wars are growing, while the production of automobiles and spenn count, grain harvest, and nuclear arsenals are declining .
 Statistical data indicate the parameters of a quasi-equilibrium dynamic system with large number of interacting entities, as if it were a fluid . The statistical data indicate that the parameters are of a 'quasimal' system .
 "We cannot conclude from them what is going to happen next year in Yugoslavia or Namibia," says former president of Yugoslavia and Namibia . "We are not able to predict what will happen in Yugoslavia, Namibia or Yugoslavia," he says .
 Stratfor is a private global intelligence company that issues political forecasts . Stratfor says it is a global intelligence firm that issues forecasts for political events .
 On one hand it will be a period of unprecedented global economic prosperity and growth . On the other hand, the world is set to enjoy unprecedented global growth and prosperity .
 On the other hand, it will become a period of increasing fragmentation and tension in the international system, says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Putin: "It will become an increasing period of increased fragmentation"
 As in the period prior to World War I, prosperity and instability will go hand in hand . Prosperity and instability may go hand-in-hand in the post-WWI era .
 Russia and China will be moving into a closer, primarily anti-American alliance in 1999 . China and Russia will be joining forces in an anti-U.S. alliance .
 Singapore and South Korea will show the strongest tendency toward recovery . Singapore and S. Korea will be the strongest countries to show a strong tendency to recover .
 China will try to contain discontent over economic policies by increasing repression not only on dissidents, but on the urban unemployed and unhappy small business people . China's economic policies will be aimed at containing discontent with economic policies .
 Asian economic institutions, like the Asian Monetary Fund, will emerge in 1999 . The Asian Economic Institutions are expected to emerge in the near future .
 The Serbs, supported by the Russians, will test the U.S. in Kosovo . Serbs will be supported by Russia and the United States in Kosovo.
 There is increasing danger of a simultaneous challenge from Serbia and Iraq, straining U.S. military capabilities dramatically . The threat is a threat to the United States, especially in Iraq and Serbia .
 The predictions about Kosovo and economy of Japan came true, but the decisive way NATO responded to Kosovo was not foreseen . NATO's response to the Kosovo crisis was also not predicted, but NATO responded .
 The Chinese government responded with repressions to Falun Gong movement . Chinese government represses the movement . The government represses the movement in response to the Chinese government .
 Russia is preoccupied with her own problems and is not interested in China, says Putin . "Russia is preoccupying its own problems," Putin says .
 The turn of events after September 11 changed the overall picture dramatically, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The social, cultural, and economic non-uniformity of the world generates the historical climate and weather . Like the atmospheric conditions are driven by the inequality in distribution of land, water, mountains, plains, and solar radiation over the surface .
 The general trend of the twentieth century has been toward narrowing the gap between the tribes of Amazon and residents of Paris, but the difference remains enormous even among the latter . The difference between the two is enormous even though the difference is enormous .
 What we can imagine is applied history which could, with some degree of accuracy, tell us what is going to happen within a particular time and space . Like meteorology, applied history could be used to predict what will happen in particular time .
 While the yesterday’s news are synonymous with irrelevancy, the pattern survives in the information dust . The change and evolution of all patterns can be described in the same terms .
 In other words, we are pointing not to particular patterns of history but the pattern paradigm as a possible platform for the applied study of complex evolving systems . We are pointing out that we are looking at the patterns as possible platforms for the application of complex systems .
 The paradox in our attitude toward history is that what is predictable is either of no importance or within our power to prepare to it and either welcome or prevent the change . The paradox is that it is not important to predict or prepare for the change, but to prepare for it .
 After Charles Darwin and Gregor Mendel it became an explanatory science based on powerful hypotheses without the exact knowledge of the mechanisms of evolution and heredity . It became an explanation science .
 The long gone ammonites, dinosaurs, and Neanderthals are history in the same sense as the Roman, Austro-Hungarian, and Soviet empires . For paleontologist and evolutionary biologist they all lit the same evolutionary paradigm, whether we know which species originated from which or not
 Biology is a truly experimental science intervening in the genetic code and creating new organisms . In the second half of the twentieth century, biology is an experimental science, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 Gregor Mendel was measuring the numbers of pea flowers of different colors . Antoine Lavoisier weighed the candle before and after burning it in a closed vessel . The candle was measured by Mendel and weighed by the candle .
 Scientific meteorology started with measuring temperature, atmospheric pressure, and wind velocity . Scientific meteorologists measured temperature and atmospheric pressure . Meteorologists measured wind velocity and atmospheric temperature .
 Weather forecast ""70% chance of rain tomorrow" is an understandable expression but a mathematician could be uncomfortable with this statement . For us, the weather forecast is an expression that is understandable, but it's not an expression .
 If we had a thousand planets like Earth, with a thousand of identical situations, then probably on one of them the same inefficient government would manage the appropriate reforms due to some accidental set of circumstances . The government is inefficient on Earth, but it is not always the same thing .
 "We never have any statistical ensemble of social transfonnations from the same starting conditions. But we never have social transfonsations," says the author of the book . "Social transfonsions" never have the same statistical ensemble, he says .
 It may seem that Pitirim Sorokin’s tables of wars and calamities offer such statistics, but they comprise different conditions, times, and places . Sorokin's tables of calamities are different conditions and times, but there are different times and conditions .
 The media present locally a daily list of events and current forecasts .
 The problem with the media is that what is not in the news does not exist for the reader or TV-watcher . The problem is that it is not the news, but the news doesn't exist for viewers or viewers .
 Starting from the twentieth century, the previously voiceless masses have been heard through the opinion polls . The majority of the population has been heard in opinion polls for the first time .
 Their most intimate desires can be registered in consumption statistics, not to mention fear, hope, and stock market indices . They can also be registered on consumption statistics and stock markets .
 They pull the levers of the society by voting or non-voting, not always with anticipated results . The results are not always anticipated results, however, they are .
 In the twenty-first century, whether the masses want it or not, their behavior, urges, impulses, hopes, hopes and fears will be most probably pooled in the ocean of global information . In the first century, the masses will probably be pooled in an ocean of information .
 The modem telephone system automatically records the date, time, and connection between two numbers . It plays an increasing role in criminal and political investigations .
 Nobody, not even the U.S. President, is free from this Orwellian watch, which would be impossible without computers, says CNN.com .
 Web filters can be used for both discarding the undesirable information and fishing out the desirable one . Web filters are used to filter out undesirable information from the web .
 Historians seem to have abandoned search for the timeless laws of history and global regularities as eternal and powerful as the laws of physics . Historians appear to be abandoning search for timeless laws, global regularity .
 Such laws are of little practical use exactly because they are timeless, such as laws of the age of law . Such laws should not be applied to the future, but are timeless and timeless .
 There is a possibility that the flow of events can be monitored and prognosticated on a constantly updated basis as we do it with the weather . Instead of monitoring the weather, we should use the weather to monitor the flow .
 Social, economical, and political factors can be compared with the outline of continents, only the fonner change constantly and discontinuously . Social,  economic, and political factors . can be . compared to the outline . of continents .
 With all the differences between fluid weather and structured history, a computerized global model is needed for both . The model is based on historical data and historical data . It will be used to help predict the future of the Earth's climate .
 In the developing World Wide Web, we have an emerging computer model of the world without even having asked for it. In developing the world we have a new computer model without even asking for it . In developing countries, the world is now a model for the future of the Internet .
 The Web is usually regarded as a new convenience, providing information and assisting trade . The Web usually provides information and assists trade .
 We pay for information on the Web, however, not only with money, but also with our identity, address, telephone, social security and credit card numbers which are part of our unique individuality . We also pay for the information, which is personal information, not money .
 For the first time ever this model has a potential for representing both thoughts and actions of people in a quantifiable way, locally and globally . The model has potential to represent the thoughts of people globally and locally, locally .
 What the computers bring to history and sociology can be compared with the microscope in biology, balance in chemistry, thermometer in physics . What the computer brings to history is the same as the microscope, balance, balance and thermometer .
 Computers can accumulate quantitative historical data without the participation of the sociologist or historian . Unlike the current use of computers in history for data processing, computers are able to accumulate quantitative history data .
 Non-numerical evaluations are built into the common historical narrative . Note that non-numbers are built in the common narrative .
 This is not what is called a historical happening, but rather a semi-quantitative measurement which allows for building a scale of efficiency similar to the Sorokin’s register of calamities . The Sorokin's register is similar to a register of disasters, but not historical events .
 In other words, it tells us something about the generalized energy of historical configurations . The energy of a historical configuration can tell us something more about the energy of history .
 Brinton’s statement attributes a high tension to the pattern of French government on the eve of certain events, which could only mean a high probability that the government would not survive . Simply speaking, the above Brinton said that a high likelihood is that the French government will not survive
 This quasi-numerical scale has been widely used in social psychology and sociological polling . It has been used in the past for social psychology, sociological polls .
 The bond relation is the bond relation that asks for quantification in the first place . It is a bond relation, it is a relationship that needs quantification .
 We can observe the dissolution of bond couples and the development of new social affinities and idiosyncrasies . We can also observe the decline in bond couples, and the change of social relationships .
 It requires some level of creativity to specify the similarity transformation that links the old and new structures . The problem here is not that much a lack of imagination as its possible hypertrophy .
 The major difficulty, as we see it, is the bond relation expressed statistically . The bond relation is expressed statistically, says the author of the book "Bond Bond"
 Never married male: 20 to 24 years 35.8% 83.4% 25 to 29 years old: 20-24 years old never married male . 25-29 years old are the youngest ever married men in the U.S.
 The bond of marital attraction between sexes is getting weaker, says a sociologist . The natural conclusion of a pattern historian or sociologist, as well as a person from the street, could be that the bond of marriage attraction between the sexes is weaker .
 One explanation of this weakening of the marital bond could be attributed to the rising social temperature due to uncertainty, changing condition, higher mobility, and higher mobility . The hedonistic culture glorifying the ephemeral at the expense of the pennanent .
 Other types of bonds that people form are getting stronger, so that the total energy of the configuration remains nearly unchanged . Another possible explanation is that the other types of bond bonds are growing stronger .
 We do not need to look far in search for the object competing with humans for human attention . The object competing for attention from humans competing with human attention is the world's most powerful object .
 We do not know the answer, which is up to professional sociologists, but we would recommend a statistical monitor that makes distinction between temperature and work .
 If we find that the average time of owning a certain thing goes down (and it looks as it does) the reason is the rising social temperature . For example, if we find . that time of ownership goes down, the . reason is that the social temperature is rising .
 If the general number of things in possession goes up, it means that they are winning the competition with family and friends . If the number of items in possession increases it means they're winning the contest with friends .
 We are flooded with statistic in the form of Nielsen report, electoral and exit polls, crime and roadway statistics, Internet polls and countless others . We're flooded with statistics from Nielsen report and electoral, exit polls .
 We can argue about their reliability and accuracy, but it can be improved and standardized . We can't argue about reliability or accuracy of their accuracy . It can be better and standardized, and we need to improve our accuracy .
 CNN Opinion Polls are an excellent way to share your views on the issues of the day . But they are not statistically valid. They are not statistical valid.
 Father-child bond among not too busy Internet users on a day in mid-June 1999 . Nevertheless, they contain some infonnation .
 Internet, therefore, appears as a potential model of the world, possibly, distorted, but with a chance to account for the distortion . Internet, however, appears to be a model for the world that could be distorted .
 The emphatic intensity of the language in quotations from leaders and rank and files can also be measured and used as an indication of the temperature of the air .
 The poll about Bush and Gore was mostly intuitive, but was less remarkable than the shift of the balance to a draw by the heavy propaganda dumbbells put on the balance of the campaign .
 The prediction like the following, for example, can be made quantitative by monitoring the level of discontent, repression, unemployment, and general unhappiness . The prediction is based on the state of discontent and repression .
 Whether tensions in fact rise or not, comes always, like the chances of rain, with a random component .
 If there is any identified contribution to the rise of temperature, the chances are good that the tension will rise . And yet if there is no identified contribution, the tensions will also rise .
 Stratfor, the company offering the above prediction, generates its forecasts by, among other sources, analyzing email and Internet information . Stratfor is based in Washington, D.C. and New York City .
 The major idea that we want to express here is that instead of probabilities and philosophical difficulties connected with the definition of probability, the statistical data, however limited, can be interpreted in terms of affinity or strength of a bond couple .
 We are not thinking that such industry of a somewhat Banthamian-Orwellian brand would be good for anybody . We are far from thinking that . such . industry of such an industry would be a good thing for anybody, we say .
 It simply happens, and next day historians have to rewrite their books . "It simply happens," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Knowledge offers us an advantage in standing against any dictate, even that of history itself . As we believe, knowledge offers us a advantage, knowledge is an advantage, even if history itself is dictated .
 It seems like a long shot, but the Y2K problem came sooner than everybody expected . It's not a long-shot, but it's a good thing for the world to get ready for the next year .
 Theoretically, USA, where the mutual obligations of government and population are secured not by mentality but by law, is not immune to separatism . U.S. government and people's rights should be secured by law .
 In practice, none of the states has resources comparable with the rest of them, says CNN.com . "In practice, the states have resources that are comparable with others," she says .
 Modern USA seems to feel an increasing stress between equality that presumes distinctive components and the pattern of the melting pot that is supposed to blend the separate components .
 There are always at least two ways to compensate for cognitive dissonance, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 As Heinrich Heine once said, everybody can't be virtuous alone, but for the vice you need two . The vice is vice, says Heine .
 Immiscible components with high melting points are, probably, the best candidates for the generators of future conflicts . The immiscible component is probably the best candidate for future conflicts, says author .
 Any bilingual or multilingual tendency raises the melting point of the components . Thus, any bilingual or multi-lingual tendency raises a melting point, say experts .
 Whether the melting pot can liquefy even the pattern heritage of those Anglo-Americans who designed this unprecedented social configuration is a politically charged question and we better stop here .
 Today we think about a historian as somebody researching the past, often very distant, at best through field work, but not on the battlefield . We think about historian as someone researching the future, often distant, but never on battlefield .
 Thucydides and Flavius Josephus chronicled contemporary events they witnessed and took active part in . The two chronicled history as art and science .
 History, armed with computers, will make a full circle . Who knows, maybe history will come to an end .
 "It is not accidentally that nowhere in this book we gave a definition of what we understand by history," says author . "It's not accidental that there is no definition of history," he says .
 The concept of history, as both events and their description, past and present, and present and future, evolves and changes . The concept is that history is both past and future and evolves, and future .
 History is kneaded and baked every day, like bread, and it comes in a wide variety of shapes . History comes in all shapes, including shapes, shapes and shapes .
 The terrorist attack on September 11, 2001 made the portentous words history and historical sound commonplace . A sunny day in September was September 9, 2001 .
 History becomes a way of life, something that happens only a few times in a century, and the century was not even one year old . History became a way-of-life, something only few times happens only once or twice .
 In November, 2001, while this line is being written, even the human dimensions of the attack are not fully estimated and most of the thousands of the dead are not buried yet . Most of the thousand of the . thousands of . the . dead are still under investigation .
 It is a good time to use lofty words but not a good one for a cool-headed historical account . It's not a great time for an historical account, but it's a time for a serious discussion of the history .
 The counterattack against terrorism is in progress and nobody knows how long it will last . The counterattacks against terrorism in progress are in progress, says CNN's Peter Bergen .
 The innocent are hit with one hand and fed with the other hand of the same unifonned body . The innocent far away are hit by one hand, and fed by the same hand .
 We can see how understanding is slowly crystallizing from chaos, but it cannot be completed until everything is over . We can't see understanding slowly crystallising from chaos but it can't be completed .
 Even if it is over, it will be revised and reinterpreted, both factually and counterfactually, as we saw on the example of WW1 . Even if the world war is over it will still be changed and re-interpreted .
 Counterfactually, we already can see how easily the disaster could have been prevented or how it could be much worse . Counterfactual, we can already imagine how easily it could've been prevented, or how could it have been worse .
 The transition barrier on the fatal day was very low and the array of final states very wide . The transition barriers were very low on the final day of the day .
 In the Prologue we promised to demonstrate an apparatus for looking inside history . In this article, we show how this apparatus can be used to look inside history. We also show how it can also be used for historical purposes .
 What we can do is to search for the patterns of the past that seem to be recognizable in the fragmentary picture . What is the past? Search for patterns of past that are recognizable in fragmentary pictures, says author .
 September 11, 2001 was preceded by a decade of economic growth, uncontested superiority, and untested complacency . 9/11 was the beginning of the decade of America's most successful decade . September 11 was the start of a new era of American prosperity .
 On a smaller scale, with higher resolution, we can see the end of industrial growth, collapse of the “irrational exuberance” of the stock market, and an apparent turn of economic tide . We can see an apparent turning of the economic tide, with the end
 The American society was (and remains) incredibly open and unrestricted as compared with most of the world. The U.S. society was incredibly open, unrestricted, as compared to most of world.
 Local gradients create forces and flows that tend to restore the previous state of the system . New local gradients often restore the system of the previous system .
 The flows of money and alcohol in opposite directions across the New Hampshire-Massachusetts border tend to minimize the local gradient created by the absence of sales tax in one of the neighboring states .
 As result of the flows of refugees to Western Europe, tensions decrease in the source countries but somewhat increase in the recipient countries . As result, tensions increase in both source countries, but increase in recipient countries, say experts .
 The sharp contrast between the openness of the U.S. society and the tightly built restrictive societies creates a similar gradient across the permeable United States borders . The contrast between openness and restrictive societies is similar in the United States .
 The conflict in another part of the world can be easily transferred on the U.S. soil . The conflict is easily transferred to the United States soil .
 In response, it can be transferred in the opposite direction, as it happened many times, at a high economic and social cost of a military conflict . In response to the conflict, the cost of the conflict can also be transferred to the social cost .
 American society has been successfully maintaining a very low level of social anxiety . Despite internal conflicts, internal conflicts and local tensions, the existence of two mutually unfriendly political parties of approximately equal weight, U.S. society has successfully maintained a low social anxiety level .
 The change of the internal structure of American society toward a more restrictive one would face a very high transition barrier . The general satisfaction of the society with the current way of life known simply as freedom would be high .
 It was economical and political freedom that made America a deep attractor on the landscape of the troubled world . America's economic freedom was a strong economic and political strength that made it a strong attractor .
 The Islamic world is in a stressed position, closer to the transition barrier, says CNN.com's John Sutter . He says the Islamic world has a 'stressed position'
 Western ideas start playing a role similar to that of that of the French philosophes in France of the eighteenth century . It may be a far-fetched comparison, but the Western ideas are starting to play a role .
 The voices of the Islamic clerics have been louder, better amplified, fortified with oil money, and the message much simpler . The message of Islamic clerics, however, has been much louder and better amplified by oil money .
 In search for familiar patterns on a smaller scale, we may note similarity between radical Marxism and radical Islam . In search of familiar patterns we may find similarities between Marxism and Islam, we find similarities .
 In Among Believers, he sees the same pattern of the dogmatic search for justice in both Marxist and Islamic revolutions .
 A totalitarian state in a period of stability is not necessarily a gloom world of mass suffering . Contrary to popular opinion and as one of the authors can testify, the author can testify . The author says that totalitarian states in a stable period are not necessarily as bleak as they are .
 It may look bleak for a visitor from the free world, but its inhabitants can laugh, sing, create, create and feel happy as much as people in free world .
 American writer William Saroyan once noted that the loudest laugh can be heard in prison . The loudest laughter can be laughed in prison, he said .
 The secret of well-being in a totalitarian state is the code of behavior, says the U.S. government . The code of conduct in totalitarian states is the behavior of the state, says Dr. Martin Luther Luther .
 It allowed a significant degree of personal freedom, encouraged personal achievements, equality, and did not intrude into personal matters . It allowed . personal freedom .
 It was probably, probably, a much more liberal atmosphere than in the Massachusetts Bay Colony . It was, probably , probably, much more tolerant than in Massachusetts .
 Nobody can control what people think and what they say to each other in private, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "Nobody can control how people think," he says .
 What they say in a narrow public circle can be controlled by informers, says CNN.com's John Sutter . What is said in a private circle can't be controlled, he says .
 The code of behavior enforces the unity of the society as much as military unifonn strengthens it, says the author of the book .
 fundamentalist ideology creates a quasi-military cohesion between followers by controlling selected aspects of behavior, from appearance to rituals to obedience . Any fundamentalist ideology, whether religious or secular, creates a close quasi military cohesion .
 It does not necessarily mean that the cohesion will be abused and aggressively misdirected by the leaders . It doesn't mean that cohesion will not be abused by the leadership, it does .
 It only means that people are expected to follow the leader or leadership by their unifonn and enthusiastic behavior . People should follow their leaders by their enthusiasm and enthusiasm, the author says .
 It seems that the radical and violent interpretation of Islam follows the same pattern. It seems to be that it follows a similar pattern. The radical, violent interpretations of Islam follow a pattern.
 The need for self-sacrifice was justified by the good of the future generations, says President Obama . "Self sacrifice was justified," says Obama .
 If so, the same forces that over centuries guided and pushed the Puritan Yankees toward modem American way of life will work on fundamentalism around the world . If so .
 Soviet ideology right after the revolution was extremely militant . Pattern of ritualistic control of behavior was patterned in the Soviet ideology .
 We remember that militant radicals inside the Soviet leadership were contained for a long time after the experiment with Cuba . The Soviet leadership was able to contain militant radicals in the 1980s after the Cuban experiment .
 The Taliban won on the question of Afghanistan invasion, only to be completely ousted from power later . They won on question of invasion, but were then ousted later in the country .
 The monolith Marxism that set the goal of violent destruction of capitalism split immediately after Marx’s death . Marxism that aimed to destroy capitalism split up immediately after his death . Marx's theory of Marx's Marxist revolution is still relevant today .
 It generated the whole gamut of shades from liberal revisionism to militant Communism . It generated a wide range of shades of shades .
 The relaxation of the militant and xenophobic drive may be the most probable future for Islam as well . Islam may be relaxed in the future as well as the future for Muslims .
 Each side expects the enemy to be smarter, learn faster than itself, and ask for peace as result . The great paradox of fierce and entrenched conflicts is that each side expects to be smart and learn faster .
 By definition, transition state is fluid and changing right before the eyes of the observers . Transition state is 'fluorient and changing' and 'changing'
 It started as an external shock that sent the national adrenalin sky high within a few hours . But it started as a . external shock . The national . adrenalin . was sent sky-high within a . few hours.
 The fact that the attack did not quite fit the known pattern of Pearl Harbor could only add to the anxiety of the public .
 The initial stress gradually subsided, however, from apocalyptic to pragmatic level, and the national leadership clearly played important role in this process . Initial stress subsided from apocalyptic, but eventually subsided .
 It is possible that in ten years history will have a much downsized perspective of the current conflict . It is also possible that history will be a much smaller view of the conflict .
 The next “bad news” does not hike the temperature to the previous highest level, while the next ‘good news’ brings a mixture of some concern with much enthusiasm . The next "good news" does not increase the temperature .
 The high energy of the transition state comes not only from its high temperature and ensuing chaos, but also from its configuration . The transition state is a state of chaos, with a high temperature, and high configuration .
 Many of its Eastern participants—Pakistan, Iran, Indonesia, and Saudi Arabia—are itself highly stressed by internal and international conflicts .
 Japan and Germany are constrained by their historical memory, while Britain is encouraged by her own . Germany and Japan are constrained .
 The ties with Russia and fonner southern Soviet republics are strengthening right before our eyes . The ties between Russia and the southern Soviet Republics are strong, says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Russia's ties with the South Caucasus are strengthening, says Putin .
 The ongoing transformation of the configuration, strikingly similar to a mechanism of a chemical reaction, is what we have seen in the French Revolution, WW1, and the collapse of Communism . The ongoing reaction is similar to what we've seen in WW1 and WW1 .
 Looking through the tiny peephole of the media, which is all most of us can do, we may not see the complete picture . We may not be able to see the full picture of the world .
 The President apparently gets the best view of the transition state while it twists, stretches, and quivers, as desert mirage . There is no such thing as “truth, the whole truth, and nothing but truth” in a complex system . The President, apparently, gets
 The perspective may be very different, depending on what country shoots and edits the documentary of the events and how much fiction it adds to the film .
 The points and lines of the title of this book do not mean that every statesman, analyst, or historian has to draw diagrams made of circles and fancy lines to justify his or her salary and confirm prestige . This is not the case that every stateman or analyst draws diagrams to justify
 Historical narrative, fiction, nonfiction, textbook, memoir, movie, diagram, diagram and diagram are representations of knowledge best suited for different particular purposes . The forms of knowledge are represented by different forms of representations, best for different purposes .
 Behind each representation we find a set of generators, rules of regularity, configurations, and behind some sets of configurations we find patterns . What we are saying is that behind each such representation is a series of generators .
 They pennit us to study all of them in the same language under the all-encompassing aegis of however incomplete thennodynamics of non-equilibrium systems . The then-narrows of thennodynamic systems are important enough to study, they say .
 Maths can be visualized, if needed, by points and lines, but the mathematical abstraction itself is not its visualization . The mathematical abstraction is not the visualization itself, but it's a mathematical abstraction .
 The flow of dollars for the Saudi oil, Egyptian position in the Middle East conflict, and Israeli defense created a high concentration of energy in the area . The area has a permanent high temperature, writes Peter Bergen .
 Most ambitious terrorists seem to be in unrequited love with the Great Satan . On the other hand, the most ambitious terrorist seems to love Satan . Terrorists seem to have unrequired love with Satan, but not with him .
 They are locked up in a deadly embrace with the West who makes it easy for them to increase their personal influence and send tremors all over the world . The West is the only thing to stop them from increasing their influence and sending tremors around the world.
 It is the ancient pattern of the quest for world domination that drives large scale conflicts . We may wait some time before the true intentions of the sides become clear from historical studies .
 Finally, we want to refer the reader to Chapter 21, Ideas and actions and the role of ideas in history . Chapter 21 is "Ideas and actions, ideas and actions in history"
 Flow of soft drinks from West to East vastly exceeded flow of democracy and civil liberties . Flow of oil in the opposite direction notably surpassed flow of information and cooperation . In the exchange of goods and ideas, the flow of soft drink from the West to the East also exceeded flow from democracy and
 This should be seen as pattern-dynamic view, not political. Once again, this should be considered as pattern dynamic view . It's not political, it's pattern dynamic and pattern dynamic .
 History tells us that war always ends with peace and, unfortunately, vice versa . It is in the future and impossible to visualize, but history tells us . War is in a war that ends in peace, and vice versa, says the author .
 The answers to questions of this kind cannot be found in pattern theory, says the author . Pattern theory is a theory of patterns, not pattern theory .
 They cannot be found in abstract chemistry, either, because chemistry is overwhelmingly based on the idea of equilibrium . They are not found in the abstract, but in chemistry, they are not abstract .
 If there is there is a mathematical source of answers, it is the science of complexity . The distance between computer simulations of simplified systems and real life is immense . The science of complex systems is itself very complex and controversial .
 A future pattern historian would carefully reconstruct the configurations before and after the conflict, as well as plot the transition state as a sequence of snapshots .
 We are in the middle of an uncertain and fluid situation which is not yet history, but, mostly, because we are a chemist and a mathematician, and not historians, political analysts, and strategic planners . Today we, the authors, cannot do it, not only . But, mostly
 This is why this chapter is so sparsely embellished with points and lines . This is the reason for this chapter's lack of embellishment . This chapter is the first of its kind .
 If it is ambiguous, the enlargement of the picture and a look at the subtracted details may give more accurate evaluation of the bond couple strength . The enlargement may give a more accurate assessment of the relationship .
 As first approximation, we see Taliban and al-Qaeda as monolith, while a closer look of a historian might reveal internal tensions and rivalry . For example, as first . approximation, as . first approximation to see Taliban as monolithic, while closer . look of historian might show internal
 Future memoirs of American statesmen and generals may disclose the same internal processes in the political and operative planning of the war . The war planning process may have been internalized in the war planning .
 To list the alternative configurations of the final state, we have to look at all the stressed bond couples in the transition state . The final state of the state is a stressed bond couple .
 Even the dependence on foreign oil could persist because a very high transition barrier stands on the way of change . The country is still dependent on oil, but it could be a major source of oil wealth .
 What can change more easily is the immigration and visa policy, as well as international relations, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 The main potential change that can happen and last significant time is the deformation of the pattern of civil liberties, says Julian Zelizer . The last significant change can happen, he says . Zelizer says .
 These are just imaginary examples of a possible post factum analysis in a historically distant future . It is just hypothetical examples of the future .
 The templates of carelessly open society and its paranoid opposite are completely different . The templates are very different, says the author of the book .
 Computer simulation of an abstract model shows the reversible transition from one to the other when temperature reaches a certain level . Remarkably, the computer simulation of a model shows a reversible transition between the two .
 At lower temperature, only one template is trapped in the thermodynamic valley . Only one template can be trapped at lower temperature .
 The experiments are valid only for a closed system, however, however . The experiments of this kind are valid for the first time, however.
 In open non-equilibrium systems, the energy profile constantly changes . The energy profile of these systems is constantly changing . In open systems, energy profiles constantly change, scientists say .
 It can sound a shrill if a similar pattern of escalating terrorism is recorded in measurable units . It can automatically sound a loud shrill in response to similar patterns of terrorism .
 It could be as mandatory to take certain actions, following the already known historical pattern, as to use a fire extinguisher on a kitchen fire, as it is to use an extinguisher .
 It would be a pity to delegate part of human control over human destiny to computers with a mind of their own . It's a pity for humans to delegate some of their power to computers .
 History tells us that humans would do whatever it takes to sleep quietly on their soft mattresses and not on anything as harsh as the terrain of Afghanistan . But the logic of history tells us we would rather rather than sleep on the ground .
 From the point of view of thermodynamics, the accidental disaster will happen sooner or later, but ‘later’ is indefinitely far away . “Sooner” is tomorrow. “sooner’s is tomorrow,” the author says .
 "The gun cannot fire on its own, it needs a finger on the trigger, and sooner or later somebody will pull it," says CNN.com's John Sutter . The gun is not a gun, it is a gun that needs a trigger to fire .
 The accumulation of metastable states is in itself a contemporary pattern and nuclear stockpile is an extreme example . Nuclear stockpile is the most extreme example of a modern nuclear stockpile .
 Potential and kinetic energy is being accumulating in taller buildings, faster and larger planes, larger and heavier cars, larger oil tankers, guns in private possession, oil and gas storages, and even in the woods surrounding the houses in the suburbs .
 It is accumulating in masses of people who live in poverty and with the sense of injustice . Moreover, it is accumulating . in masses . of people . living in poverty . The social injustice has been accumulating in mass of people, writes CNN.com .
 It is not generally recognized that biological weapon also uses the energy stored in human body . Biological weapon uses energy stored by human body to make weapons .
 From a distant pattern perspective, terrorism, whether of Timothy McVeigh or Osama bin Laden brand, is a social mutation . Terrorists are social mutations, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The love of Werther to Lotte, a betrothed woman, ended with Werther’s suicide because his love was rejected . Werther's suicide was the result of his love being rejected by Lotte . Lotte was a bride to Werther .
 Goethe, who was 23 at the time, woke up famous next morning . His novel became an international bestseller and initiated a wave of commercialization of all things a la Werther .
 The pattern of eliminating the object of love, that of Desdemona and Carmen, does not even need any catalyst . Unfortunately, the pattern of elimination of the love doesn't even need a catalyst, it does . The pattern is similar to that of ending the relationship between Carmen and Des
 It comes as a surprise that the extreme patterns of human personality are still little explored by science . Another easy switch in an inflamed imagination .
 We have mentioned, half seriously, a possible pattern shift in Hitler’s mind in Chapter 22, Three World Wars . We have discussed, half serious, a potential pattern shift .
 Idea and its negation, thesis and antithesis, victory and defeat are always close in the mind . The bond couple can swing from one position to the other, as a pendulum, confusing the border between reality and dream . Idea and the negation of its thesis and its antit
 The age of social psychology could come next after the age of molecular biology . Funding psychological research might be a good investment into national security . Social psychology could be a big investment in national security.
 Americans shocked by suicide mission of terrorists, not all of whom were destitute people . Americans were shocked by the suicide mission . Not all of the terrorists were destitutes people .
 The mass suicide of the Heaven’s Gate cult and the murder-suicide of the Columbine High School had been forgotten . The Heaven's Gate cult's mass suicide and Columbine's murder suicide were forgotten .
 There are very few things we can predict with certainty about large and complex systems . There are few things that can be predicted about large, complex systems, experts say . But that's not always possible, they say .
 They are of thermodynamic nature, and of no immediate use because thermodynamics is beyond time . They are not immediate use, but they are not of immediate use .
 On the contrary, kinetics is about time, but it is only applicable only to known structures . "Kinematic time is not about time but it's about time," he says .
 Yes, it can if we see a pattern of a larger scale, on a higher level of abstraction, but with a limited range of transformations, i.e., alternative configurations . The pattern can be seen on a large scale, but only if it is on a limited scale, i
 Instead of the branching tree of alternatives in a sequence of detailed patterns, we have a more manageable list with just a few . What we gain is that instead of the . branching tree, we gain a . manageable list of alternatives .
 The more abstract the pattern, however, the little use of it today, especially in hedonistic societies which care little about future generations . The pattern is more abstract than the more abstract it is .
 The fall of the Twin Towers seems to follow the same historically new pattern . The World Trade Center was the tallest building on the East Side of the world .
 Taking the second snapshot in April, 2002, we can see the events of 9/11 already taking up a patina of history .
 A new high energy transition state in the Middle East was initiated much earlier and independently . Instead, it was initiated by an army of political analysts, as well as government advisers, experts in history, culture, and psychiatry, and talk show hosts .
 The least expected expert to see on the podium is a natural scientist, least of all, a mathematician or a chemist . It's as if we still believed that an invisible supernatural hand moves the nations and people, as if an invisible .
 The overall picture, however, remains more intricate because, in order to evaluate the probabilities of different pathways, we need a wider range of factors to be taken into account . We need to take into account factors such as climate change, say experts .
 It's still incomparably smaller than the entire picture and comprises the neighborhood of the focal point of change . It is still incomparable .
 In the end, instead of a doctrinal reiteration of main points, we will attempt to answer the question we have already asked on two occasions in Chapters 3 and 17 . The end of this article will be an attempt at answering that question .
 Historians have been speaking about patterns in politics, culture, and history for a long time without any mathematics . Historians and laymen have been talking about patterns of politics and culture without mathematics .
 The dictionaries give us such meanings as model, archetype, specimen, which means a composite of features characteristic of a certain entity . The dictionary says model is an archetype, not a model or archetype .
 The word pattern in common language means a persisting behavior, form, or property that we can recognize and label as distinct from another pattern . Pattern patterns are a pattern that we identify and label distinct from other patterns, such as patterns .
 For example, we can speak about a pattern of evasive behavior, or totalitarian society, or imperial collapse, or patterns of American and French political attitudes . We can also speak about patterns in American, French and French attitudes, such as evasive behaviour .
 We used to understand pattern patterns as what makes events different, specific, and unique . Pattern patterns are patterns that make events unique, specific and unique, according to experts . Pattern pattern is pattern that makes events unique and unique.
 In common perception, dictatorship as pattern is the opposite of democracy . "Dictatorship" is a pattern of dictatorship, not democracy, it is democracy .
 In pattern perception, both structures are structures that have the same pattern elements and can turn into each other at certain conditions . In patterns perception, the structures are similar to each other .
 There is neither absolute democracy nor absolute dictatorship as there is no absolute order and chaos . There are no absolute orders and chaos in the world, says President Barack Obama .
 We may choose our political allegiance, but if they are in our lab in cages, taken to an X-ray test, we may give them both a pat on the back . When they fight we may choose their political allegiance . But if they're in cages in cages they may give
 Soviet and Imperial Chinese systems exemplified absolutism, but even they had some elements of feedback and freedom that democracy had . Democracy may harbor pyramids of absolute subordination, charismatic cults, tyranny of party discipline, and obscurantism .
 Pattern apparatus, therefore, is a tool of unification rather than classification . Pattern apparatus is used to unify and unify, rather than categorise. Pattern apparatus can be a tool for unification, not classification, in the world .
 It views as pattern, actually, any general shape, idea, formula, and principle . The pattern is a general shape and idea, a formula, formula and principle, and a pattern .
 History has been part of culture and ideology because it provides corporate, ethnic, religious, professional, etc.identity, inspiration, and value . It tells students what is good and what is bad, whom to love and whom to hate . What is white history and what's black history
 This is why history as knowledge is revised time and again, itself, itself a part of history as process . History as knowledge and process is constantly revised, says historian .
 It offers a circus for ideological gladiator fights, creates and updates modern mythology, and is always partial . It offers "political gladiator" fights and creates modern mythology .
 History in its second role is, ideally, science that asks questions and answers them without moral qualms and prejudices . History should be more like science, not just history, but history should be science .
 This history, ideally, can be no more partial than quantum physics, which does not mean it is free of debate . The history of the world's history is free to be open to debate, but it's not always free to debate .
 We are not qualified to join the debates but another quotation could be to the point. We are here to discuss the world's most important issues .
 The macrohistorical vision of the engine of human history was thus a vision that conformed to an ancient realism about the human condition, namely that progress had a price, and that human nature had a dark as well as a light side .
 Rousseau's vision of how evil entered into history was that one man fenced a field and called it his . Rousseau: "The only thing to stop evil entering into history is to stop it from happening"
 Science becomes a collective enterprise of a community of scientists when it acquires a common, concise, and unambiguous language . Science is a collective effort of a . community of . scientists . Science becomes . a collective . enterprise of . a community .
 If we measure separately the volumes of one gram of hydrogen, sixteen grams of oxygen, and fourteen grams of nitrogen at the same pressure, their volumes will be the same . The volume of hydrogen and oxygen is the same if you measure separately .
 "This statement can be tested anywhere in the world where we can weigh gas and measure its volume," says NASA . This statement can't be tested in any place where it's tested .
 We are very far from offering such a language in a finished fonn, but we believe that the pattern approach is worth trying as a possible contribution toward history as an objective science .
 Geology, which perceives sand as fonner rock, a rock as future sand, and the present moment as a clash of tectonic plates, is an example of this kind of science . Geology is a form of geology that sees sand as a rock and future
 Reductionism, science of complexity, and patterns could be mutually complementary components in such history . Reductionism and science of complex complexity are mutually complementary parts of history, say experts .
 History is unthinkable now without economic and technological aspects of social evolution . Of course, history would have been unthinkable without economic, technological factors in its evolution .
 These days one cannot take over a free nation with impunity, but one can perform a hostile takeover of a corporation . The U.S. government has been accused of trying to take control of the world's largest corporation .
 Third, we would like to stress that patterns are not exactly points and lines but abstract mathematical objects describing regularity of observed objects . We would also point out that patterns do not necessarily point and lines .
 On the surface we can see either narrative or diagrams, or a combination of both, or even a movie . We can also see either a narrative or a movie, or diagrams .
 Representation of history, its events, and actors, come in many forms . Representations of history come from all over the world .
 There are also pictorial representations as in the paintings of Gericault and David .
 There is the French Annales school with its emphasis on everyday life, demographic and economic statistics, represented by Braudel and Le Roy Ladurie . There is also an emphasis on every day life and demographic statistics . There are also two schools in France, one with the emphasis on
 A pictorial representation certainly brings the viewer closer to the history it depicts . The history of the American Civil War is represented in a pictorial form .
 What we have in mind is also a representation of history, not in pictures or words, but by logical diagrams, geometry of relations and changes and changes . What we want to say is that history should be represented in logical diagrams .
 We use pattern theory as a mathematical tool, but not a numeric one, as a tool, not a numerical one . Hence, pattern theory is used in pattern theory, not numerical theory .
 Mathematics is not only about numbers, its domain of discourse is vastly richer . Our aim has been to illustrate this in the context of history . We hope to use this to illustrate the history of mathematics .
 Patterns are hidden behind the images and can be inferred from images and configurations . How the reverse process of generating images from patterns from patterns can be done .
 The laws of Newtonian physics are there. Whether we throw a stone or launch a missile, the laws are there . We throw stones or launch missiles, the law is there.
 We can toss a pebble without knowing the laws of physics, but for launching a missile we need physics indifferent to who throws what and why . We need physics indifference to who threw what, why and why to launch a missile .
 Ptolemaic system of celestial navigation based on what was visible in the skies was in use up to 1980, when satellites made the Global Positioning System possible . The Nautical Almanac, indifferent to the historical dispute between Copernicus, was antiquated .
 Copernicus had been there for centuries and it was used for the spacecraft calculations when the time came . Yet the system had been used for centuries . It was used by the spacecraft when it came to make calculations .
 Patterns are there, whether we speak in plain words or draw diagrams and charts, patterns are there . Whether we speak plain words, we can't ignore patterns in our language, we have patterns there .
 The star found in the closets of nations, to be called, clad in flesh and armor, into the fighting ring . The star of the fight is found in closets .
 It is to the plain words that the traditional historical narrative owes its everlasting appeal and power, says historian . The plain words are the reason for the traditional narrative to be remembered .
 Hopefully, once we see the skeletons of events with pattern vision, they will always benignly haunt us . The skeletons will always haunt us, but we can't wait to see them in patterns like patterns .
 Edmund Burke, The rights of Man, by Thomas Paine. Burke, by Edmund Burke . Burke, E Reflections on the Revolution in France. Burke . Paine, The Rights of Man and The Right of Man .
 Herodotus , Thucydides, The History of the Peloponnesian War . Thucydeides, Historia, The Historia of the War, The Peloponerasian War. The History Of The Pelopean War .
 William Benton, J. Holmes and Murray, S.L. Holmes, J and Murray . Holmes, M. Murray, L. Murray: Conflict in Close Relationships is a form of conflict .
 Of the Nature of Things / translated into English verse by William Ellery Leonard . Of the nature of Things . translated into . English verse .