 Said capitalism exploited workers to make the rich even richer . Said that capitalism exploited the workers to give the rich more money .
 The state should take control of the economy and run it to benefit everyone, says John Defterios . State should run the economy, he says, and it should benefit everyone .
 It was agreed that the USSR would help defeat Japan, that all allies would work for democracy in Europes and that the UN would be set up to promote peace . The USSR agreed that it would be helped defeat Japan and all allies worked for democracy .
 Decisions were made on what to do with Germany: prosecute Nazis as war criminals, reduce the size of Germany by a qaurter and divide Germany up temporarily into French, British, U.S. and Soviet quarters .
 Cold War was a battle of ideologies not armies . Reparations to be taken from each zone . The Truman Doctrine and the Marshall Plan .
 The USA was determined to stop the spread of communism, and the USSR was . determined to defend itseld against Western attack . The USSR was determined not to attack the West .
 In many countries people had no money, no jobs and feeling hopeless . 3.5 per cent of people in the world have no money or no jobs .
 Many in Eastern Europes had been liberated from Nazi rule by the Soviets 5.5.5 years ago . Many Eastern European countries were liberated by the Soviet Union .
 Countries like Poland, Romania and Bulgaria had already has communist governments forced upon them . Poland, Bulgaria and Romania had already had a communist government .
 Communism was a bad thing as it meant poeple could not be free and so the USA must try to contain the spread of communism . The U.S. must try and contain communism as it means people cannot be free .
 At the Yalta and Potsdam conferences, the USSR agreed to free elections in the countries in its sphere of influence . The USSR agreed that elections should be free in all of its sphere-influence countries .
 The USSR thought people would choose communism in free elections however, most did not . Most did not choose communism . Most of the USSR thought it would be a form of democracy .
 The bearu organised all the communist parties in Europe and arranged their leadership so they would do what Moscow told them to . He organised all communist parties and arranged them to follow orders from Moscow .
 Cominform got rid of any opposition to the USSR's control in satellite states . Comininform was used to get rid of all opposition to Soviet control .
 It encouraged communist parties in Western countries to block Marshall Plan assistance . The Marshall Plan was intended to encourage communist parties to block it .
 Comecon included the USSR, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Poland, Romania, Albania and, from 1950, the German Democratic Republic . The United States wanted Germany to be a strong, capitalist and united country to trade with .
 The USSR wanted Germany to be weak, communist and divided so that it would never be able to attack the USSR again . However, the USSR wanted it to be a weak and communist state so it could never be attacked again .
 USSR blocked all supplies into Berlin to show it had the power to stop a divided Germany from working . USSR blocked supplies to Berlin to prove it could stop the work of divided Germany . The USSR blocked Berlin supplies to show the power of the state .
 It looked like the Western powers would have to pull out of Berlin that would look weak; undermining the USA's image in particular . The U.S. has been in Berlin for more than a decade .
 Western powers responded with an airlift of thousands of tonnes of supplies to Berlin . Thousands of tonnes were flown into Berlin in the wake of the crisis .
 The Berlin airlift made the USA appear peaceful and generous but it made the USSR appear aggressive and threatening . The airlift was made to appear peaceful but also aggressive .
 West Germany was officially formed with United States support in September 1949 . In September 1949, West Germany became West Germany .
 In 1949, Western Europe countries and the USA set up NATO to counter the Soviet military threat . Western Europe and the U.S. established NATO in response to the threat of the Soviet threat .
 By 1956, USA and USSR has hydrogen bombs and USA didnt want to risk war . By 1956 and 1956, USSR had hydrogen bombs . USA did not want war .
 After the war, Germany and Berlin was divided into four zones . Soviet control tightened across Eastern Europe .
 The USSR had developed a H-bomb . Reasons for not attacking West Berlin: 1. It was not the first time the USSR had ever attacked West Berlin . It was the last time the West Berlin was attacked .
 The Soviets couldnt continue to allow Germans to leave East Germany through Berlin . The Soviets couldn't continue to let Germans out of the country through Berlin.
 Berlin announced in November 1958, that berlin was East German and that western powers must leave the city in 6 months or else . The western powers had to leave Berlin in six months .
 The first two summits went fairly well, though nothing was agreed . June 1961 summit was held in New York City, New York .
 The third summit was a disaster a U.S. spy plane had been shot down over the USSR and Eisenhower refused to apologize . The summit collapsed after the plane was shot down and the summit collapsed .
 The final summit was only agreed because there was a new U.S. president but neither side was willing to back down . The summit was agreed because of the new president .
 Khrushchev backed down as he knew he couldnt win a nuclear war, so the western powers stayed in Berlin . He backed down .
 Anyone who tried to escape was shot at and many were killed . It stopped East Germans from leaving for the West which solved a crisis . The East Germans were shot at by East Germans trying to escape .
 Before 1959, Cuba was very closely linked to the USA, for example, there were lots of United States owened businesses . Cuba's relationship with the U.S. was very strong before 1959 .
 Cuba had a socialist revolution in 1959 and the USA refused to deal with the new government . Then Cuba's new government was overthrown by the USA in 1959 .
 Cuba started to build economic links with the USSR by trading Soviet oil for Cuban sugar . Instead, Cuba traded Soviet oil with Cuban sugar to build ties with the country .
 The CIA told Kennedy that the invasion would look like a Cuban revolt . They had trained Cuban exiles and disguised old U.S. planes as Cuban .
 Many Cubans say Castro's control of Cuba was very weak and that many Cubans didnt like Castro . They also said that many Cuban people thought Castro was a dictator .
 What actually happened was that the planes were recognised as United States planes and were photographed with the information being published .
 1400 U.S. backed troops met with 20,000 of Castro's troops . Castro knew of the invasion in advance and 1400 troops met . The United States backed down and backed down .
 The chance of a friendly USA-Cuba relationship was ended . Most Cubans didnt want their old leader, Batista, back again, because he had been corrupt .
 Cuba saw the Soviet missiles as a great way to prevent the USA from invading Cuba again . Cuba saw it as a way to keep the USA out of invading Cuba .
 Soviet ships carried nuclear warheads and missiles to Cuba in September 1962 . In September 1962, Soviet ships brought nuclear warheads to Cuba .
 U.S. spy planes photographed the Cuban missile sites in October 1962 . Missile sites were photographed by the United States in 1962 .
 The U.S. public learned that they were now in range of Soviet nuclear missiles and there was panic . The United States was in range from Soviet missiles and was in danger .
 Do a deal to get the USSR to withdraw from Cuba in return for the USA withdrawing from one of its missile bases close to the USSR 3. Do deal with the USSR in exchange for withdrawing from a missile base close to Cuba .
 Blockade Cuba to stop any more missiles or equipment coming from the USSR 6.5 years ago . Blockade Havana would be the first to block Soviet-era missiles from Cuba . Blockaded Cuba would block any more missile or equipment from Russia .
 It could be done with airstrikes and so wouldnt need nuclear strikes or a land invasion . 7.5% of the world's population could be wiped out of the country .
 The Student Room Post-revisionist and New Cold War Interpretations . Use this resource to help students understand the history of the Cold War .