 The Japan Times is on an ad-blocker list of approved sites . To enjoy our content, please include the Japan Times on your ad-blocking list of sites .
 At Lowry, new recruits streamed into seven-man crews . They received intensive training in the missiles’ engines, guidance systems and nuclear payload .
 The U.S. military seized Okinawa in 1945, months before the end of World War II . It wasn’t until the Korean War broke out that the United States became fully convinced of the island’s strategic importance .
 Bolo Point in Yomitan, the first of Okinawa’s nuclear-missile sites, became operational in early 1962 . The first of the Okinawa's nuclear missile sites was operational in the early 1960s .
 Eight Mace missiles were trucked from Kadena Air Base and loaded into launch tubes aimed over East China Sea . The men’s eight-hour shifts began with a briefing at the missile control center on Kadena .
 The crews were met by an escort from the previous shift with the latest password . Following this, the crews drove to Bolo Point where they would be met by escorts from previous shifts .
 Havemann: “Guard dogs would send in to see if there was a problem. That’s when they’d send in the guard dogs to check . Once safely past the security check, the missileers climbed into the launch site itself .
 Around 10 meters away sat the eight missiles around which the men's duties revolved . Consisting of three main areas — a crew ready room, a diesel generator chamber and a launch room replete with a red telephone hotline to Kadena .
 Life within the missile sites was terrifyingly mundane . They checked the engines and fine-tuned the guidance systems . They drilled themselves on safety procedures .
 The men played endless rounds of pinochle and compared notes on shows they’d seen recently on the bases’ nightclubs . To pass the time, the men played correspondence classes, compared notes with each other . The Supremes are a little-known band called
 The missiles themselves created few problems for the men and the gigantic springs beneath the bunkers dampened the earthquakes and typhoons that rattled nerves among their colleagues . But the events of October 1962 were about to dash any hopes that Okinawa would be a sun-drenched holiday posting .
 The photos were taken by an American spy plane on a surveillance flight over Western Cuba in October 1962 . Horn: "From that moment on, things became very serious" The photos are part of a series of photos taken by Horn .
 SS-4 medium range missiles — at 22 meters nose-to-tail and carrying a megaton warhead — could reach the White House 15 minutes after launch . They could be at least 20 meters nose to tail and carry megaton warheads .
 JFK took the news as a personal affront — branding Khrushchev “an immoral gangster” He immediately demanded that his top brass draw up plans to bomb the Cuban sites .
 There was a sense of professional rivalry as the men compared their own Maces with the grainy spy-plane footage of the Soviet missiles . The men concluded that the SS-4’s were technically inferior .
 Bordne: "After we reached DEFCON 2, another mechanic offered me $1,000 to give him my shift" Bordne says he is excited that he might finally be given a chance to put his hard training into practice .
 Havemann was told that if things became any worse, his crew would have to improvise by loading warheads onto missiles and covering the launch doors with tarpaulins . Horn was locked underground for 48 hours at Bolo Point, where he spent the night underground .
 Horn likened the experience to a near-missed car wreck when word reached Okinawa . Kennedy and Khrushchev finally struck a secret deal in October .
 Khrushchev and Mao had come to blows over Russia’s refusal to help China develop nuclear missiles . The 1959 Sino-Soviet split was a fratricidal ideological debate over the future of communism in China .
 The Pentagon had assumed that the two countries were allies . However at the time, the Pentagon had blindly assumed that they were allies.
 JFK had made token changes to the plan in early 1962 . The amendments apparently hadn’t filtered down to the missile control center on Kadena . Mao would have sat out the Euro-American armageddon sparked by the Cuban Crisis .
 The three missileers are reluctant to discuss the targeting of China . They all agree that the United States missiles on Okinawa made the island a target . But had the Okinawan Maces annihilated Shanghai and Beijing, killing untold millions of neutral Chinese civilians, Mao would undoubtedly have lashed out .
 Havemann raises even more frightening prospect for the islanders still traumatized by the Battle of Okinawa in which a third of the civilian population died . Havemann: A land invasion by Russian or Chinese troops could be a terrifying prospect .
 Havemann: "We were told to get our equipment, helmets and backpacks ready in case we had to head for the jungles. At the same time he was warned he may need to load the warheads into the Onna Maces, Havemann says, “We were
 All three missileers are now retired with time to reflect upon their roles in human history’s most dangerous moment . Of the three, Horn is the most rueful of his role as a missileer .
 Bordne is prouder that he could perpetuate his family’s long military heritage . Bordne: "I am proud to be a proud member of the Bordne family" Bordne says he is proud of his family's military heritage.
 In 2011, his research into the U.S. military’s usage of Agent Orange on Okinawa prompted the Japanese government to seek disclosure from Washington on the issue . This research was the subject of two TV documentaries in May 2012 .
 In a time of both misinformation and too much information, quality journalism is more crucial than ever . By subscribing, you can help us get the story right. We need to know the truth.
 Before writing your first comment, please create a display name in the Profile section of your profile page .