 NACA is capable, by rapid extension and expansion, of providing leadership in space technology."
 I think that the only reason why a civilian agency was mooted was to make the proposal palatable to the U.S. Congress . The only reason for the proposal was to be mooted is to make it palatable for Congress, I think .
 Kennedy ordered the unsuccessful Bay of Pigs invasion in Cuba in April 1961 . Kennedy was less than three months after he assumed the Presidency .
 US-trained force of Cuban exiles were to invade southern Cuba with support from U.S. government armed forces to overthrow the Cuban government of Fidel Castro . US forces were to overthrow Fidel Castro's government of Cuba .
 Nikita Khrushchev agreed to place nuclear missiles in Cuba in September 1962 . U-2 Spy Planes discovered the facilities in Cuba by October 8 . The world probably came very close to nuclear war .
 It shall be the policy of this nation to regard any nuclear missile launched from Cuba against any nation in the Western Hemisphere as an attack on the United States, requiring a full retaliatory response upon the Soviet Union."
 "Money after all is said and done is merely a tool," says President Nixon . Defense was the top priority of the U.S. government, Nixon said in 1962 .
 If nuclear war actually had broken out, then I shudder to think what would have happened, says author . 'If nuclear war broke out, what would've happened?' he asks .
 The moon programme did not mean the Cuban missile crisis was resolved it was over before the announcement anyway . The United States was and still is the only country in the World to use Nuclear Weapons during a war .
 U.S. justified stopping the USSR placing Missiles in Cuba when the the the United States was so entrenched in Europe . Even though I can't see how the United. States justified stopping . the USSR placed Missiles .
 By standing up to the USSR over missiles in cuba then it was probably the turning point that ensured that the USSR kept their distance . The moon programme did do was divert great amounts of money that could have been spent on other science . To me it was hypocrisy of the highest level.
 We have no idea how many 100's of millions of people have died due to that . And we have no known how many millions of millions have died because of that .