 The New Red Scare beginning in 2010 however is vastly more dangerous as it is flying mostly under the radar and is supported by several government agencies and some of American’s most prestegious institutions .
 This series of five annotated research review articles begins by very briefly introducing the concepts and roles of alternative media and alternative news in society as compared to mainstream media and news .
 Several clusters of American alternative news publications are reviewed including Black, Hispanic and Asian news media . The group of publications are referred to as Social Justice/Anti-Empire Alt-News publications . Following that several clusters of U.S. alternative news media are reviewed .
 In this series of articles political/economic motivations for U.S. government/corporate suppression of alt-news publications are explored . Political/economic reasons are explored as are methods used to prevent American voters learning about the largely unseen and often very illegal acitivies of their own
 This suppression of alternative news is illegal due to First Amendment rights and numerous Supreme Court decisions, says CNN.com . It is illegal to suppress alternative news because of First Amendment right to freedom of expression .
 The real underlying currency of our world is narrative, and the ability to control it, says CNN.com's John Sutter . The real currency of the world is narratives, says Sutter.
 Blaming the foreign ‘other’ came later but proved a remarkably convenient scapegoat for repression of workers’ efforts to get fair pay and legal protections . Blaming foreign “others’s” came later . Blame the foreign "other" came later
 At the dawn of the 20"" century the American press was relatively free . Grassroots movements had a healthy amount of social influence .
 Mainstream news media has consolidated into a small handful of corporate controlled entities, and grassroots movements don’t usually go very far because people find it much more convenient to rely on corporate produced electronically delivered media . Unfortunately, due to the digitalization and weaponization of everything in the USA
 In every society there are going to be individuals and groups who see and experience things differently from the majority . "In every society, there will always be people who see things differently," she says .
 The ability of minority individuals and groups to express their viewpoints in the USA is supposed to be protected by Constitutional law . However that has rarely been the case. The ability to express your views in the U.S. is rarely protected by law .
 What can be found is massive government and corporate suppression of alternative news. What can't be found, if one looks for it, is government suppression .
 From 2010 this suppression has gone very high-tech and turned into an enormous and highly secretive industry flying under the flag of “national security,” exactly the same as it did during the First and Second Red Scares . Although that suppression has always been there, from 2010 this
 In a nation guaranteeing the right to free speech and free press, alternative news media has a right to express alternative views . Alternative news media should be given a fair opportunity for those views to be heard by the public, says CNN.com .
 Freedom of opinion and expression is fundamental rights that contain both a personal and a social dimension . Freedom of expression is a fundamental human right, according to the U.S. Supreme Court .
 In addition to a swarming effect by government and corporate generated propaganda oriented fake news, the voice of the alt-media has been suppressed for the past several years by legislative rules .
 Suppressed publications include those from nations targeted by the American Intelligence Community and Department of Defence (e.g., China, Russia, Iran, Syria) as well as a cluster of social justice/anti-empire alt-news publications as defined above .
 This is a “significant issue” as the American empire suffers from quite a number of interrelated domestic and international issues . MSM reliably avoids these issues, but it is a significant issue .
 The phrase “American empire” used herein includes but not limited to the United States and other nations in which the U.S. Department of Defense has located military bases with or without permission . Use of the phrase "American empire" in this article includes references to the American empire
 The American Empire’s IC/DoD has assumed the right to execute extra-judicial killings, either directly or indirectly via the military/police and/or PMC forces of proxy nations, without due process of law, such as in Palestine, Iraq, Syria, Egypt,
 This writer goes a bit further reviewing literature pertaining to probable outcomes if alt-news continues to be suppressed and current domestic and international trends continue unabated . This writer reviews literature regarding the possible outcomes of the suppression of alt news .
 MSM includes most TV and radio programs, movies and news media . MSM includes broadcast, print and internet news news .
 MSM news is nominally divided into ‘liberal’ (NYT and USA Today) and ‘conservative’ Both represent primarily corporate-government-driven interests and perspectives .
 The tone is geared towards white-, middleand upper-income “news” consumers . Though some “pays lip service” to minority viewpoints in order to attract and maintain a liberal consumer base .
 MSM is funded by corporate entities that work promoting government objectives . It is designed to indoctrinate the public into adopting “mainstream’s corporate-government viewpoints .
 Alt-news investigates abuse of power by corporations, their handmaidens in government and most especially by government . Alt-News presents contrasting, alternative views to the mainstream mainstream .
 Yemen 2014, Ukraine 2014*, Turkey 2016, Venezuela 2019, Bolivia 2019, Iran 2019* Iran 2017 to present, Nicaragua 2018, China 2018 to present . Cuba, Cuba, Venezuela, Bolivia, Nicaragua, China, Venezuela and China are the next countries to enter .
 Palestine deserves to be on that list as it’s being rapidly and violently conquered by Israel on a day-by-day basis ever since the Nakba in 1948 . Israel has been violently and violently conquering by Israel since 1948 .
 Israel is just a cat’s paw of the USA in its ambition to conquer the entire region . One can assert Israel is the aggressor, however Israel is only the cat's paw of USA . Israel is not the aggression, however, it is the USA's ambition to
 President James Knox Polk is often lauded for his achievements as president, including the acquisition of the western portion of the nation . Polk’s Rhetorical Transfer of Savagery, by Stephen J Heidt .
 During its entire history the USA has only experienced 17 years without a war . During its history the U.S. has only had 17 years of war without war .
 Many in the U.S. now admit the Vietnam War was a “mistake,” while others assert the entire war was a War Crime . Some in the USA now say the Vietnam war was an ‘mistake’
 Being corporate controlled, the U.S. media is feeding the American public an avalanche of highly deceptive fake news about China, specifically misrepresenting the Chinese government’s legal rights to enforce laws in Hong Kong and Xinjiang .
 The USA has been funding violent insurrections in many nations in blatant violation of United Nations Charter signed in 1945 . Likewise, the U.S. has also been funding violence in many countries in violation of UN Charter signed by 1945 .
 Meanwhile within the USA homelessness, poverty, racial conflicts, frustration and frustration, judicial impropriety and grave uncertainty about the future stalk the land . Meanwhile in the U.S. homeless, poverty and racial conflicts continue to stalk the country .
 Only the Social Justice/Anti-Empire alt-news consistently investigates and reports the details of the events surrounding the Empire State of Empire . Only the social justice/anti-empire alt news consistently investigates the details .
 The “Social Justice/Anti-Empire” alt-news group of publications is being massively and illegally suppressed by Google’s search engine algorithm . Nobody can find any of those publications unless they know their names and look for them specifically . Simultaneously, the �
 Alt-news is sometimes sub-divided into left-wing, centrist and right-wing groups . Alt-News is also sometimes called “alt-news’s” as many are broad-based in their viewpoints .
 Alt-news readers, writers, editors and publishers find remarkable similarities between MSM and Hitler’s Reich Ministry of Public Enlightenment and Propaganda . Some alt-journalists find similarities between the two .
 The American Empire is suppressing news from American IC/DoD “target” nations which includes a disproportionate number of Muslim countries . Russia, China, Venezuela, and Venezuela are among the countries targeted .
 His ‘conflict of interests’ was transparent as India stood to benefit from the demise of net neutrality . His conflict of interests was transparent, as was India's interest .
 Other altnews publications around the U.S. still suffer from search engine algorithmic tyranny and being largely marginalized .
 Following that is a brief review of alt-news in other countries, links to alt news history sites, legal issues pertaining to the suppression of alt news, and Conclusions . Conclusions: Conclusions. Following that, we look at the legal implications of the suppression .
 It is true this association is vaguely alternative in some ways; however, this label is a bit deceptive . It's true that this association with alternative music is vaguely different .
 Newsletters and small periodicals belonging to the AAN cover arts, entertainment and local news . Only rarely address issues like social justice and government malfeasance beyond the local level .
 Local level arts and entertainment media is most certainly a valuable service to the community and those artists . On the other hand, promoting local level media is a valuable .
 Arts historically have been one of if not the major vehicle for protesting injustice . On the other hand, arts have historically been a vehicle for protest .
 Most minorities especially in the USA feel marginalized and statistical analysis of their relative power in government, the economy and media provide solid evidence they are right .
 The Black Press is a large and powerful group of both print and online newspapers . It covers primarily domestic minority, primarily African American issues . The Black press is a group of newspapers covering primarily domestic minorities .
 Some of the world's most important news sites are based in Africa . They report on events in Africa and around the world . They also report on issues of national security .
 Many or most publishers in the USA require corporate sponsors to pay the bills and, in some or many cases, “make compromises” with MSM and their corporate-government sponsors . Many of the world's largest media outlets have to make compromises with corporate sponsors .
 Wearing a facemask in all public places is a good idea, says CNN.com . Wearing it in enclosed public places like stores and on transportation .
 COVID-19 hit the African American community particularly hard with death rates two to three times higher than in the white community . Death rates in the black community are twice as high as those in white communities .
 Only one editor wrote back to me stating they would “think about it.” | noticed those same “public service” notices kept running for months in an African American newspaper .
 President Trump chose to follow the advice of President Trump over a former physiology researcher who had a front row seat on how China defeated the COVID-19 epidemic . In other words, they chose to . follow the . advice of . President Trump .
 That is a prime example of the “Black Misleadership Class” in my opinion . That is the prime example . That’s the ‘Black Misleading Class’ .
 COVID-19 proved to be deadly advice that fatally misled the community they claimed to serve . This is dubious advice from supposed advocates for the African American community and in the case of COVID 19 .
 In all fairness they weren’t the only ones to completely ignore my advice as | also wrote to the mayor who | knew at one time and city health officials without response .
 The Black Press usually does a great job of representing Black communities around the USA, however from time to time they miss the boat entirely .
 Few of them report on critically important international issues in Afrika like for example in Somalia, DRC, Mali, etc. Likewise, few report on critical international issues like in Somalia and DRC .
 Few are likely to spell Afrika with a “k” in the middle in an effort to please mainstream Amerika . Few are expected to spell it with a "k" instead of a "d" or a "e" in a middle .
 One cannot blame them for not using a “k” in the word “Amerika” because they need corporate sponsors to stay afloat . However one might think they could “get away with” using a "k" in Afrika.
 To continue using a “c” in the middle is rather like continuing to call black people ‘negros,’ in my opinion . To continue to use a ‘c’ is like calling black people Negros, in his opinion .
 There is nothing wrong with that per se, as long as editorial content has true independence . It's important to advocate for the people of for example Venezuela who suffer extreme deprivation and in some cases starvation due to American government sanctions and covert actions,® .
 There is an Asian American Journalists Association . Asian American journalists have published articles under the name "Asian American Journalists"
 AAJA sponsored by mostly very conservative organizations like the Democracy Fund, CNN, Fox News, Knight Foundation, Ford Foundation and so on . AAJA is sponsored by a variety of mostly very right-wing organizations .
 As time goes on and violence against Asian Americans increases, they might find it expedient to do more bonding with other minority groups . The source of the violence against them is coming from the same very conservative groups they have bonded with .
 There exists the possibility white supremacists are just warming up for greater violence in the future . There is the possibility that white supremacists may be warming up to greater violence .
 The USA is becoming increasingly polarized economically, politically and racially . The USA has become increasingly polarized politically and economically .
 Minority groups are sometimes represented by sycophants of majority groups . Minority groups may misrepresent their constituencies, says the author .
 Due to the rapid escalation of oppression directed at all minority groups, including alt-news, more bonding between oppressed groups might be advised in order to create more effective leverage in demanding equal rights .
 Ostrich approaches to news don’t usually work out to well from a Darwinian perspective on evolution . The Darwinian view of evolution is that evolution has evolved to adapt and adapt .
 To borrow and memorialize the late great alt-news icon Bill Blum’s newsletter, “The Anti-Empire Report” seems appropriate . The Anti-empire Report is a group that covers so many topics that it's difficult to name .
 The phrase ‘Fourth Estate’ as applied to the free press was first used by Thomas Carlyle in 1840 . Carlyle first used the phrase in 1840 in reference to the press .
 The immortals, the persecuted and the unsung all share a belief in what the job is about . They may keep it well hidden under the obligatory, hard-bitten mask, but they share it .
 The American police state has had an going war against minority alt-news publications at least since the 1970s . Suppression of alt-News in the USA has been a problem since then .
 Sometimes it is overt (which included bombing the headquarter offices of one alt-newspaper and bombing the car of the editor of another alt-Newspaper) and sometimes somewhat covert . Sometimes it was overt (and sometimes covert) or sometimes covert (or overt)
 Rights enshrined in the Bill of Rights like Free Speech and Free Press have been subverted by special interests . Special interests have subverted the rights enshrined by the Constitution .
 Social Justice/Anti-Empire Alt-News publications are silencing many of the best . Special interest groups control politicians and MSM, effectively silencing the best publications .
 Freedom of expression under assault across the world . However, freedom of expression is currently under assault in the U.S.
 Recent laws and policies show that western democracies are not immune from this trend . Governments increasingly willing to limit the freedom of civil society to participate in public debate and discussion . Western democracies are no longer immune to this trend, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Udo Ulfkotte, a former editor with the German main daily newspaper, Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, wrote an authoritative book on how the CIA and German Intelligence bribe journalists to write articles devoid of verifiable truth, and with an unambiguously pro-
 His first-hand experiences in this unsavory field lends a great deal of credibility to his work . He names names of specific individuals involved as he does in his book .
 He died January 2017, found dead in his home, it is said by a heart attack . It is said to have been caused by a fatal heart attack.
 The Washington Post apparently hoped it had successfully tamped down the controversy over a story defamed Naked Capitalism and many other reputable sites . Black Agenda Report, Counterpunch, and Paul Craig Roberts join us in second Demand Letter Retraction and Apology for Defamatory “Propaganda
 Three other publishers, Black Agenda Report, Counterpunch, and Paul Craig Roberts, have joined us in again calling for the Post to retract the article . Issue a prominent apology, and give us an equivalent opportunity to respond, they say .
 Truthdig and Naked Capitalism both sent letters to the Post earlier this month demanding the article be retracted . The Post retracted the article .
 Black Agenda Report, Counterpunch, and Paul Craig Roberts have joined us on this edition of this week's edition of HLN . This week's episode is a special edition of iReporters' weekly webcast from 9 p.m. ET .
 We've also had five other sites say they would participate in a lawsuit against the Post . One other prominent site is seriously interested in the lawsuit .
 There is a multi-faceted strategic purpose for this as discussed later in this paper . There is also a purpose for the use of this technology to support the military .
 Little-known entities have long histories of controlling American and international news media . Even above those superstructures there are several other little-known super-structures .
 L Fletcher Prouty, The Secret Team: The CIA and Its Allies in Control of the World. Shoup and Minter; Shoup, Minter, Minters, Shoup; Prout, Prout. Prout .
 Suppression of alternative views on news on the internet comes from many directions, including the CIA and U.S. Department of State .
 One can only wonder if they will study the history of American misinformation, and the very real threat to democracy from corporate MSM news completely determining who Americans will vote for .
 Democracy is most certainly under threat, not from enemies without but rather those within . Democracy is under threat from enemies within, not enemies but rather from within, says Obama .
 Obama’s Secretary of Defense Ash Carter gave literally billions to far-right neo-Nazis in Ukraine in order to escalate the proxy war there against Russia . This dubious organization is also sponsoring the Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs led by MIT Innovation Fellow and MIT Innovation .
 Harvard Kennedy School’s Shorenstein Center on Media, Politics and Public Policy is wishful thinking at best . To expect anything good to come from the center is not likely, it's wishful .
 The U.S. appears to be adding its considerable weight to triggering WWIII, or at minimum more endless, pointless, expensive wars that profit no one except the already super rich, while the poor die premature, pointless and usually very painful deaths .
 The State Department's Global Engagement Center is tasked with countering foreign state and non-state propaganda and disinformation targeting the United States and United States interests .
 The original GEC had a specific purpose to focus on countering terrorist and extremist groups’ influence . Section 1287 states that the GEC's purpose is to counter foreign state and non-state propaganda and disinformation efforts that threaten U.S. national security interests .
 The language indicates a much broader purpose for the new GEC than the original one, possibly encompassing counterterrorism communications but also expanding the GEC's coverage to include countering foreign communications from any source .
 Section 1287 also provides the new GEC with specific hiring and grant-making authorities that were not included in Executive Order 13721 . The order also provides new authorities for the new board of appointments .
 The above pdf goes on to list budget increases slated up to $80 million in direct funding in FY2017 or FY2018 . The budget increases are slated to be $80million in total .
 The FBI encouraged Facebook, Instagram and Google to remove or restrict ads on the American Herald Tribune . The journal published critical opinion articles on U.S. policy toward Iran and the Middle East .
 The bureau has never offered a clear rationale, however, despite private discussions with Facebook on the ban . Facebook has never been able to explain why the ban was imposed .
 The FBI's first step toward intervening against dissenting views on social media took place in October 2017 with the creation of a Foreign Influence Task Force in the bureau’s Counterintelligence Division .
 The FBI defined any effort by states designated by the Department of Defense as major adversaries to influence American public opinion as a threat to U.S. national security . Next, the FBI defined a state effort by major adversaries as an effort to influence public opinion .
 In February 2020, the FBI said it would act against any online media outlets found to fall within its ambit . The FBI has defined that threat in much more specific terms . The threat was defined in February 2020 .
 A look through its site reveals a hodgepodge of accusations with somewhere between little and no evidence to substantiate any of it . A look at the site reveals little evidence of any of the accusations .
 China modifying laws in Hong Kong to aid in the extradition of wanted criminals is a normal, ordinary and legal part of judicial due process . NED funded dissidents used the NED funding as a pretext for violent rioting . China is changing laws to aid extradition of criminals .
 Chinese medical authorities should be congratulated for being the first to identify this disease, and the only nation to successfully contain it rather than being condemned and vilified with the pandemic .
 This writer can be “identified” as a “foreign agent,” by such inquisitorial organizations as DFRLab . This writer makes reasonable and logical observations, but can be identified as a foreign agent .
 Only in an American politically motivated ‘Red Scare’ environment could someone be scurrilously accused in such a manner for use of logic that should be obvious to anyone over age six and/or with an IQ above 100 .
 In general, discourse power for the party aims to convince foreign audiences with sugarcoated Chinese narratives . If that fails, the party seeks to deny unfavorable party-state narrative .
 Graphika implies criticism of Western imperialism is Russian disinformation . U.S. government-backed Graphika suggests criticism of West imperialism is Russia's disinformation .
 Graphika has a history of weaponizing dubious tactics to smear left-wing politicians and journalists as tools of the Kremlin . Graphika is known for using dubious tactics against journalists and politicians .
 Ben Nimmo is a senior fellow at NATO’s de facto think tank, the Atlantic Council . The Atlantic Council is funded by the governments of the US, Britain, and the UAE, along with NATO and the EU .
 Atlantic Council’s Digital Forensic Research Lab is based at the Atlantic Council . The Atlantic Council is leading a digital forensic research lab in New York .
 Graphika reports suspected Russian operations targeting conservative voters before the U.S. presidential election . The social network analysis company Graphika made a name for themselves in 2020 by reporting suspected Russian attacks on conservative voters in the United States and Taiwan .
 Graphika is only the American IC and the American Empire’s colonial partners and vassal states . e If Graphika wants to really research fake news, they should research themselves. e Graphika .
 Justice in the USA will always depend upon the whims of the (corporate controlled media selected) person occupying the White House . Unless there is a Constitutional Amendment redressing the appointment of Attorney Generals, justice in the U.S. will never be achieved .
 This is one of the most pathetic examples of U.S. government disinformation you can possibly imagine . USC Center on Public Diplomacy: This is a pathetic example of United States government .
 "I've traveled enough around this world over the past 55+ years to know this is the truth of it. And, I’ve traveled enough . around this . world over this . century to know, it’s a truth . And, he’d traveled
 There is no lie too big for the U.S. government to sell to the unsuspecting American public, says CNN's John Sutter .
 "There is no infamy too great for them to force upon the innocents in this world," says CNN.com.com's John Sutter .
 The mainstream American media will support the American killing machine every step of the way . Furthermore, the mainstream media will back the U.S. in the fight against ISIS .
 These days the United States often gets allies to do their killing for them . These days, the U.S. often has allies to help kill for them. The United States needs allies to kill for themselves .
 Rahman Mohammed Mahmoud AISamony, then aged 43, died with half of her face blown away . Later, he saw one missile come through the roof; another from the window and the third one, do not know from where .
 'I lifted my daughter and she had wounds on her neck and stomach. Blood was everywhere. She had wounds in her neck, stomach and neck' 'Blood was everywhere'
 There’s no trace of the blood, intestinal or brain fluids spilled by their “intelligence community” masters anywhere on it . There's no trace .
 In fact, it's so clean it’s absolutely sterile, until one starts reading . The book is so clean that it's absolutely sterile until one begins reading .
 Russia, China, Iran and ISIS use information operations to undermine national security objectives of the United States and its allies . e The US’s international response has been weak. Internal constraints have limited more effective countermeasures.
 Russia, China and Iran don't want U.S. leadership; they have their own . The fact is that they don’t want American leadership, the president says .
 Second, they would be more than happy to be friends with the USA if the USA didn’t constantly attack them and surround them with vast military killing machines . The U.S. should not be constantly attacked by the USA, they say .
 USC should be ashamed of themselves for affiliating with such a scurrilous agenda that represents such blatant disregard for truth, human life and both American and internationals laws starting with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and original UN Charter .
 In May 2019, the GEC was forced to suspend its Iran Disinformation Project after it was determined that the partner organization had inappropriately targeted journalists, academics and human rights activities for not being tough enough on Iran .
 The American DoD demands total subservience from all nations to its own interests . The American State Department is the most powerful in the world . The U.S. has the world's most powerful and most powerful military power .
 China is fighting a defensive counter strategy trying to be as diplomatic as possible every step of the way . To the best of my knowledge, the American DoD relentlessly makes things up, fabricates, distorts, uses wild exaggerations, etc. whereas China is trying a defensive strategy .
 Usually, it’s the foreign agents that tell the American officers the lies they want to hear, says CNN.com's Tom Charity .
 Officers report lies to their bosses up the pipeline and the big lie get bigger every step along the way . Then the officers report those lies to bosses . Then they report them to their boss . The big lie gets bigger every time .
 The poor indigenous agents are more than happy to supply any number of lies the “intelligence community” officer wants to hear for the right price, or even the hint of a Green Card at the end of it .
 To a Russian, Chinese or Iranian the accusations contained in that document are provocative in the extreme, just like the billions of dollars of killing weaponry pointed at their families 24/7/365 . The accusations contain a document that is provocative to the extreme .
 Am proud to see the Social Just/Anti-Empire reporters, editors and publishers bravely moving forward into the hailstorm of illegal disinformation, harassment, and censorship . If the reader doesn't believe this, please just keep reading .
 Given their extreme biases against any views at variance with official Department of Defense dogma, they certainly appear very threatening to all innocent people in the world who only want to live in peace .
 It is funded by the United States government, backed by the European Union, linked to NATO war alliance . It is part of a larger network of regime-change outfits that are bankrolled by Western governments and corporate oligarchs .
 From a historical point of view, it operates rather like inquisitor Tomas de Torquemada . From historical view, the Spanish Inquisition operates like an inquisator, says historian . "From a historical perspective, it's not surprising to see how it operates," he says .
 In some ways Coda Story’s methods are the usual McCarthy Red Scare tactics because of its anonymity . The film is set to be released in October .
 Anyone, anytime can anonymously smear anonymously with vague unproved allegations . Anyone can be smeared anonymously, anytime, can smare anonymously .
 The people behind Coda Story may think of themselves as “info-warriors” but are just cowardly bullies acting on behalf of other cowardly bullies . They may think they are ‘info-wielding’ and ‘information-warrior’s’
 Real news must have some verifiable information, not just vague innuendo and baseless accusations, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "Real news" must have verifiable info, he says, "not just vague, baseless accusations"
 Coda Story is just as pathetic as USC Center on Public Diplomacy, Graphika, FTIP, GEC, etc., etc. etc. and FTIP . spent some time in Xinjiang hanging out with a large extended Muslim family .
 They understand the meaning of love. They bitterly resent foreigners who are programmed by the American ‘intelligence community” to hate and sow fear of innocent people, especially because they have an American passport .
 Xinjiang grapes are arguable some of the best in the world, as are their raisins . Xinjiang is proud of Xinjiang's grapes, and they are also proud of their raisinars . The region has a reputation for its quality of grapes, as well as its
 If only Americans would get up off their couches and up from behind their computers and travel more what a peaceful and beautiful world this could be, says author .
 The world is balanced on the knife edge of a thermonuclear war . Instead of a nuclear war, the world is on the brink of nuclear war .
 What a horrid, horrid world the American “intelligence community” is creating for the billions of poor around the world and anyone who gets stuck on any side of American hegemonic wars . The U.S. intelligence community is creating a world of misery for the poor
 Like the very poorly named USC Center on Public Diplomacy, Coda Story is not alone . "Coda Story" is a poorly named public diplomacy center .
 In some ways Google is only one of the newer members of the corporate cult that rules the USA and world . Google is not the latest in a long line of corporate cults that rule the world .
 Monopolies were theoretically made illegal in the United States with anti-trust legislation starting with the Sherman Antitrust Act of 1890, Clayton Act of 1914, and Federal Trade Commission Act of 1915 . The Federal Anti-trust Act was passed in 1914 .
 During the 1930s this again became a big issue leading to the formation of large trade unions in the U.S. and further legislation . This led to formation of the largest trade union in the United States .
 Communication monopolies continue to exist in the U.S. with communication corporations like Google, Facebook and others dominating their fields .
 Freebase was founded by MIT alumnus and Al expert Danny Hillis, cofounder of Thinking Machines, in 2005 . Freebase is a free-software company founded by Thinking Machines co-founder and MIT alumni .
 Google rolled out Knowledge Graph on Tuesday . The Knowledge Graph has been rolling out since 2010 . Google's Knowledge Graph is now being rolled out on the web .
 Visits to Wikipedia had previously risen steadily year-on-year for a decade . Visits had previously increased steadily year on-year in the past .
 Towards the end of the 2012 this trend stalled, but went into an unprecedented decline . The trend has stalled since then, and is now on a downward trend .
 Page views for English language Wikipedia pages fell by 21 per cent over 12 months to December 2013 . According to Wikipedia's own stats, the number of page views has fallen by more than a quarter over the past year .
 For German, Spanish and Japanese language pages, views dropped by 30 per cent, 29 per cent and 25 per cent respectively . Viewers also dropped for Spanish and German language pages .
 Wikipedia is every bit as much as much a monopoly and a monopolist as the rest of the rest . Ignoring Wikipedia is a dire mistake, says CNN's John Sutter .
 There is nothing positive about sucking away users from high-quality content published by individuals, small blogs, or focused wikis . There is no positive about sucking users away from high quality content .
 Wikipedia went dark to prove the point they’re vital and immediately missed . Wikipedia has gone dark to show the point of the importance of Wikipedia .
 On October 20. 2020, the United States filed an anti-trust law suit against Google . The suit was filed by the U.S. against Google in October . Google is accused of operating under the guise of Google Maps .
 Corporate controlled Mainstream Media and systematically suppressed Social Justice/Anti-Empire alt-news suppressed social justice/anti-war alt news . Vice President Kamala Harris and Vice President Joe Biden are both anti-war Americans .
 Tragically the criminal activities of the American Empire appear they only will get worse under President Joseph Biden . The American Empire's criminal activities will continue to get worse in the coming years .
 President Trump found himself on the same side as Julian Assange advocating for net neutrality . Julian Assange is the founder of WikiLeaks and founder of the group that WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange supported the idea .
 Ajit Pai, an opponent of net neutrality to become the chairman of the Federal Communications Commission, was appointed to lead the FCC . Net neutrality was effectively killed in 2017 pushing the internet towards the direction of the Reich Ministry of Public Enlightenment and Propaganda .
 Pai voted against the FCC's 2015 Open Internet Order . Pai voted for the order, classifying internet service under Title Il of the Communications Act of 1934 . Pai also voted against FCC's Open Internet order .
 Why liberal democrats should wish to kill net neutrality might seem confusing to some, but the answer appears to emerge from big money paid to the democrats by virtually omnipotent special interest lobby groups . Not China or Russia, but rather Israel and India .
 Given that this “treasure trove” of information was available to all Google employees, it is probably not complete in regards to algorithmic bias or list of banned news sites . Given that all employees were given access to all the information, the information probably is not complete .
 Google does have at least one news publication blacklist in violation of numerous American laws pertaining to Free Speech and Free Press . None-the-less this is rather strong evidence that Google does not have a blacklist of publications .
 Not understanding humor, satire, irony, etc. means Al can misclassify a great deal of information . Al often misclassifies a lot of information, not understanding humor .
 Google’s use of it in ‘filtering’ the news is absolutely illegal in American law . It is a dull-minded brute that is now managing elections, says Google . Google's use of the technology is illegal in the U.S.
 Article 5 — Laws and Legal Precedents addressing the suppression of alt-news. Article 5 . Article 5: Laws and legal precedents address the suppression . Article 4: Laws, legal precedents addressing suppression of alternative news .
 In this polluted information environment, it’s never been harder to know what to trust, and never easier to be misled . But in this polluted environment, trust has never been easier to trust .
 This is finely crafted, highly professional disinformation, a sub-discipline of psychological operations. This, for the reader’s information, is . The reader's information is . finely crafted and highly professional . disinformation .
 It might be amusing to the armchair intellectual who happens to know what’s really going on in the world . However to someone who has personally experienced the terror and death inflicted by U.S. hegemonic wars it's disturbing, revolting and nauseating .
 For movie buffs it’s reminiscent of HAL 9000 in the movie 2001 A Space Odyssey, the Red Queen in the Resident Evil movies, the Master Control Program in Tron and Skynet in the Terminator series .
 It doesn't seem human due to its utter lack of moral conscience, common sense and truthfulness . In other words, it doesn’t seem human because of its lack of conscience .
 Google planners, writers and project managers approve this style of totally dishonest writing . Writer: Google planners cannot see their writing style is the prototype of an evil computer trying to take over the world .
 Corporate influence in the world today is the prototype for the movies that follow in their wake . The total lack of the simplest forms of humanistic awareness is the a priori prerequisite for those kinds of jobs, he says .
 Fake forms of liberalism are usually easily detected as well . On the other hand, a fake form of liberalism is also easily detected in the U.S.
 They were dressed and posed to look like “rebels,” when in fact they represent the same authoritarian hegemonic interests as the American Empire . “Rebel’s” pose pose pose poses pose poses to look as rebels, but they represent authoritarian he
 At first glance they looked authentic, but a deeper look followed by a moment of reflection evaporated the illusion of ‘liberalism’ and the photo then looked staged and transparently fake . The photo then looks staged and fake .
 My apologies to readers of this article for my interjection of these observations in the middle of a review of Google’s projects, however . I personally personally needed some psychological relief, an island of peace in this torrent of strategic disinformation that has led, and will continue to lead to
 Report for America aims to place a thousand young journalists in local newsrooms in the next five years . The initiative is part of a five-year initiative that aspires to place 1,000 young journalists .
 Some are trained to infiltrate the Social Justice/Anti-Empire domain . Some are even trained to infiltrate the social justice domain .
 Google’s Report for America and The Groundtruth Project report for America has several subcomponents . Report for the U.S. Report for . America has a number of sub-components, including Google's Report .
 Democrat and Republican candidates are carbon copies of each other in regards to their absolute obedience to and support for corporate rule of the USA and world . This is the reason both American Democrats and Republicans are virtual carbon copies . The U.S. and the world are being ruled by corporate rule .
 Google employees most certainly do work on IT and other projects that cause immeasurable suffering and the uncountable deaths of innocents . Google employees are responsible for the deaths of innocent people .
 Google News Lab apparently helps suppression of alt-news investigatory journalism, while flooding the internet with narrative supplied to it by the American Department of Defense .
 This makes getting and keeping sponsors very difficult or impossible for some businesses . This makes it difficult to get sponsors for some companies .
 A few altnews publishers and editors are more likely to publish “tailored” altnews stories that appear to report real news, but push a corporate-government supplied narrative . Then, a few hungry altnews editors are — in a few cases — more likely — to publish
 Social Justice/AntiEmpire publications have specific “targets” coinciding with American Department of Defense targets they lambast . Likewise, there are numerous new “alt-news” sites that appear to be Social Justice publications .
 alt-news sites might criticize Israel for land-grabbing in Palestine and then criticize Chinese authorities for attempting to maintain order in Hong Kong .
 Social Justice/Anti-Empire publications use fact based verifiable evidence . Or, they might write sympathetic stories about China, but also publish articles defaming Syrian President Assad repeating DoD narratives about gas attacks .
 This sort of asymmetric fake journalism appears to be the kind of product the so-called “Groundtruth Project” is producing .
 Alt-news reports on Google search engine rank suppression . Google’s new search protocol is restricting access to 13 leading socialist, progressive and anti-war web sites .
 More than half of the sites were right wing nutjobs, from the nazis at StormFront to the libertarians at the Ron Paul Institute . More than 50 sites featured right wing extremists .
 Their sources of information are usually “anonymous government spokesman’s or “intelligence sources,” while the wars they promote kill millions of innocents . Their sources are usually anonymous government spokesman or ‘intelligence sources’
 "They denigrate and censor the only real journalists that look behind the scenes and get the names and even in some cases photos of the terrorists that work for the U.S. government," CNN's John Sutter says .
 Google is building an army of info-war specialists to expand the influence of the American Empire inside the USA and worldwide . Google is further ratcheting down their ruthless and illegal suppression of alternative news .
 Mohammad Morsi was sworn into office June 30, 2012, and overthrown July 3 July 3 the next year by American appointed Abdul Fatah al-Sisi . Morsi died due to medical neglect in squalor in prison June 17, 2019 .
 Tens of thousands of his followers and friends were then rounded up, imprisoned and many were executed . Many were executed by the new American appointed strongman dictator al-Sisi .
 Given the truth of these assertions it’s a bit surprising that “The Groundtruth Project” would dare to mention Egypt, but audacity always have been a hallmark of American policy .
 They didn't mention how the United States backed so-called rebels raped him with an iron rod before murdering him . Likewise, they didn’t mention how U.S. backed rebels raped and killed him with iron rod .
 Groundtruth Project seems to conveniently overlook a lot of very important truths . In other words, The Groundtruth project seems to be conveniently overlooks a number of important facts .
 The cases of Egypt and Libya are only two of dozens of ongoing intelligence and military operations by the USA in foreign countries . William Blum, Killing Hope, U.S. Military and CIA Interventions since World War II, 15 .
 Britain, France and Russia have about 30 foreign bases combined . Britain and France have more than 30 foreign military bases in total .
 Maintaining bases and troops overseas cost $85 to $100 billion in fiscal year 2014 . Total with bases in warzones is $160 to $200 billion, the author says .
 This is another illegal war the USA is fighting in flagrant violation of the United Nations Charter . The U.N. Charter says the U.S. is in violation of it's illegal to engage in such a war .
 The U.S. intelligence community and DoD are so rich and operating in so many countries simultaneously it’s practically impossible for any publication to keep up with it all .
 Matter Ventures is a media startup accelerator we support that is working with the Next Media Alliance to offer design thinking bootcamps to local newsrooms . Matter Ventures A media startup incubator we support . Matter Venture is based in New York and New York .
 The issue of bias built into search engine results by Google is a different issue than that of a it being a monopoly . Google is not a monopoly, but it is a source of bias in search results .
 Alt-news is being challenged by corporate control of virtually all of the mainstream news . Altnews is facing formidable obstacles to its survival, says Julian Zelizer .
 Google in some ways launched the Cold War against by refusing to censor pornography in China in 2010 . There’s more than a little irony .
 In 2017 Google launched an Al research center in Beijing which attracted some of China’s top tech companies including Tencent and JD.com . In 2017, Google also launched a research center for Al in Beijing .
 The next year Google was working on a censorship program called Project Dragonfly which employees objected to and was then dropped . Google was also working on an anti-Google censorship program that was later dropped .
 Social Justice/Anti-Empire alt-news has a long list of detailed investigatory reports illuminating American CIA financing for the sometimes very violent ‘student protests” in Hong Kong .
 Google is confident they can abuse their power in any way they like because they believe, the Supreme Court is weighted in favor of their imperial obsessions . Google, Supreme Court and Congress are all corporate functionaries within the American Empire .
 In the case of the suppression of alternative news a conservative view will be to uphold previous Supreme Court decisions upholding First Amendment rights . Conservative views will be upheld by Supreme Court ruling on First Amendment cases .
 Should that not happen it may be possible for Congress to override the Supreme Court in most cases .
 Biden's Chance to Open a Clean Slate on Surveillance, March 14, 2021 . Biden has an unprecedented opportunity to restore faith in America’s intelligence agencies .
 As recently as 2015, the Department of Justice and NSA argued they didn’t need a warrant to acquire records of calls of all people in the United States . The NSA argued that some records could be relevant to foreign intelligence should be relevant .
 The ongoing deployment of facial recognition systems across the nation, for instance, alarms us all . We all need to be aware of the dangers posed by facial recognition .
 The secrecy and unaccountability of the surveillance state delegitimizes the government and undermines trust, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: The secrecy of the government delegitims the government .
 The FISA Court ordered the FBI to address issues that tainted the Carter Page investigation . A DOJ inspector general audit found pervasive problems affecting each of 29 sampled FISA applications . The FBI has been ordered to address the issues .
 Mike Lee, R-Utah, and Patrick Leahy, D-Vt., wrote a letter to Barr and then-Director of National Intelligence John Ratcliffe demanding to know to what extent the executive branch believes it has the inherent authority to spy on people in the U.S.
 Free speech is permitted theoretically, but practically nobody is allowed to read that free speech thanks to Google’s monopoly, bias, and FISA permission to spy on any attempt to circumvent that . Google has been accused of being biased in favor of censorship .
 First Amendment rights supersede FCC rulings according to U.S. law . First Amendment right superseded FCC rulings .
 The Supreme Court could try to claim they don’t have jurisdiction as they often do to avoid making decisions in critically important cases . However their credibility is so low now they might be forced by popular demand to actually do their job for a change .
 Net neutrality is an issue most Americans actually do care about, and all the programming from the MSM probably isn’t going to change that . Net neutrality has been a thorny issue for years, but it's not likely to change it .
 One of the symptoms of this Third Red Scare is suppression of alternative news publications on the internet . Alternative news publications have been suppressed by the government . The government is trying to suppress alternative news sites on the Internet .
 One might think the scions of the Intelligence Community and Department of Defense would know this and avoid past mistakes . The intelligence community and the defense department should have known this .
 Tragically, the costs of repeating those ‘mistakes’ today are vastly greater than in past centuries . The costs are beyond imagining, and the potential future costs beyond imagining . The cost of repeating the mistakes is beyond imagining.
 Just as in the past, the suppression of social-justice/anti-empire altnews is cynically done to suppress liberal viewpoints advocating for social justice and critical of government malfeasance and abuse .
 Lessons from the First Red Scare (19171920) and the Second Red Scare can help prevent greater conflicts and loss of innocent lives in the USA and abroad . Now and in the future, lessons can be learned from both the First and Second Scare .
 The weaponization of racism within the U.S. to justify foreign policy objectives is nothing new . The weapon of racism in the United States is not new .
 It was used most effectively in all colonial exploits and continues to this day . It was the most effective weapon of colonial exploitation .
 The March 6"" 2021 murders of six Asian women in Atlanta was only the most recent example of this . The March 21st murdered women in Atlanta, Georgia, was only one of many Asian women murdered in recent years .
 Eisenhower's 1961 speech was a warning of the dangers of the Military Industrial Complex . The speech was delivered January 17, 1961 . Eisenhower warned of the potential for the domination of science through Federal funding .
 The American Military-Industrial Complex has consumed mainstream media and become a massive multi-trillion-dollar industry dedicated to total world domination . Now it’s called the military-industrial-media complex .
 This military-industrial-media complex is the single greatest mass murderer and torturer in world history . It presents the greatest threat to democracy ever encountered in U.S. history . This military industrial complex is one of the greatest mass murderers and torturers .
 Democracy in the USA and in most countries has long been a sham when corporations control the media, they also control who will be nominated for and ultimately elected to political office . Democracy is a sham in the U.S. and in many countries .
 "That is a usurpation of power that totally undermines the foundation of a liberal democracy," he says . That is the usurpment of power," he adds .
 When the free-flow of ideas falls beneath the iron heal of totalitarianism, dissenting views are silenced and democracy is dead . The free-flowing of ideas is essential to democracy, says Julian Zelizer . Democracy is dead, he says .
 As of this writing, dissenting/alternative views are surviving only on respirators . This is not the first time dissenting views have survived on respirator respirator .
 Readers can easily see the same assumptions, methods and abuses used in the 20 Century Red Scares and currently ongoing 21% Century Third Red Scare . It is presented such that when readers review information about the First and Second Red Scare in the following sections, they can easily .
 Supreme Court decisions effectively ended the Second Red Scare . For example, various Supreme Court cases were made that effectively ended it .
 Tragically, 21°t Century political zealots have conveniently forgotten them and brazenly gone ahead with the Third Red Scare . Tragically they have forgotten them, and gone ahead ahead with their plans .
 A new task force at the Department of Homeland Security is focused on the domestic effort in the United States . The Global Engagement Center was established in response to the new urgency to break the recruiting efforts of violent extremists abroad .
 We are currently adding staff and securing more funding, but, most importantly, we are taking a fundamentally new approach to the problem . We are adding staff, securing more funds, but also taking a 'fundamental new approach'
 President George W Bush started the Afghanistan and Iraq Wars with the advice of his CIA director George Tenet . The GEC is using new 15-year-old technology to replace the old 15 years .
 George Tenet was appointed by Democrat President William Clinton . Tenet is a former CIA director .
 President Bush "retired" George Tenet when he realized how he had been “suckered” into two unjustifiable wars, he “retired” Tenet .
 A conservative Supreme Court may be a good thing to help end the Third Red Scare . And thus, it may be good for conservatives to see the Supreme Court as a conservative .
 The wild excesses of the Third Red Scare in particular can have devastating consequences for the U.S. and world . Please also recall a synonym for “conservative” is “careful,” and the wild excesss of the third Red Scare can have absolutely
 A careful person would put an end to this wildly illegal and transparently duplicitous farse as quickly and expediently, as possible . A careful . person would end the wildly illegal . farse .
 Suppressing free speech and freedom of the press is not an effective solution to the issues the USA is not confronting, but rather contributing to the dangers inherent in those issues . The U.S. is not dealing with the issues it is facing, but with the dangers of those issues,
 This Third Red Scare has the potential to deliver the final death blow to democracy by totally stifling reasonable dissent . Furthermore, this Third Red Scary has all its’ high-tech weaponry . High-tech weapons could deliver the . potential to stifle reasonable dissent, says Julian Zel
 Supreme Court shouldn’t have to do much as decisions regarding the unwarranted suppression of reasonable (and even highly questionable) alternative views have already been made . Fortunately, the Supreme Court won't have to make much of the case .
 It will be up to the lower courts to decide in litigation by injured parties those individuals and groups that have suffered loss and injury as the result of the Third Red Scare . The lower courts will decide in . litigation by . injured parties .
 The organs of government, quasi-government and private organizations that should lose in those state, and federal lawsuits will then appeal to the Supreme Court . The Supreme Court is expected to refuse to rehear those cases as decisions have already been made .
 A long-term strategy to counter violent extremism cannot focus solely on killing terrorists, it must effectively prevent the recruitment of new ones . Ultimately, any strategy must focus on preventing terrorists from recruiting new ones, the author says .
 The U.S. Information Agency was established during the Cold War to counter Soviet disinformation . The agency was established in part to engage directly with overseas audiences .
 The GEC’s predecessor, the Center for Strategic Counterterrorism Communications, was created in 2010 by Secretary Clinton, when al-Qaeda and its affiliates were the primary focus .
 Al-Qaeda always used communications in its strategy, but the volume and quality was nothing like what we see violent extremists doing today . The volume of communications is nothing like that of today's violent extremists, says the author .
 "Over time, we were not putting the right amount of resources—technology, people, and funding— necessary to address the evolving threat," says President Obama . "Over the next few years, we have not been able to deal with the growing threat," he says .
 To support social justice in the USA and worldwide, and oppose the American military and intelligence communities’ drive for “hegemony in perpetuity” is now labeled as foreign inspired “terrorist” activities . The U.S. government and its corporate support structures must suppress
 In both cases those responsible were later reviled as oppressive loathsome individuals which indeed they were . Those responsible for the deaths of those responsible for their actions were reviled by those who were later deemed oppressive .
 UK wants to register me as a foreign agent...because I work for RT . Galloway was a member of the British Parliament for nearly 30 years .
 Tory cronies raking it in thanks to the pandemic . But | have nothing to hide, unlike the Tories raking in .
 The secretive American ‘Kill list’ officially labeled the ‘Disposition Matrix’ is planned to stay in effect indefinitely . The secretive U.S. “Kill List” officially labeled “DispositionMatrix” is planned for the next five years .
 The roots of unrestrained capitalism and colonialization are the same in all cases, says the author . Capitalism and colonialism are the roots of the problem, he says .
 The following review of the history of the Red Scares in the USA demonstrate the same pattern of repressing American citizens communication rights in order to allegedly combat “foreign influence” as has been used since 2010 by Secretary Clinton’s Center for Strategic Counterterrorism Communications .
 The Haymarket Affair of 1886 marks a suitable beginning point for examining the actions that led up to the Red Scare . Haymarket is a suitable starting point to examining the events that led to the Haymarket affair .
 The massacre, or riot, was a bombing that took place on May 4, 1886 in Chicago . The massacre took place in Chicago, Illinois, in 1886 .
 The day began as a peaceful rally striking for an eight-hour workday . The rally quickly turned into chaos .
 Someone threw a dynamite bomb at police attempting to disperse the crowd . It was already tense with police killing an individual and injuring several men the day before .
 Seven police officers and four civilians were killed when the smoke from the smoke dissipated . Dozens of others were injured in the incident .
 Hundreds of potential jurors were dismissed from potential jurors who spoke well of the men . A bailiff picked the jurors for the trial . The jury was selected by a bailiff .
 These jurors admitted to being openly prejudiced against the men, but Judge Joseph Gary allowed the case to continue .
 This shows that before there was ever a Soviet Union to fear, economic tensions between classes had Americans on edge . This shows how before there were ever there were economic tensions, Americans were on edge.
 This only increased racial tensions within communities, as white men saw African Americans as inferior to themselves and destroying their jobs and livelihoods . White men saw blacks as inferior and destroyed their jobs, destroying their livelihoods, according to reports .
 High tensions resulted in emotions exploding during a meeting to discuss the ongoing strike at Aluminum Ore Company . The men decided the solution to their problems was violence .
 The mob cut the fire department’s hoses and set buildings and homes ablaze . The mob set fire to homes and buildings, setting them alight .
 When beatings or shooting were not their choice of violence the mobs resorted to lynching . The mobs were not happy with violence and lynching. The mobs often resorted to violence when beaten or shot, lynched .
 On September 9, 1919 the police officers of Boston decided to strike to obtain higher wages, better working and living conditions, and alleviation of a long list of other grievances, such as high equipment cost . The strike was held in response to a number of grievances, including high equipment costs
 With their requests denied, they collaborated with the American Federation of Labor to unionize . They collaborated with their requests for unionization .
 The mayor of Boston almost immediately suspended those who held union leadership . The mayor also suspended the mayor's office staff members .
 The men’s suspension was upheld, but they were removed from the police force . With the backing of Massachusetts Governor Calvin Coolidge, the men were stripped of their police duties .
 They warned that what was to follow was the replacement of democracy with a Soviet . They further warned that the replacement was to be replaced by a Soviet state .
 The city recruited an entirely new police force to supplement the few who had remained on the job . Instead of replacing them, the city recruited a new force of officers .
 Not only had the strike failed, the labor movement lost any credibility as large portions of the country and media saw it . The strike was the first strike in the history of the U.S.
 Evidence from the first Red Scare strongly suggests that association with the foreign “other’s” decades later was used as evidence against the American workers attempting to get labor rights and fair wages . It was then used to censor them , weaken their bargaining position, incarcerate and kill
 Mainstream media supported the wealthy against the workers struggling to put food on the table for their families . Just like today mainstream media supports the wealthy vs. the workers .
 James Weldon Johnson, field secretary of NCAAP, spoke out against increasing the censoring of mail . He spoke out on the issue of censorship in America .
 This outspokenness came as censorship suppressed any protest by the 15 million black Americans . This is censorship suppression of any protest against black Americans.
 Despite the oppression of protesting by African Americans themselves, national attention focused on the anti-black feelings becoming more violent across the entire country . Despite the protests by African American protesters, the protests continued .
 Cities such as Chicago, Omaha, and Washington D.C. suffered severe riots, but also showed organized counterfighting by African Americans against white-supremacist attacks .
 McCarthy ruined lives of innocent people, says Sen. Richard McCarthy . McCarthy's critics of McCarthyism are threefold: McCarthyism, McCarthyism and McCarthyism . McCarthyism ruined the lives of people, he says .
 McCarthy and his followers believed subversive elements posed a danger to the national security of the country . McCarthy believed such extreme measures justified such measures, even if they included the denial of civil liberties .
 As understood, it is a means of government harassment that includes blacklisting with intent to pressure people to follow popular political beliefs . The blacklisting is a form of harassment aimed at government .
 Anyone who makes insufficiently supported accusations or engages in unbalanced investigations against persons in an attempt to silence or discredit them is said to be practicing McCarthyism . Thus anyone who makes enough support for accusations or . engages unbalanced . investigations against people in an effort to silence, discredit or discredit
 It would go on to serve in the Second World War as a version of the First World War’s Espionage and Sedition Acts . It suppressed anti-war agitation and foreign subversion of American war efforts .
 Smith Act would be used to prosecute dozens of American communists for suspected subversion . Later, during the Cold War and ‘McCarthyism,” the Smith Act was used for prosecution of communists .
 The Supreme Court would finally rule against the government in cases of sedition, starting with Yates United States. It was in response to this string of convictions .
 Richard Stengel the Third Red Scare and Intensified Moslem Scare . The new Senator Joe McCarthy is named Richard Stenengel . The third Red Scare was the Third and Fourth Red Scare .
 At the time, he was tasked with unpacking, disproving, and combating both ISIS’s messaging and Russian disinformation . He was the single person in government tasked with . unpacking and disproving both ISIS and . Russian disinformation, he said .
 Timothy Setter tjsetter@mail.fhsu.edu, Summer 2020 ABSTRACT “With American involvement in World War | a drastic change in U.S. domestic policy occurred.” “Deterior’s” role in World
 Espionage and Sedition Acts were used as a campaign of suppression of political radicals . The use of the Espionage Act was used to suppress political radicals in the U.S.
 The Los Angeles Times bombing in 1910 occurred with a campaign of anarchist bombings, a growing number of strikes, and wartime propaganda created a setting allowing for government officials to carry out raids, arrests, and both a censoring and punishment of speech .
 Analysis of categories such as race, economics, gender, and other factors and the evolution of their repression throughout the Red Scare . The Red Scare was a form of repression in the 1930s and '50s .
 Boards of Education and Loyalty Leagues combined to create the perfect little patriots . Board members of the Loyalty League and the Board of Education created the perfect patriots.
 There was removal of all signs of insubordination in both the students and teachers . To ensure this, there was removed from all signs .
 Both men were under constant surveillance by private groups, such as the American Protective League, and the government .
 The first recorded case of sedition, however, was the arrest of William N Waddleton in Juneau in June 1917 .
 Waddleton was an unofficial lawyer accused of distributing a pamphlet created by socialists . He was described as a “colored man” described as an ‘colored man .
 The pamphlet encouraged resisting conscription and the draft and for working men to strike with the goal of embarrassing the government . The pamphlet was published in the 1930s .
 Despite the material he was accused of distributing, the result was a hung jury . The jury was unable to reach a verdict of guilty verdict .
 Race did indeed play a role in the hysteria, but it is not a lone factor in the actions of the government, groups, or individuals . Therefore, while race played a role, it was not the only factor .
 The actions performed do show that after the conditions were set, a baseline of fear that is accommodating pre-existing American racial, social, gendered, nativist, economic beliefs, the Red Scare took place . Regardless of the reasoning, the actions performed show that the actions were performed do
 “The end of the Red Scare came as the fear dissipated and some form of rationality with the law came back into existence.” “Some form of rationalism with law came into existence,” says the author .
 McKinley’s assassination and the Los Angeles Times bombings pushed any tolerance for radical or anti-capitalist movements out of many Americans’ realms of possibility .
 There is no real justification to punish or retaliate against these groups on a large scale, at least legally . Despite the growing hatred, there was no real justified to punish these groups, says author .
 It was during the period following the start of World War | that it did become actionable . As a result, it was during that period that it became actionable.
 Public opinion slowly became pro-war, or at least anti-German, before exploding into the dominant public consensus . The majority of public opinion is pro-German .
 It would then become anti-foreign, and anything perceived as anti-American, it would then be anti-America, it's claimed . It would be then anti-anything perceived as being anti-Americans, it said .
 The Red Scare slowly began with the Espionage and Sedition Acts and World War I, it escalated. It escalated. The 'Red Scare' was the beginning of World War One .
 Labor increasingly lost ground as the Red Scare escalated in scale over time . Labor lost ground in the early 1950s .
 The latent fears received further stoking by individuals like Mitchell Palmer and J Edgar Hoover . Hoover was the prime minister of the United States in the 1930s .
 There was pushback against these men and their agendas to root out the communism and opposition they saw in every radical’s shadow . There was pushing back against these agendas .
 On March 6, 1920, Louis F Post became acting Secretary of Labor due to President Wilson’s sick leave . President Wilson was on President Wilson's sick leave at the time of the incident .
 Previously content to punish labor or radicals in many circumstances, the courts returned to normal behavior . This coming as early as February 12, 1920, when Judge George Bourquin in a Montana district court upheld Whitfield vs Hangesin the case of John Jackson .
 Following Jackson’s arrest, the police ransacked his home without a proper warrant in the hopes of finding some radical material to deport him for . Jackson was arrested on suspicion of terrorism .
 Throughout the Red Scare this had become largely accepted practice with the obtaining of warrants coming after the arrests . This had become an accepted practice throughout the period .
 Times bombing of 1910 had set the stage to fear and target radical bombers it did not last through the scare . Times bombing was the first of its kind in the world, but it was not the last .
 Negative feelings compounded during the Great Depression, with repatriations and discrimination being present in American society and policy .
 Mexican racism peaked before receding; white Europeans saw racism in areas like Alaska . Black Americans saw relations deteriorate due to economic and social issues culminating in the 1919 Red Summer race riots .
 The fear of communism still bubbled beneath the surface as those suspected were blacklisted or suffered other social consequences . Those suspected of being communist still suffered from the fear of being blacklisted .
 This second high point took place through the late 1940s into the 1950’s under the direction of Senator Joseph McCarthy . Senator McCarthy was responsible for McCarthy's anti-war efforts .
 “The deliberations of the Constitutional Convention of 1787 were held in strict secrecy. Conclusions: The deliberations were held at the Convention in 1787 .
 Anxious citizens gathered outside Independence Hall to learn what had been produced behind closed doors .
 The Supreme Court has already decided on these matters, and it only remains for judges in the lower courts to enforce the laws to put an end to this Third Red Scare . Judges in the Lower Courts must enforce the law to put the end of this Third Scare, writes CNN.
 These should not be lengthy court proceedings as the laws in this matter are very clear and unambiguous . The laws in the case should be very clear, unambiguous, says the judge . The case should not take too long to be heard in court .
 Suppression of alternative views on the news is wildly illegal . spurious claims of “sedition” have no substance or merit within the legal framework established at the end of the Second Red Scare . Suppression is illegal in the UK and it is illegal to suppress alternative views of the
 When the Inquisition came to a suspected area, the local bishop assembled the people to hear the inquisitor preach against heresy . The local bishop gathered the people in a bid to stop the spread of heresy .
 Many of the alleged Communist sympathizers that were rounded up were deported in December 1919 . Many of them were deported from the U.S.
 The USAT Buford was nicknamed the Soviet Ark and the Red Ark . The boat used for this was the USAT Buford, nicknamed the Soviet Ark .
 Cannone refused to sign a statement admitting to being an anarchist, his signature was forged . Cannone's signature on the statement was forged when he refused to say he was an anarchist . He has since been charged with forging his signature .
 She would not return to America until 1940 when her dead body was shipped for burial . Her dead body would be shipped to be buried in 1940 .
 Justice Department agents conducted raids in 33 cities, resulting in the arrest of 3,000 people . The raids were carried out across the U.S. and resulted in arrests .
 Any reference to Islam or Muslims on the Internet can be targeted as sympathetic to or supportive of Iran . Just so, any reference to Muslims is targeted as supportive of or sympathetic to Iran .
 Anyone’s site can easily be added to a blacklist, or simply have a different algorithm applied to its ranking on Google . Anyone can easily add a blacklist or have their site added to an algorithm to rank it on Google's ranking .
 This is precisely the same kind of environment created ruing the Red Scare, says David Cameron . This is the same type of environment that was created by the 'Red Scare', he says .
 The Modern-Day Red Scare Perceptions of Modern Islam in American Society by Cierra Wallis . Wallis: American people have often looked to point the finger at a certain group, religion, or idea that far extends pass just women and African-Americans .
 American society continuously looks to blame _ others-a phenomenon the government actually uses to gain power and unite Americans . American society constantly looks for scapegoats and blames others . The government uses this phenomenon to gain the power of the government .
 Salem Witch trials, Japanese Internment, and McCarthyism all have placed blame on a minority under the leadership of the government as a way to answer social problems and to gain power . We will first look to history to see how the public and influential leaders during the Salem witch trials and Japanese
 We will then look at the modern issue of how in the grand scheme of things, this continues today with the making of Muslim-Americans and terrorists to be synonymous . The government has played a key role in uniting the American people against a common enemy .
 Visitors to the site are invited to report sites that might have Russian propaganda . The site is a collection of Russian propaganda.
 Even being a critic of “mainstream media’s” is listed as a criterion for being a Russian sympathizer . Criticism of ‘mainstream’ media is also considered a criteria for being Russian sympathizers .
 "Good Americans should march lockstep behind the Fuhrers at Propornot and inform on Un-American Americans," says John Avlon .
 There isn't any question that at least since 2016 when Propornot went online, the Third Red Scare is in full deadly flower in the USA and worldwide .
 The question is, why are the courts remaining silent on this when the laws are unambiguous on the illegality of all this. The law is unambiguous, and the law is clear on this, it is said. The courts should not be silent on the issue, it says.
 The Anti-Empire Alt-News group represents the majority of humanity that does not benefit from the American empire’s unrestrained capitalism, eradication of all human and national rights, legitimation of the American police-incarceral state, and the murder of innocents around
 In terms of money and power however, the Social Justice/Anti-Empire Alt-News is definitely a minority . Social Justice and Anti-Empy-News are definitely in a minority of social media users .
 The fine hotels, first-class seats on airplanes and magic carpet rides are all reserved for pseudo-journalists who happily rephrase U.S. government narratives .
 Social Justice/Anti-Empire journalists and publications are most certainly minorities . Thus, Social Justice and Anti-empire journalists are most definitely minorities .
 Alternative Press Center is a non-profit collective dedicated to providing access to and increasing public awareness of the alternative press . There was an organization called The Alternative Press .
 As large as it is, it isn’t complete or updated . Fortunately, its’ very extensive link list to sometimes obscure publications is still there and occasionally useful .
 Most of America’s colonies overseas have either presidents, prime ministers or dictators . Most of the colonies have either president, prime minister or dictator .
 The American government can print up as much money as they like, and have no need to follow any international laws what-so-ever (as per American exceptionalism) They are free to completely control at least half of the nations on earth using bribery, extortion, ideology, ideology and
 Those murders usually take the form of airplane crashes, helicopter or car crashes, heart attacks, cancer, etc. etc. Those murders are usually the result of a plane crash, helicopter crash or car crash .
 Most don't last long as majority groups have a number of ways of extinguishing them . Most don’t last long . Majority groups have several ways to extinguish them, such as extinguishing .
 Right-wing nationalist parties are “riding high” in Europe at time, especially in Germany . It appears right-wing nationalists are riding high in Europe, especially Germany, says German politician .
 Euro-American wars in Middle Eastern and African countries in the form of waves of refugees arriving in European countries . One reason for this is blow-back from Euro-U.S. wars in Europe .
 This has caused considerable consternation in some members of those local populations that express fear that their ‘whiteness’ is in jeopardy . Some people in the U.S. are concerned that their whiteness is at risk .
 The state must prove ‘imminent threat’ to suppress news, which they could not do and so lost this landmark case . The state had to prove “imminent threats” to suppress the news . The case was a landmark case.
 Trend includes the genuine threat of thermonuclear war as compared to an ever-growing number of endless wars and deadly economic sanctions motivated by American corporate greed for other nations’s natural resources .
 Ending Corporate Tyranny: Solutions to the Plague that Afflicts Us All, by Michael Diamond . February 18, 2021 . Ending corporate Tyranny is one sure way to turn matters around quickly .
 Domestic violence clause involves use of the domestic violence clause in the Constitution of the U.S. The clause is part of the Domestic Violence Act .
 Article IV, Section 4, has the power to wrest control from the corporate elite . That clause in Article IV has the . power to . wrest control of the corporate . elite .
 It contains the authority to reconfigure all U.S. institutions, public and private, for the benefit of the people and to assure our survival, says President Obama .
 The Statue of Limitations may protect some of the above from some litigation . But when it comes to American IC/DoD driven wars, the extrajudicial killing of innocent foreigners is murder, which is not covered by the Statue of .
 All of the above bulleted organizations are, on an ongoing basis “party to” these egregious crimes, liable for civil damages and vulnerable to criminal prosecution . All of these organizations are party to the crimes .
 The rational of “just following orders” did not serve as an adequate defense at the Nuremberg Trials and likewise will provide no shelter from civil and potentially criminal prosecution today . “Just following orders is not a sufficient defense,’s the rational of just following orders
 The struggle for liberation from the oppression and violence of the corporate American drive for hegemony in perpetuity will go on, says G Brundage .
 This struggle is illuminated and facilitated by the last survivors of the real 4** Estate — the Social Justice/Anti-Empire Alt News . The struggle is litigated and enabled by the social media/anti-empire/alt news . This struggle will be illuminated and aided by the
 IC/DoD cabal, FBI, U.S. Agency for Global Media, FBI's Foreign Influence Task Force, Atlantic Council’s Digital Forensic Research Lab, Graphika, those on the judicial right, USC Center on Public Diplomacy, Coda Story .
 Wealth inequality within and between nations leap-frogs to every dizzying extremes . Meanwhile wealth inequality in the U.S. continues to rise in the global economy .
 USAGM also lists five other subordinate organizations besides VOA most people probably never heard of which makes them exponentially more powerful and potentially dangerous to world peace . VOA is one of the most powerful organizations in the world .
 The official numbers are as good as former President Trump’s leadership during the COVID-19 pandemic . Former President Trump was in office during the outbreak of the deadly virus .
 Corporate control of the media diminishes the integrity of U.S. democracy, says Julian Zelizer . Corporate control is intractable, he says, but it's vital to democracy .
 CrowdTangle is a Facebook tool that publishers use to track how content spreads across the internet . Facebook pages that have put out misinformation at some point in the past and are on either side of ideological spectrum .
 Chomsky's 'Breathlessly Deranged' Quotes, Waving black flag . @quotes_chomsky: “The #Reagan administration constructed an array, a #terrorist network of terrorist states.” Chomsky says .
 All other terrorists are probably equally divided between witting and unwitting agents of the American “intelligence” apparatus . Next to them are the rank and file, probably equally equally divided . The U.S. 'intelligence' apparatus is responsible for the majority of the terrorists .
 The Master List Instances of the U.S. overthrowing or attempting to overthrow a foreign government since the Second World War . Since the war, the United States has overthrown or attempted to overthrow any foreign government .
 Please try to conceptualize how those slaughters of innocents actually benefitted the average American tax payer . The average American taxpayer will never be able to afford the cost of the war .
 The answer is simple, only the shareholders in major corporations benefit . A substantial number of them hide their profits in anonymous untaxed off-shore accounts . The answer to the question is simple: Only the shareholders benefit .
 World sickened by American hegemonic drive, few people trust or even like Americans anymore, the United States has an “aging” nuclear arsenal, Russians generally make pretty darned good weapons . The ever-widening wealth gap in the USA, plus the huge number of
 Further blinding American voters to the realities of the world will not help this situation . Further blinding U.S. voters to reality is not helping this situation and makes a further complete sham of the democratic system, writes CNN.com .
 Noam Chomsky, the apex social philosopher of our times in his book ‘Hegemony or Survival, made the consequences of not relinquishing the American fantasy of global hegemony in perpetuity quite clear .
 Many empires in the past have attempted to wrest global domination and all have failed . Many empires have failed to achieve global domination, including those in Russia .
 The USA is in the unique position where it can trigger WWIII and possibly cause global extinction of all life on earth . The USA however is in a unique position . It can trigger the creation of WWIII .
 The question is not whether most people would prefer U.S. global domination or death, it's whether they would prefer death or death . "The question is whether the world would prefer the death of America or global domination," says Obama .
 Most people in the world are poor (thanks primarily due to EuroAmerican neo-liberalism which results in massive poverty; an a priori condition for instilling colonial servitude worldwide) and have known something akin to slavery their whole lives . Most of the world is poor and has known
 They might opt for U.S. global domination if they had a choice, as compared to certain death in thermonuclear war or nuclear winter that would follow .
 The real question is whether the leaders of other nuclear powers are willing to accept the U.S. nuclear threat . Nuclear war would probably follow, and the potential for thermonuclear war .
 Russia and China will not ‘go gentle into that good night,’ but will certainly rage before the dying of the light, writes Andrew Hammond . ‘Russia and China’s relations will not go gentle into ‘that good night’
 The yield of a thermonuclear bomb can be hundreds to thousands of times more powerful than the atomic bomb . The yield is hundreds of thousands more than a nuclear bomb .
 Fake “alt-news” sites can be identified by the precision of the details they provide in regards to those conflicts . Fake ‘alt-News’ sites can identify by providing precise details of those conflicts in order to be identified .
 It is hoped that the issues discussed in this article will help foster a new generation of honest journalists and facilitate reforms in the U.S. and Western Europe .
 Expanding empires in history usually expanded in bloodshed but then fostered hundreds of years of peace . Expanding empire inhibits involves bloodshed but also fostered a long history of peace and tranquility .
 Any conquest could bring death and suffering on a large scale . As numerous examples across other continents would show, any conquest would bring death . As many examples, any conquests could bring large suffering .
 Periods of explosive expansion across Asia and North Africa were followed by longer periods of stability, peace and prosperity . But, such as in the extraordinary first decades of the spread of Islam or during the time of the Mongol conquests, were also followed by a period of stability .
 Thomas Hobbes’ Leviathan was quintessential texts that explained the rise of the west . Hobbes' Leviathan was one of the seminal works of Hobbes that helped explain the west's rise .
 The attack on the 76-year-old Chinese granny and the murder of six Asian women in Georgia, were racially motivated largely by President Trump’s Cold War style populist “China virus” lie . Meanwhile mainstream media are collusively obscuring the fact that the
 Both the attacker and the victim were later taken to hospital for treatment . Both were taken to the hospital where they were treated .
 Trumps false claims have further significantly reduced the freedom of millions of Asian Americans . Trumps' claims have reduced freedom of freedom for millions of Americans, says White House .
 The single most complete article in the news media . about the Atlanta murders of six innocent Asian women was produced by social justice/anti-empire alt-news publication FAIR.com .
 It’s the product of a carefully calculated strategic move by the U.S. Department of Defense to defame China in advance of its intention to Balkanize China into several smaller impoverished nations . IC/DoD's plan to further its megalomaniacal plan
 Other anti-China myths like the Huawei ‘security threat’ are part of the coordinated information war which provides critical support for the New American Cold War . This is designed to squeeze more money out of tax payers for the Department of Defence and further the American hegemonic drive
 IC/DoD confederacy see Balkanization of China as critical to American total domination of the world . IC/D confederation sees Balkanized China critical to U.S. domination of world .
 That Chinese grandmothers in the U.S. should get beaten in the streets and other Asian women murdered is just acceptable “collateral damage” to the IC/DoD cabal . That Chinese granddaughters in the United States should get beat up in the street and other
 Jesus said to him, "Thought unto him, Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thirtieth soul, and  mind"
 The differences are semantic, linguistic and cultural variations all describing precisely the same things . The differences in language and culture are all describing the same thing .
 One woman said, ‘Please, my lord, this woman and | live in the same house; and | gave birth while she was in the house.’ The baby was born while the mother-in-law was at the hospital .
 We were together; there was no one else with us in the house, only the two of us were there . Only the two were together, and there was only one other person with us at the time .
 She got up in the middle of the night and took my son from beside me while your servant slept . Your servant slept, she said, 'I don't know why she did it'
 The king said, ‘Bring me a sword,’ and they brought a sword before the king . So, the king said ‘bring me a . sword’ And they brought the sword before him, and the king asked for a sword .
 The world wants to be friends with the USA, but the U.S. government has been hijacked by corporations . Cold-blooded corporations have weaponized all aspects of American life, author says . America is divided against itself and the world .
 For those who have never experienced one of America’s hegemonic wars, the possibility of this seems remote at best at best . The possibility of such a war seems remote, but it's possible that it could happen .
 There are certain natural laws and it is wise not to push one’s luck too far, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 As of this writing it is not too late for the aggressors to back off and make amends . The aggressors should back down and apologize for their actions .
 We mothers are fighting to save our sons and our Republic, need your immedicte financial end moral support . Mothers’ Crusade For Victory Over Communism: We need financial support .
 Mothers' Crusade For Victory Over Communism, P 0. 0. National Headquarters, Mothers’ Crusade for Victory over Communism, is located in California .
 British boys had been programmed in school to hate “Yankee dogs,” for their part in the American Revolution . Those were purely defensive battles against gangs of British boys . The American Revolution was fought in 17th century in New England .
 In 1968 Mr Brundage returned to the U.S. for a couple of years and participated in anti-apartheid and anti-Vietnam War demonstrations . The USA was and remains as much or more of a colonial power than the UK ever was.
 His first exposure to social justice/anti-empire alt-news was via the Kaleidoscope and then the Bugle American newsletter published in Milwaukee, Wisconsin .
 Bugle's office was firebombed in 1975 and the car of Kaleidoscope’s editor John Kois was also bombed . The car of the editor of the Bugle magazine was also also bombed in 1975 .
 Everyone knew Milwaukee Police Department’s Red Squad was behind those attacks . Milwaukee police department's Red Squad is behind the attacks, police say . Police say they were behind the attack .
 He, along with a couple of friends started an ‘underground newspaper’ at his high school in 1972 . He and friends started the "underground" newspaper at school .
 He was a university student from 1973 to 1988 without a break . He started publishing professionally in 1980 writing book reviews for the Special Publication of the American Geographical Society .
 In 1988 he started working as a reporter for the Black Press, specifically the Milwaukee Community Journal . He started working for the newspaper in 1988 .
 In 1992 he moved to South Asia where he worked first as a stringer with a national newspaper, and later on a freelance basis . In 1992, he worked as a freelance journalist in South Asia .
 He has lived in and traveled through 30+ nations during almost half of his life, almost always living with indigenous people . He has been in and out of 30+ countries .
 No alt-news publications were appearing in his Google searches in 2016 . This unusual as in 2016 he had found quite a good collection of what he terms “social justice/anti-empire alt news” publications on the web .
 This led him to consider ways to improve alt-news’ rankings on Google’s search engine . Alt-news has been featured on the site of alt-journalists .
 This led to research on Google’s algorithm, which broadened into more research on the very wide range of government and corporate efforts to suppress alt-news . The research led to more research, which led to a wider range of corporate efforts .
 He began studying relevant laws pertaining to First Amendment rights and subsequent case law . After that he began to study relevant laws .
 Many of the subsequent case laws date to the Red Scares in the USA, he studied them also . He studied the case laws also studied them .
 This collection of annotated research reviews is the product of that chain of events . This collection is the result of an annotated review of research by John Sutter .
 The roots of this dubious plan date back to the Munroe Doctrine and are supported by a belief in American Exceptionalism . It is supported by the belief that the U.S. should be exceptional .
 Former Secretary of State Clinton brags and laughs about killing him, knowing full well the “rebels” she hired raped him with an iron rod before murdering him . Hillary Clinton knew full well that she hired the "rebels" she hired to rape him with a rod before
 Saddam Hussein the sovereign leader of Iraq was kidnapped by the U.S. and hanged . Certainly, Saddam Hussein was kidnapped and hanged by the United States and hanged.
 Manuel Noriega, also a former U.S. intelligence asset, was kidnapped, tried and sentenced to 60 years in prison for murder . Despite the fact that United States presidents routinely murder large numbers of people, this is not the case . Noriegas was kidnapped and tried and
 There used to be a ‘Kill list’ or “Kill Chain” but these days in some countries CI/DoD just kill whoever they want whenever they want . CI/D just kills whoever they wish whenever they wish .
 French-African banking headquarters are located in Tunisia, and some members of the French aristocracy and even some French middle class like to take winter vacation in Tunisia . Tunisia is much cheaper than Italy and Greece, and its resorts are in the Mediterranean Sea .
 Niger always ranks at or second to the bottom of UNDP country rankings . Niger is the least, or second least developed country in the world, in spite of being resource rich .
 Niger’s uranium lights the skies of Paris and other major French cities, while citizens of Niger drink uranium polluted water and live mostly without modern infrastructure at all . For example, Nigerians drink uranium contaminated water .