 Everything2.com .push; Near Matches Ignore Exact Everything2 John F Kennedy .
 JFK was the youngest president ever to be elected and was the most politically successful of the famous Kennedy family . JFK was elected to the presidency in 1964 .
 His wife, Jacqueline Bouvier, was almost as famous as he was, and was one of the most popular First Ladies in history . The couple was married in 1945 .
 Kennedy's life ended tragically when he was assassinated in Dallas, Texas, on November 22, 1963 . Kennedy was assassinated by Dallas police officers in 1963 .
 Joseph's fortune came from bootlegging during the times of Prohibition . It is suspected, however, that a great deal of his fortune came in bootlegging .
 Joseph Joseph served as ambassador to the United Kingdom under President Fraklin D Roosevelt . Joseph had important political connections and a good reputation in high society . Joseph also had important connections with the British elite .
 John's mother, Rose, was the daughter of a mayor of the city of Boston . John's father is a former mayor of Boston, Massachusetts .
 Joe Jr. and Robert Jr. aspired to be President one day . Robert would serve as Attorney General in John's administration . Joe Jr.'s aspired as President, and Robert's son would be Attorney General .
 Joe Jr. was always his father's favorite son when the young Kennedys were growing up . Many of the other siblings were jealous of Joe . Joe Jr.'s father always loved him .
 John always wanted to prove that he could do just as much as Joe could, says John . John, who played for Joe, says he wanted to be able to do much more than Joe .
 John did not stray far from home to go to college; he went to Harvard and graduated in 1940 . John went on to become a radio star .
 Why England Slept became a bestseller, though it was originally intended only to be John's senior essay project . John's essay was intended to be a senior essay .
 After college, Kennedy entered the Navy and became a skipper on a PT boat . Kennedy entered college and was a Navy captain .
 Kennedy and his crew were placed in the Pacific Theater of the war, and a Japanese destroyer rammed the vessel, sinking it . Kennedy was the last ship to be sunk in the war .
 Kennedy's coolness under fire saved the crew from disaster and they swam to safety on an island . The crew was able to swim to safety and swim to a safe island .
 Kennedy dragged one badly burned crew member through the water to safety . Kennedy himself dragged one of the crew members to safety from the water . Kennedy's rescue mission was the first time he had been rescued .
 His brother Joe was killed in action during the war, which was a major blow to his family . His brother died in action in 1944 .
 After his military service, John turned his eyes to a political career after a short stint as a journalist . John turned to politics after a successful military career . John is a former member of the British House of Representatives .
 Kennedy did not accomplish much while he served in Congress, mainly because of further health problems . Kennedy was plagued by health problems throughout his career .
 Kennedy suffered from malaria, Addison's disease, and malaria, which he contracted during the war . Kennedy also suffered from Addison’s disease .
 Kennedy wrote the Pulitzer Prize-winning book Profiles In Courage . While recovering from that surgery, Kennedy wrote a book about courage .
 This book told the stories of unsung heroes in American history who made decisions based on morals instead of votes or popularity . This book was published by Pulitzer Prize-winning Pulitzer Prize winner David Gergen .
 Kennedy was a candidate to be Adlai Stevenson's running mate in 1956 . He lost to Stevenson in the 1956 presidential election . Kennedy was also a candidate for the Stevenson nomination .
 He was running against a popular Richard M Nixon and he knew that it would take a lot to beat him . He knew that he would have to run against him .
 Kennedy was somewhat like candidate Al Smith in 1928 in that he faced an anti-Catholic prejudice . Kennedy faced similar prejudice in 1928 when he was a candidate for president .
 Kennedy's young, vibrant image had actually been an advantage in many of his earlier campaigns and he wasn't about to let it hinder his run for the presidency . Kennedy's youthful image was actually a success in many earlier campaigns .
 He resolved to challenge his opponent to a series of televised debates . The pair have been engaged in a long-running battle for years .
 Kennedy's image during the debates greatly improved the public's opinion of him . Though Nixon brought better arguments to the table, JFK's image improved his public opinion .
 Nixon, on the other hand, looked very weary and he lost a lot of support . Nixon, the other . hand, appeared weary and looked weary, and he looked tired . Nixon was the president of the United States in 1972 .
 Kennedy was the first politician to use the television to his advantage . Kennedy was also the first to use television to use his advantage in politics .
 Kennedy became popular because of his youthful, energetic image despite his horrific medical history . It's quite ironic that Kennedy became famous for his youthful image, despite his terrible medical history.
 In his early administration, he began laying out groundwork for the legislation he would encourage . He began laying groundwork for legislation he'd encourage .
 He founded the Peace Corps and set the stage for other legislation which he would implement in his second term . The Peace Corps was one of the first steps taken by President Obama in his first term .
 Of course, Kennedy would never make it to a second term, so much of this legislation was passed under the administration of Lyndon Johnson .
 His most important actions during his short term as President would be how he dealt with the Soviet Union, Cuba, and communism, he says . Still, his most important action would be dealing with Soviet Union and Cuba .
 The island nation of Cuba fell under the rule of Communist leader Fidel Castro while Dwight D Eisenhower was still President . Fidel Castro ruled the island nation while Eisenhower was President .
 The people of America were afraid of having a Communist presence only 90 miles from their shores . America was afraid of the Communist presence in the US .
 The leaders of the CIA and Eisenhower had been planning to overthrow Castro for some time . The leaders were planning the overthrow of the Castro regime .
 Kennedy inherited these plans from Eisenhower's administration and he agreed to an invasion . Kennedy inherited this plan from Eisenhower and agreed to it .
 The plan was to have Cuban exiles return to Cuba and overthrow Castro's regime . With the help of U.S. training and supplies, the plan was carried out .
 This invasion, which would be known as the Bay of Pigs invasion, failed horribly and embarrassed the U.S. government . The invasion, known as "Bay of Pigs," failed horribly . This invasion failed horribly, embarrassed the American government .
 Both sides sent troops to Berlin to show they meant business . The Soviet Union threatened to end Allied occupation of Berlin . Both sides responded with troops .
 The Soviets eventually backed down, and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev was impressed with the young President's confidence and assertiveness . The Soviets backed down .
 When this news was made public, there was a lot of panicking among the American public . When this . News was made . There was a . lot of panic among the . American public, the author says .
 The American government set up a blockade preventing the entry of any Soviet boats into Cuba . The blockade was imposed by the American government in Cuba .
 Khrushchev was gaining respect for Kennedy, but he was not expecting such a gutsy move . Kennedy was losing respect for the Soviet Union .
 In meetings, Khrushchev had commented that he was old enough to be Kennedy's father, and originally refused to take him seriously . In meetings he said he was 'old enough' to be JFK's father to be his father .
 Khrushchev made a promise to America, ""We will bury you"", as the world escalated ever closer to nuclear war . Khruschev made the threat to America as a threat to the U.S. as a result .
 Kennedy and his advisors saw that the Soviet Union was in no condition to have a war, and gave Khrushchev the chance to remove missiles from Cuba if America removed its missiles from Turkey . The U.S. and the Soviets agreed to remove the missiles if Turkey removed them .
 This gave Khrushchev an easy way out, even though that agreement was secret . The deal was secret, but it was made public by the government .
 Kennedy did not even finish one full term as president . Kennedy was a very successful president, but did not finish a full term .
 On November 22, 1963, Kennedy was shot in Dallas, Texas, while riding in an open convertible in a motorcade . Kennedy was riding in a convertible when he was shot .
 Oswald suspiciously met his end as well when he was being transferred from a temporary holding cell . Oswald's death was suspiciously the same way as his death . Oswald was transferred to a temporary cell when he died .
 The American government placed Earl Warren and the Warren Commission in charge of the official investigation of Kennedy's death . The Warren Commission determined that Oswald acted alone . Oswald was found to have killed Kennedy in 1963 .
 Many people don't accept the Warren Commission's report because the facts about the assassination are unclear . Many people do not accept the report because of the facts on the assassination .
 Regardless of who actually killed the President, the whole nation mourned the loss of a great man that day . Regardless of the truth, the President's life was in the United States .
 Every American alive that day remembered where they were when they found out that Kennedy had been killed . "Every American alive" remembered when they were in the wake of Kennedy's death .
 This is a testament to Kennedy's popularity and legacy he has left on the history of the U.S. This is the testament to his popularity and the legacy he's left on .
 Jack Kennedy is generally viewed as a war hero for his actions in the Solomon Islands . He was commander of PT-109 in the Pacific Ocean . Jack Kennedy was one of the most successful pilots in the war .
 He was awarded the purple heart and Navy and Marine Corps Commendation Medal for acts of heroism following the loss of PT-109 .
 His detractors at the time, and later on as he tried to use his war record to counter charges that he was too young and too weak to stand up to the cold-war Soviets during a run for the U.S. presidency, charge that his loss of PT-109 was
 Although he was new and untested, the boat and crew had seen combat in the waters near Guadalcanal and other parts of the Solomon Islands .
 PT boats operated in divisions of up to four boats . They were often lying in wait for Japanese supply convoys known as the Tokyo Express . PT boats were known as 'PT boats'
 Convoys made up of troop and supply ships guarded by destroyers and sometimes aircraft . These convoys needed to pass through narrow straits between the reefs and islands of the archipelago .
 The maneuverability and small size of the PT boats let them effectively harass Japanese shipping with torpedoes . The small size and maneuverability of the boats allowed them to effectively harass the Japanese .
 Kennedy at the helm took part in an operation in the Iron Bottom Sound, so named because of the volume of shipping that was sunk there . Kennedy was the first ship to sink a ship in the sound of the sound .
 The boat was in one of four PT-boat divisions that were ordered to intercept the so-called Tokyo Express which was expected to pass through the area . It was in a division of four that was tasked with intercepting the Tokyo Express . The Tokyo Express is expected to arrive in Tokyo
 Each PT boat division included a boat that was equipped with radar, which the Imperial Navy didn't aquire until the following year . The Imperial Navy did not aquire radar until the next year .
 PT-109 was equipped with an unauthorized radar set, although it was probably not working that night and one of the other boats was using its rader . In fact, at one point it was used by an unauthorized set .
 After picking up shipping on radar, one division would set off to attack while the others would race off to various locations . They would 'lay up in wait' in wait for the passing convoy .
 A Japanese convoy was passing through the area as it returned from a supply mission . That night, a Japanese convoy comprised of five destroyers was passing by .
 Kennedy was a part detected the convoy, which it misidentified as landing craft, and set off to ambush it . Kennedy was part of a group that misidentified the convoy as landing boats .
 The convoy was alerted to the presence of the attackers by a misfired torpedo . They brought all their considerable firepower to bear on the PT boats, which fled unscathed .
 Kennedy's and two other boats believed they had encountered landing craft . They fled from the scene, believing that artillery from a shore battery had spotted them . The boats fled the scene .
 After requesting additional orders from base, three PT boats led by Lt. Lt. Cevallos led the boats to the scene of the incident .
 Kennedy who knew how to reach the destination, went to another location to lay up in wait for the convoy . Kennedy was able to get the convoy to a safe destination .
 It's probable that the radar-equipped boat was the one that was no longer part of the group . It's not known if it's the same boat that may have been used by the Navy .
 Kennedy, using only one of his boat's three engines, was in the lead running the boat at an idle . Kennedy was using one of only three engines in the race .
 The tactic may have been designed to minimize the boat's wake which could be visible from the air even on the darkest nights, due to phosphorescent plankton in the water which glow when disturbed .
 Kennedy's boat was split in half lengthwise, killing two crewmen instantly . Two crewmen were killed instantly while dumping others into the sea . The boat was spotted with burning fuel, which was later spotted with the fuel .
 Just before the ramming, one boat attempted to fire its torpedos at the destroyer, but they wouldn't fire . The ramming was the first time the destroyer had been attacked by a ship in the past .
 It gave chase after the ramming and fired its other two torpedos, but was forced to flee . The destroyer turned towards it and lit it up with a spotlight then bracketed it with its guns .
 After being detected, the second boat fled, zigzagging and laying a smoke-screen until it encountered another Japanese destroyer . The second boat was spotted by a Japanese destroyer in the early hours .
 It was able to hit the destroyer with a torpedo, but returned to base since it had no more torpedos and the destroyers were alerted to its presence .
 A third boat caught sight of this destroyer, which was limping home at 5 knots, but missed with two torpedos . The destroyer was limped home at five knots, limping back at 5 .
 It may have been difficult for the crew to correctly identify a Japanese destroyer bearing down on them head-on in the dark, especially when they were expecting to encounter slower landing craft, which would have taken longer to arrive at the ambush point .
 Some say that the crew's, and ultimately Jack Kennedy's negligence, were to blame for the catastrophy . Some say the crew and the Kennedy family were responsible for the disaster .
 Kennedy tried to maneuver his boat, but the single engine wasn't up to the task . Kennedy's single engine turned at slow speed wasn't able to turn the boat at all .
 The Amagiri was a destroyer captained at the time by Lieutenant Commander Kohei Hanami then 32 years of age . Lieutenant Commander Hanami was the youngest destroyer captain in the Imperial Navy in the history .
 Lookouts noticed another PT boat nearly dead in the water, 3000 yards away . The incident happened after a skirmish with American boats .
 Commander Hanami turned his warship towards the PT boat and decided to close the distance, given the PT boats' reputation for being hard to hit with gunfire and the speed with which they could deploy their torpedos . The PT boats are known for their speed and ability to deploy torpedos
 The Amagiri rushed towards PT-109 at close to 40 knots, which didn't notice her until it was too late to get out of the way . The gunners' fingers on their triggers, the gunners said, with, presumably, the amagiri .
 The events that took place over the next seven days are what earned Jack Kennedy his reputation for heroism . A man's gotta do what a man's must do, Jack Kennedy says .
 Kennedy ordered all hands off what was left of the deck, since it was on fire . Kennedy ordered the ship's deck to be taken off the fire-damaged .
 Luckily, the destroyer's wake had dispersed most of the flaming fuel and the fire soon burned itself out . The fire was caused by a collision with a Japanese destroyer in the Pacific .
 Kennedy and some of the crew returned to the wreck and they discovered that five crewmen were still in the water some ways from the wreck . Kennedy and crew members were able to rescue them .
 Kennedy swam towards a group of three, two of whom had been burned, while two other uninjured crewmen swam out to assist the other two who were overcome by smoke . Two of the crewmen had been uninjured .
 Kennedy towed a burned man back to the wreck by holding a rope in his teeth as he swam . Kennedy towed one burned man from the wreck with a rope . Kennedy was the last man to be pulled back to a wreck .
 Lt. Cevallos swam back for the other two, one of whom was burned . He and the uninjured man towed the burned man back to the wreck after Lt. G. Givallos pulled the burned victim back to shore .
 The entire crew, save the two who were killed in the ramming, survived . The other two men were also rescued successfully, and the entire crew survived .
 The crew had flare guns, but didn't use them for fear of alerting any Japanese that might still be in the area . The crew didn't want to alert any of the Japanese that may still be there .
 They floated on the wreckage until dawn with no sign of rescue, when it became apparent that despite the PT boat's watertight compartments, the wreckage was about to sink .
 Kennedy made the decision to abandon the wreckage and try to reach a small, uninhabited island that appeared to be about 4 miles away . Kennedy decided to abandon his ship and make it to a small island .
 The wreckage was drifting towards the island of Gizo which they knew to be occupied by the enemy . Time was of the essence since the wreckage was drifted towards the enemy island .
 Two crewmembers could not swim, and one was badly burned and incapable of reaching the island . Two crew members were unable to swim . One crew member was burned and unable to reach island .
 Non-swimmers floated on a long 2x8 while the remaining crewmembers pushed and towed them towards land . The non-swimmer floated on the 2x7 while the rest of the crew members pushed and towed them to land .
 Kennedy took it upon himself to tow the badly burned man to land, the same one he had initially towed to the wreckage . Kennedy said he had towed the man from the wreckage to land .
 They all arrived safe ashore with nothing more than the clothes they were on their backs . They were armed with seven handguns, three knives, and a flashlight . The group was able to make it ashore safely .
 Kennedy alternately waded along reefs and swam until he reached a stretch of water known to be frequented by PT boats . Kennedy swam in the shallow water to avoid being spotted by the boats .
 There were none in the vicinity, and signs of fighting in the far distance indicated that they were elsewhere, too far away .
 During the return journey, he was caught in a powerful current and ended up far out of his way . He was caught by the current, but was able to get out of the way .
 He started to suffer the effects of malaria, and several days went by with no sign of rescue . Several days later, he was found dead in a hospital room .
 Another crewmember, also an officer and the strongest swimmer, also swam in the boat . Lt. Lt. Cpl. David Johnson was the strongest member of the crew .
 Kennedy's attempt to attract the notice of a passing PT boat, but wasn't able to find anybody . Kennedy's attempts to attract a passing boat were unsuccessful .
 Kennedy was able to avoid being washed in the wrong direction and returned unharmed . Kennedy's warnings about the current were not true .
 Food on the islet ran out and the group decided to swim to another island . Food was nothing more than coconut meat and the occasional seabird . The group swam to a new island .
 Kennedy again towed the badly injured man, pressing ahead through a powerful current, and the entire crew reached their destination safely . The entire crew made it safely to their destination .
 A New Zealand warplane fired upon a nearby island, which indicated that it might be occupied by the enemy . The incident occurred during the Second World War . It was the first time a warplane had fired upon an island .
 They also discovered and commandeered a canoe belonging to some islanders . The group also commandeer a canoe from the island of Tonga .
 Kennedy used the canoe to search for American PT boats, with no success . Kennedy used it to look for the missing PT boats . Kennedy's canoe was used in the search for the PT boats.
 The islanders were extremely helpful, and even showed them where another canoe was cached .
 They agreed to take a message to the American coastwatcher sentries via canoe . The message was written on a coconut-husk via canoe to send to the sentries .
 Kennedy and the other officer set out in the canoe in hopes of finding a PT boat . Kennedy and two other officers went canoeing in search of the missing man . Kennedy: "It's a miracle that this is alive"
 The canoe sunk and they were washed up on a reef, receiving minor injuries . The canoe was pulled from the surface of a reef .
 PT-109 was rammed by an enemy destroyer and two of her crew were killed . The remaining crewmembers were rescued seven days later .
 Even Douglas MacArthur called for a court martial . It got to the point that even Douglas MacArthur said for his court martial.
 Lt. Cevallos was awarded a Navy Medal of Honor for his bravery .
 His father was a former bootlegger with extensive contacts with organised crime who had used his money to buy his way into Franklin Roosevelt's administration . Franklin Roosevelt became the United States ambassador to the United Kingdom where he became known for his pro-Nazi sympathies .
 JFK attended Choate School in Connecticut before studying at the London School of Economics . He spent a year studying under Harold Laski at the LSE .
 Initially denied late admission until his father fixed the problem, he only attended the university for a month before illness again forced him to give up his studies .
 Recuperating in Arizona, he changed his mind and decided to try Harvard instead . He decided to go to Harvard instead of Harvard .
 His brother Jack was failing to make the swim team and boasted an unimpressive academic record . Meanwhile his younger brother Jack had a poor academic record, largely relying on tutoring services or attendance at 'cram school' to get him through exams .
 The one thing that he did excel at was charming women . ""I can now get my tail as often and as free as I want"" he once bragged to Lem Billings .
 He eventually managed to graduate, with his thesis, despite being described as ""badly written"" being apparently sufficient for him to do so magnum cum laude . He eventually graduated with a fine sum of sum of million cum laude from his thesis .
 His health was however poor and he failed the physical exams for both the Army and the Navy officer candidate schools . He failed to pass the physical exam for both Army and Navy officers .
 John joined the Office of Naval Intelligence as an ensign in October 1941 . Papa Joe arranged for some friendly doctors to give him the necessary clean bill of health .
 Despite being declared unfit for duty in April 1942, the United States Navy agreed in June 1942 to his request for transfer to sea duty . However the navy seemed reluctant to assign him to active command and JFK was not particularly happy when he was posted to Rhode Island as an instructor .
 A quiet word with his grandfather Honey Fitz ensured that he was eventually transferred to the South Pacific where he was to spend seventeen months on active service .
 JFK and his surviving crew were left adrift in the sea, but they managed to swim to dry land . They spent seven days avoiding detection by the enemy before being rescued . JFK and the surviving crew spent the last seven days in the water avoiding detection .
 Being Joe Kennedy's son his experiences attracted considerable press coverage . JFK won for JFK the Navy and Marine Corps Medal and the Purple Heart . He was awarded the Navy, Marine and Army Medal and a Purple Heart for his service .
 It is not the only occasion in the entire war when a PT boat managed to get itself rammed by an enemy vessel . It is however worth nothing that this was the only time in the war when the PT boat was rammed . The incident was not the first time the boat was
 JFK managed to escape censure and later made the rank of lieutenant becoming a PT instructor in Florida . JFK escaped censure .
 After a further operation on his back he was honourably discharged in March 1945 . After further operation he was honouredably discharged .
 JFK's older brother Joe Kane was blown up in 1941 . JFK's brother was killed by a plane carrying Joe Kane . JFK: "The first is money and the second is money. The first is . The first . is money."
 JFK was now the focus of his father's ambition, who told him that it was now his responsibility to run for Congress . JFK's father ran for Congress, and JFK ran for the White House in 1964 .
 The subsequent progress of his political career is an object lesson in the importance of money in the American political system . The subsequent rapid progress of . the . . of his . career is a lesson in how important money is in American political . system .
 JFK spent between $250,000 and $300,000 to get his son nominated as the Democratic party candidate for the 11th Congressional District in Massachusetts .
 As with all of JFK's election campaigns no one is quite sure where all the money went . A lot of it was simply passed around in brown paper envelopes as out-right electoral bribes .
 JFK ran for the senate against Republican Henry Cabot Lodge in 1952 . Cabot was "overwhelmed by money" as Eisenhower put it . JFK ran against Cabot in 1952; Cabot ran for Senate seat .
 This time around papa Joe pumped several million dollars into the campaign . His principal contribution was the $500,000 he 'lent' to John J Fox, the owner of the near-bankrupt .
 JFK was the only Democrat in the Senate who failed to vote against McCarthy . When the Senate voted to condemn McCarthy, JFK couldn't bring himself to vote and simply abstained .
 His politics were largely indistinguishable from those of his future presidential opponent Richard Nixon . Hubert Humphrey went so far as to call JFK the 'Democratic Nixon' whilst JFK himself openly congratulated Richard Nixon when he beat the left-wing Democrat Helen Gahagan Douglas in a contest for the Senate
 JFK's record in Congress was largely undistinguished; he turned up and voted and that was about it . It is undisputable that JFK's . He turned up to vote in Congress and that's about it.
 He never achieved much in the House of Representatives because he spent all his time there building his campaign for the Senate, and he never achieved anything as a Senator because he was too busy running for president . The reason for this was quite simple, he spent most of his time building his Senate
 JFK decided to make a bid for the Democratic presidential nomination for 1960 . JFK tried and failed to win nomination as the Democratic Vice Presidential candidate in 1956 . JFK was elected to the White House in 1964 .
 Adlai Stevenson declined to formally run, but indicated that he was willing to accept the nomination if asked . This was complicated by the fact that he did not formally run for president .
 The Kennedy machine put a great deal of effort into winning the nomination on the first ballot, knowing that if they failed to do so, Stevenson would likely emerge as the compromise candidate .
 Once again papa Joe's money was needed to grease the political wheels . Winning nomination as the Democratic candidate for the presidency wasn't that easy for JFK as much of the party would have preferred to nominate an actual liberal .
 The White House has been the home of many a serial adulterer but probably none so prolific as John Fitzgerald Kennedy . Kennedy was a prolific womaniser .
 JFK's most famous 'conquests' include Marilyn Monroe and Judith Campbell Exener . JFK bedded a long succession of secretaries, campaign workers, waitresses, stewardesses, actresses etc etc .
 He famously prepared for his televised debates with Nixon by having a prostitute sent to his room . Nor was he averse to hiring call girls should the need arise, he said .
 JFK once claimed to Harold Macmillan that he needed to bed a new girl once every three days otherwise he would get a headache . This of course, represented some inner compulsion and JFK once said he needed bedding a girl once a three days .
 His womanising was more than simply simply a personal quirk, it was potentially damaging to both his political career and the national interest . The former Prime Minister's womanising is not a quirk but a potentially damaging political career .
 The Kennedys went great lengths to keep all this quiet, since it goes without saying that his political career would have ended had any of these liaisons become public knowledge . It's a good thing that he was not involved in any of the liaisons .
 JFK was married to Jacqueline Bouvier on 12th September 1953 . He believed that she would bring a much needed touch of sophistication to the Kennedy family .
 Jacky soon became a significant asset to her husband's political career . In this regard papa Joe was quite right as Jacky became an asset to his career .
 She was never happy with her husband's philandering and used to retaliate by going out on mammoth shopping sprees . She was however, never happy .
 This was much to JFK's annoyance and frustration, particularly since he couldn't do anything about it for fear that she might of course spill the beans to the press . JFK was annoyed and frustrated, especially since he feared she might leak the beans .
 JFK's reputation as an intellectual and author was simply an invention of the Kennedy machine, says historian John Avlon . JFK's image of JFK as a writer was an invention, Avlon says .
 JFK was credited as the author of Why England Slept and Profiles in Courage . JFK did not actually write either of these books . JFK is credited with writing the books .
 Joe arranged for the purchase of some 30,000 to 40,000 copies which were then stored at the family mansion at Hyannis Port . It didn't sell all that well either, it only became a best seller .
 Profiles in Courage was described as a ""disorganised, somewhat incoherent melange from secondary sources" that was then rewritten by Theodore Sorenson and a team of academics into something readable .
 The fact that the book later won the Pulitzer Prize is more of a testament to the power of papa Joe's lobbying then any inherent quality of the book itself . Even then the fact that . the book won the . Pulitzer Prize was more of the . power of the power . of
 The stream of articles also appeared under JFK's name in periodicals including Life and Georgetown Law Review were ghosted by a variety of academics .
 JFK was ill for most of his life, but JFK was the patient . Kennedy was ill throughout his life and suffered from a host of health problems . JFK was a patient who suffered from many of his ailments .
 He spent much of his life in and out of hospital seeking cures for a wide variety of ailments . On more than one occasion had the last rites read to him .
 JFK suffered from Addison's disease, colitis, abdominal pain, diarrhea, prostatis, repeated urinary tract infections, nausea, dehydration, and acute back pain . JFK also suffered from colitis .
 He was prescribed with cortisone for the Addison's, heavy doses of antibiotics, given procaine injections to control the back pain . He was also prescribed with testosterone to counter his weight loss, various steroids, ritalin etc etc.
 By the time he became President his back problem was so severe that he only functioned as president through the help of one Max Jacobson, otherwise known as 'Doctor Feelgood', who was trusted to administer regular injections of amphetamine and other goodies .
 All of this was hidden from the American public, since it directly contradicted JFK's image as a vibrant, youthful and dynamic politician . The Kennedys lived in mortal fear that the truth would somehow leak out .
 JFK's victory in the 1960 election is often portrayed as an against the odds victory achieved thanks to a clever campaign which surmounted the disadvantages of his Roman Catholic faith, youth and inexperience . JFK's election victory in 1960 is often seen as an underdog victory achieved by his clever campaign .
 JFK was plugging away at the issue of the 'missile gap' - the belief that the Soviet Union had a superiority over the U.S. in nuclear weapons .
 It is debatable what effect his Catholicism had on the election since Richard Nixon refused to make Kennedy's religion an issue . The Kennedy campaign managed to suppress anti-Catholic sentiment by handing out bribes to Protestant ministers to keep their mouths shut .
 The televised debates with Nixon are now regarded as a landmark event in American politics . It was the point at which television and the importance of image became paramount in politics .
 Those who heard the radio broadcast thought that Nixon had won the debate . It is instructive to note that whilst the polls showed that TV viewers preferred Kennedy, those who heard it on the radio thought Nixon won .
 The Kennedy campaign persuaded the TV studio to insist that both candidates stood during the debate and to turn up the heat in the studio to ensure that JFK looked better on screen even though Nixon had the better of the argument .
 Kennedy campaign expected to win easily with 53% or more of the votes cast . They were shocked that the actual result, 34,227,496 to 34,107,646 was so close .
 The Kennedys were so shocked at the result that they had put so much effort into making sure the electorate would make the right choice in the first place . They had spent so much time preparing the electorate for the first time .
 There appears to be no dispute over the fact that the Kennedy campaign did practice electoral fraud on a significant scale . The only argument is over whether it actually effected the result of the election .
 JFK apologists appear to take the position of admitting that, whilst Nixon should have won Illinois, the scale of fraud in Texas wasn't large enough to change the result . Nixon should've won Illinois but not Texas .
 The British Prime Minister Harold Macmillan once described the Kennedy presidency as ""like watching the Borgia brothers take over a respectable North Italian City"", which signified the stark fact that the whole Kennedy political machine was something quite separate from the Democratic party itself .
 JFK was sworn in as President of the United States on January 20, 1961 . JFK had spent his entire political career simply running for office . There was no longer any higher office to run for and he was now required to actually do something .
 His tenure in office was largely dominated by foreign affairs, firstly by the Berlin crisis which began in August 1961, when the East German government began building the Berlin Wall . His tenure was to be dominated by the question of Cuba .
 Cuba was then a Communist nation located just a few miles south of the coast of Florida . The island nation is now Cuba's most populous state .
 The CIA had for some time been training Cuban exiles with the intention of launching some kind of counter-revolution . JFK succumbed to the temptation to authorise an attempt to overthrow the Cuban regime .
 The landing of the Cuban exile forces at the Bay of Pigs turned out to be a complete and utter disaster . Unfortunately for the president the landing was a complete disaster .
 JFK's 'indecision and timidity' convinced the Soviet Union that they had found a president who could be pushed around . The whole Bay of Pigs debacle had a more serious consequence, since JFK's indecision and his timidity convinced the Soviets that he could easily push around .
 JFK's stand over the Cuban missile crisis was to demonstrate, but it does explain why Krushchev thought he could get away with putting nuclear missiles into Cuba in the first place . He was, as it happens, quite wrong .
 JFK succeeded in persuading the Soviets to remove their missiles from Cuba and thus defused the crisis . He secretly agreed to remove United States Jupiter missiles from Turkey and Greece .
 JFK permitted the Soviets to maintain a considerable military presence in Cuba . Cuba later staged its own military interventions in South America and even Africa, much to the detriment of U.S. interests .
 Although publicly victorious over Cuba, JFK was frustrated at his failure to unseat Fidel Castro . He became obsessed with Cuba and the idea of getting rid of their president . JFK became obsessed over Cuba and Cuba .
 He was responsible for a number of attempts to assassinate the Cuban president, some of which were bizarre in conception and all of which failed . All of the attempts to kill Cuban president failed .
 He approved the CIA plan to ferment a military coup against Ngo Dinh Diem President of South Vietnam . He also approved of a CIA plan .
 It is said that he was shocked when he heard that this resulted in the murder of both Diem and his wife . This might well be simply regarded as further evidence of his political naivety .
 The one domestic issue which the Kennedy presidency was forced to address was that of civil rights . Kennedy and Civil rights were the one domestic issues that the Kennedy administration was faced with . The Kennedy administration had to address civil rights issues .
 This is illustrated by the manner in which whilst still a Senator he voted in favour of the Civil Rights Act, but also supported an amendment that rendered its provisions virtually unenforceable . This is demonstrated by the way he voted for an amendment to the Act, which rendered it virtually un
 His whole position on civil rights was dominated by his desire to appear as both a supporter of civil rights and of the white segregationists in order to win both sets of votes . He wanted to appear to be both a civil rights supporter and a segregationist .
 JFK argued for a new Civil Rights Act during his 1960 presidential election campaign as soon as he was elected he simply temporised for the next two years . He argued for an Act of Rights in the 1960s during his election campaign .
 JFK believed that he needed those southern white votes to get reelected and didn't want anyone else rocking the boat . JFK's main focus of his administration was to try and persuade civil rights activists such as the Freedom Riders to end their activities .
 Kennedy was looking for some kind of compromise deal between civil rights movement and segregationists that would keep the peace in the south . It is clear that Kennedy didn't really understand civil rights, he says . Kennedy was trying to make a compromise deal with segregationists, segregationists .
 JFK lacked the political skills necessary to get any Civil Rights Act through Congress . JFK finally understood that civil rights was a moral question rather than a political question .
 It is perhaps poetic justice that a man who was prepared to sanction assassination as a tool of foreign policy was himself to die by an assassin's bullet .
 JFK's death was investigated by the Warren Commission, which concluded that Oswald acted alone . His successor Lyndon B Johnson set up the Warren commission to investigate JFK's murder .
 It remains a truism that were in not for his father's money it is unlikely that he would have ever been elected to any political office . The former New York mayor's father gave him the opportunity to become a politician .
 Such is the nature of American politics; he was not the first, and unlikely to be the last of whom this could be said . But such is the . nature of U.S. politics; such is not the . first, it was said .
 JFK simply lacked the political skills necessary to get serious reforms through Congress . JFK's domestic policy initiatives in respect of health care, tax reductions and civil rights failed to get anywhere .
 JFK thought tax cuts would get him re-elected . JFK thought such cuts would help him win re-election . JFK really cared about the proposed tax reductions .
 LBJ's brother drafted Civil Rights Act 1964, drafted by his brother and passed by LBJ . LBJ had political skills to get the necessary legislation through Congress .
 We should give him credit for not blowing up the world in 1962, he says . The Test Ban Treaty of 1963 was the first step in the process that was later to lead to SALT and the ending of the Cold War .
 Robert McNamara said JFK would have pulled out of Vietnam rather than become involved in a fruitless ground war . To what extent he was responsible for the country's later entanglement in Vietnam is debated .
 He had a team of very able speech writers, most notably Theodore Sorenson . He orated a number of particularly memorable addresses which many people found genuinely inspiring .
 No one knows to what extent JFK actually believed what he was saying . As a presidential candidate and later as president he began espousing views that were far more liberal than those he appeared to have held whilst a Congressman .
 Some have suggested that his experience of campaigning in the West Virginia primary, when he discovered that there was such a thing as poverty in the U.S. explained his conversion .
 Others suggest that he simply said what was necessary to bring home the votes of the Democratic faithful . Others say that he said what he said was necessary .
 Admittedly he'd shag anything in a skirt, he treated his wife appalingly . But he was nowhere near as smart as brother Bobby, but he does appear as a very likeable character .
 Despite his earlier posturing he did eventually come to the conclusion that constitutional rights should be applied to all regardless of the colour of their skin, which in the context of American politics in the early 1960s was a fairly revolutionary position .
 Although a long way from being a 'great president', his career was tragically cut short by his assassination . It could be argued that he was simply denied the opportunity to truly make his mark .
 As a historian, what I find most interesting about him is the way he represents a lost consensus in U.S. foreign policy . The left wing and the right wing agreed on fundamental questions in the era of American foreign policy, he says .
 Perhaps the questions became more complex, or perhaps one of the wings lost their way . Perhaps the answers to the questions become more complex . Perhaps one of those wings lost its way .
 He sent the CIA to overthrow a foreign leader, and he faced down ""the enemy"" with a steel that we on the right sometimes wish his successors might have shared . But consider what this liberal hero did he started the American war in Vietnam, he started it in Vietnam .
 Kennedy was president at a time when the U.S. was transfixed by the Cold War, when the threat that the Soviet Union posed to the western world seemed obvious . The left was particularly keen to demonstrate to voters that it understood this .
 The consequences of Kennedy's foreign policy eventually led to the reversal of them all . These three conditions converged to produce Kennedy's policy .
 I think I write a generally accepted truth when I say that in our collective memory the 1950s were a decade of restraint and the 1960s of liberation . The 1950s and 1960s were the '50s of restraint' but the '60s were 'liberating' and '
 Kennedy, his life tragically cut short, became a symbol of this decade of liberation but what isn't often appreciated is how he liberated American security and foreign policy from its contraints . Many Kennedy fans would be less than willing to praise his actions .
 Kennedy came after Dwight Eisenhower, a crusty old conservative whose belief in avoiding budget deficits was so great that he took the rare step in American history of attempting to limit the goals he set for the country because he was aware of its limited means . Eisenhower came after Eisenhower, an old conservative
 His approach to the Cold War was simple tell the Commies that if they didn't watch themselves, they were gonna get nuked . His approach was simple telling the . Commies .
 Eisenhower was unwilling to fund every facet of military power to allow for less dramatic means of response . It was difficult for anyone to believe that the United States would resort to nuclear war .
 President Obama left office warning of the danger of allowing the military-industrial complex to emerge .
 Kennedy, it would transpire, was more willing to spend money on the military and avoid the cheap but suspect tactic of relying on mutually assured destruction . Kennedy was able to spend more than $1.5 billion on defense .
 This was an argument over how best to wage the Cold War and face down the Soviets, not the importance of doing so . This was a debate over whether or not it was necessary to face the Soviet Union .
 Kennedy's fascination with ingenious ways of taking on Communism was legendary no less so than in his love of counterinsurgency . Counterinsurgencies are an American tradition which lives on in Afghanistan today .
 President George W. Bush believed equally in both the Green Berets and the Peace Corps . The Peace Corps is a military branch of the U.S. armed forces .
 Kennedy didn't realize it at first, but his main foreign policy problem was in Vietnam . Vietnam was Kennedy's main problem, he says .
 American soldiers on the ground, among the native people, will fight against Viet Cong insurgents to fight them on their level and deliver the benefits of American democracy . It couldn't be more different from a nuclear war .
 Kennedy wasn't above being taken in by the James Bond mystique . A demonstration for him of the prowess of the Green Berets at Fort Bragg, Carolina involved one soldier taking off on a jet pack .
 Kennedy believes in the ability of American technology and power . Whether the equipment was ever used in combat is unclear what is clear is Kennedy's belief .
 The application of Kennedy's confidence to Vietnam would have been his undoing, had he lived long enough . As it was, it proved the undoing of his successors .
 Kennedy tried to put the U.S. in the guerrilla warfare business so that it could win the Cold War in Asia . He had his reasons a belief that China and the Soviet Union were trying to expand their influence there .
 Kennedy didn't want to have to answer for the loss of Vietnam . Democrats haunted by loss of China to Communism in 1949, and the charge that Truman could have prevented it .
 Vietnam spiralled down into violence and desperation, and Kennedy was dead before he could address it . Kennedy was killed before he was able to address the situation .
 Lyndon Johnson kept his advisors always at his side as the situation in Vietnam got worse . His successor, Lyndon Johnson, was intellectually overawed by Kennedy and kept the latter's advisors always .
 Kennedy's belief that the U.S. could profoundly affect the course of a foreign war, even one which had such obvious social and political roots . They never abandoned Kennedy's view that the United States could affect the outcome of a war .
 As tens of thousands of Americans and millions of Vietnamese died, the American public began to question whether they could ever win, and whether it would be worth the cost if they did . The U.S. began to doubt whether they would ever win .
 The enormous sacrifices made by the GIs and the suffering of the Vietnamese were a very real demonstration of what a belief in America's role in policing the world meant . The sacrifices were made by GIs as well as the Vietnamese .
 A decade of opportunity for the U.S. to change the world became a decade of disappointment . Those on the left rebelled against the Kennedy model .
 Sometimes, they would even forget what their hero taught and what he did . Sometimes they forget what they learned and what they would learn .