 What followed for the next thirteen days until October 28, 1962 was a series of intense discussions usually held in the Cabinet Room which centered on how to respond to this situation . What followed was an intense discussion of how to deal with the situation .
 The President’s primary response included a naval blockade or “defensive quarantine” put into effect on October 20, 1962 . The President's primary response was a naval quarantine .
 In addition to the naval blockade, preparations for an all-out military action, including a massive airstrike followed by an invasion of Cuba, were also approved by the President on October 20, 1962 .
 The air strike was to be implemented following the blockade on October 23, 1962 . The air strikes were to be followed by a blockade of Syria .
 Kennedy’s firm resolve to pursue a more peaceful course, and a firm leash on the military and the Central Intelligence Agency . A full-fledged military strike was finally not undertaken .
 Kennedy’s foreign policy process reflected the small group model, meaning that the foreign policy was an outcome of a small group of people who were formulating the policy process . In addition, I argue that Kennedy's foreign policy .
 This model underlined the need for secrecy, decisiveness in policy making, speed, speed and an extraordinary degree of liquidity in the flow of information to and from the White House . The White House has been criticised for its lack of transparency and transparency .
 Small group model strongly explained the President’s decision making style during the crisis .
 Overall, the foreign policy process was very complex, but I characterize it in terms of how President Kennedy headed the process . President Kennedy factored in various elements when formulating his response to the assassination question .
 President Kennedy initiated the EXCOMM to ensure secrecy and vitality in the decision making process . ExCOMM was created in order to ensure the process was secure .
 This reflected how the President maneuvered the EXCOMM to synthesize a viable response during the crisis . The President's actions reflected how he managed to get the best response to the crisis, he said .
 Kennedy’s exercise of authority was further underlined by Roger Hilsman Jr, Assistant Secretary for Intelligence and Research, Department of State, who stated that “in the case of the Cuban missile crisis, it very quickly became clear to Kennedy that it was his baby, and
 This implied that the OAS, NATO, UN, and allies such as France and Britain had no influence over the foreign policy process . The OAS had 'no influence' over foreign policy, it was claimed .
 President Kennedy agreed with Vice President Lyndon Johnson and NSA McGeorge Bundy in the very first EXCOMM meeting on October 16, 1962 where he stated that “I don’t know how much use consulting with the British… I expect they’ll just object.”
 It appears that none of these players had any impact whatsoever on Kennedy’s decision . Hence, it appears that no impact was given to Kennedy .
 The OAS, NATO and the others had no impact whatsoever on Kennedy’s decision . Hence, the OAS and NATO did not have any impact whatsoever .
 It was a gesture of diplomatic courtesy on the part of the Kennedy Administration, nothing more . Hence, it was . A gesture of . diplomatic courtesy .
 Congress was initially critical of the President’s approach in resolving the crisis . In actuality, the Congress initially was critical of his approach . Congress initially criticized the President's approach .
 Congress declared Kennedy’s response to the Soviets to be weak and called for a much more aggressive approach . That is, according to Congress, the U.S. in dealing with the Soviets .
 Republicans criticized the Kennedy Administration’s response to the Soviet build up in Cuba to be insufficient and advocated for immediate all-out military action against the missile sites . This was evident from a congressional briefing on October 22, 1962 .
 The most vigorous and aggressive proponent for military action was the Chairman of the Armed Services Committee, Senator Richard Russell . Russell criticized President Kennedy by saying that “you have told them not to do this thing.”
 President Kennedy held firmly to his ground and chose to proceed with a blockade . The Congress viewed Kennedy’s response to the crisis through a very critical lens .
 The role of the Congress in influencing the foreign policy process was limited . However, it was limited to influence foreign policy in the US .
 President Kennedy and his inner circle intended to keep the decision-making circle limited to very few members . President Kennedy wanted the decision to keep a very small circle of his own .
 The President and the EXCOMM believed they did not have “much time” and feared that the missiles would become operational if the U.S. didn’t react fast and decisively . The information cycle was limited to only “those with an operational necessity to know
 This need to conceal the information from the Congress meant that involving the Congress in the policy making process would prove to be detrimental to the U.S. in light of the given volatility of the situation .
 The Congress was simply ‘informed’ of the blockade on Cuba rather than be actively engaged in formulating that response .
 Foreign policy did not exert any explicit direct influence on the President’s decision-making process, the authors say .
 Foreign policy rarely has a purely international focus since much of it will have an impact on domestic issues . By intermistic issues, we mean that a foreign policy rarely focuses on international issues . Foreign policy often has an impact of domestic issues, such as foreign policy, we say .
 Members of the Senate have a well-defined constituency and are busy responding to domestic concerns . Most of them are related to foreign policy issues such as bilateral trade relations between two countries .
 As congressmen follow the interests of their constituents, they often come in conflict with other fellow congressmen . Congressmen follow their constituents' interests, often coming into conflict with each other .
 Members of Congress are responding to constituents' concerns, which they often see conflict . Congress is responding to constituent concerns, so there is conflict between members and members of Congress .
 The developments in Cuba that were brought up by the opposition in terms of a security concern for the United States didn't have any impact on the U.S. policy process and the outcome of the blockading Cuba .
 The exclusion of the Congress was due to its inherent deliberative functioning and due to Kennedy’s hands-on administrative style . The reason for the exclusion of Congress was because of its deliberative function . The exclusion is due to the nature of Kennedy's hands on administrative style, says
 Congress was simply informed of the blockade rather than be effectively engaged in formulating a response . Consequently, the Congress was not able to formulating that response .
 The domestic elements did not factor in the outcome of the policy process in the crisis . Clearly, the domestic elements were not factor into the outcome, the government says .
 The President controlled the flow of information and agenda setting . The President used the power of the White House to set an agenda .
 President Kennedy determined the set of issues to be addressed and the issues he will focus on and how he would focus on them . President Kennedy decided on the issues that he would address . Kennedy determined what issues he would be addressing .
 President Kennedy determined the set of issues to be addressed and the issues he would focus on . President Kennedy decided on the issues and how to focus on them . Kennedy determined what issues he wanted to address .
 The President ensured that he had absolute knowledge of the latest developments during the crisis . This shows that the President was receiving the updates besides himself .
 President Kennedy dictated the process, and crafted the foreign policy response . President Kennedy also dictated the response to the Vietnam War . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 President Kennedy stressed that “We ought to stick with that until we want to do something. This was evident when President Bundy’s question regarding how the EXCOMM would respond to the information gathered .
 This not only reflected the level of control exerted by President Kennedy over media, but also the secrecy exercised by the Presidency on the information . This not . But also, shows the . level of secrecy exercised . by the . Presidency on information .
 The President not only controlled the flow of information, but also exercised control over who participated in the foreign policy process . The President's position is said to be that he can influence foreign policy .
 We find that Kennedy determined who ought to be included in the process . We find it was Kennedy who determined who should be included . Kennedy determined that the process should be completed .
 President Kennedy exercised total command over secrecy of the issue, which gained the EXCOMM more time and facilitated the formulation of the response . President Kennedy also exercised total control over the secrecy of issue .
 President Kennedy passed instructions to Bundy stating that “in Defense we’ve got to keep it as tight as possible, particularly what we're going to do about it. This was evident when President Kennedy told Bundy to keep tight, especially what he was going on about it .
 President Kennedy’s application of secrecy was visible in the concealment of his strong intentions to confront Gromyko with the U-2 photographic evidences of the missiles . Furthermore, in his . meeting with the Soviet Foreign Minister, Anderi Gromko, . Ander
 Robert Kennedy, Attorney General, stated that the President and his advisors worked “secretly, quietly” and “privately” which enabled the EXCOMM to decide an appropriate U.S response .
 President Kennedy not only determined the players who ought to be a part of the ‘inner circle” but also, exercised enormous level of control in keeping the issue very quiet . Hence, we observe that .
 The President asserted himself as the Commander in Chief of the Military . The President is President of the U.S. military .
 President Kennedy personally selected the ship Marucla “to be the first ship stopped and boarded ” on October 26, 1962 . Another event which demonstrated the level of control exercised by the President Kennedy on the Navy was .
 President Kennedy was always closely monitoring the developments and did not allow any event go unsupervised by the President himself . President Kennedy always monitored the developments .
 All decisions are made and transmitted from the White House alone, says President Obama .
 Kennedy avoided being insulated from individuals because of their rank in the chain of military command and intelligence hierarchy . Kennedy ensured that he had access to every pertinent detail and avoided being isolated .
 Kennedy exercised a certain degree of caution in dealing with the crisis . This meant that apart from controlling the information, Kennedy exercised caution . This was the first time the government had been involved in the crisis.
 The President initiated an “elaborate command and control network,” facilitating his direct communication with the officers on the front . To this end, the President initiated .
 Kennedy’s command over the military as magnified when the situation was rapidly approaching war . Reports on October 27, 1962 claimed that a U-2 reconnaissance plane maintaining surveillance over Cuba post blockade had been shot down .
 We observe the President refrained from decisively opting for a military retaliation on Cuba and Soviet Union. We observe that the President . We observe he refrained from decisively opting . for a . military retaliation .
 President Kennedy chose to proceed with a blockade over the other three potential policy options during the thirteen days . There are several factors which explain why the blockade was decided .
 Fear of escalation of the crisis was the most dominant element influencing the foreign policy process . The fear of escalation was the dominant element in foreign policy decisions .
 The threat of US-Soviet relations going extremely bitter was haunting Kennedy months before the crisis of April . The fear of escalation was irrevocably a dominant factor influencing Kennedy’s choice of a blockade over a surgical military attack .
 President Kennedy was worried about an unintended escalation of events which would result in a catastrophic nuclear exchange . President Kennedy worried about the possibility of a nuclear war with Russia .
 The key reason why President Kennedy opted for the blockade over an air strike was simply because of the unpredictability of events and a consequent chain reaction of nuclear exchange . The key decision was made by President Kennedy over air strike .
 Robert Kennedy attributes the President’s concern regarding “a miscalculation-a mistake in judgment” to the influence of Barbara Tuchman, The Guns of August, which the President had read . Robert Kennedy: “A mistake in judgement’ is a mistake
 In explaining the reasons for World War I, the book argued that it was possible that “either side could take a step that –for reasons of security or pride or face” which in turn could very easily “bring about a counterresponse” from the other side .
 The impact of this book on President Kennedy was evident when he decided to permit the ship Bucharest to go to Cuba despite strong opposition from his advisors and the military . President Kennedy's decision to allow the Bucharest ship to Cuba was evident .
 “We don’t want to push him to a precipitous action–give him time to consider.” His explanation for doing so was that “we don”t want him to . give him time, consider,” he said .
 Every opportunity was to be given to the Russians to find a peaceful settlement, he says . In order to eliminate every possibility of transforming the crisis into “a public humiliation” for the Soviets, the Soviets were given the chance to find peace, he writes .
 This fear of uncertainty forced the President to constantly place himself in the shoes of Khrushchev, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 As well, the constant fear of escalation forced the President to oversee nearly every detail . As well as the President, the President oversaw nearly every aspect of the President's job .
 President Kennedy decided that the blockade on Cuba was strictly against “Soviet arms deliveries to that island rather the all shipments of vital supplies, such as oil” was evidence of President Kennedy’s exercise of maximum precaution towards preventing further deterioration of the situation .
 The impact of this fear of escalation on the President can be seen from the exchange of letters between Kennedy and UN Secretary General U. Thant .
 U Thant informed Kennedy about his request to Khrushchev that Soviet ships “be instructed to stay away from the interception area” to permit more time for the “discussions of the modalities of a possible agreement” along the lines of the UN Charter . U
 Kennedy assured U Thant that the United States will “accept and abide by your request” and “do everything possible to avoid direct confrontation with the Soviet ships in the next few days,” avoiding the “risk of any untoward incident” that would exacerbate
 The second letter which was made public on the same day, recalled Pierre Salinger, “had all kinds of questions and conditions which made Kennedy “uncomfortable” and hence, inclined him to respond to the first letter, he said .
 President Kennedy’s perception of Khrushchev as a sane and rational actor explains why the former adopted a blockade and followed it with a practice of maximum restraint for the remaining eight days after the blockade . President Kennedy's fear of miscalculation was also behind the blockade, which also
 Robert Kennedy stated that the President “believed right from the start that the Soviet Chairman was a rational, intelligent man who, if given sufficient time and shown our determination, would alter his position” The President was absolutely focused on eliminating the chances of “error, of mistake
 Everything from issuing a public statement to selectively stopping a ship named Marcula was made based on this simple yet critical question . The question is the question: What is the name of the ship?
 The U.S. had overwhelming conventional superiority in the neighborhood of Cuba, says Dean Rusk . Rusk: "We could have gone in there and taken out those missiles almost with the snap of a finger"
 In that same letter, the Soviet Chairman showed his understanding concerning the possibilities of the circumstances to lead to an all-out war by reminding Kennedy that “we and you ought not now to pull on the ends of a rope,” since, “the more the two of
 Kennedy's anticipation of Khrushchev’s responses set course of outcome to be more diplomatic rather than a path of war . Kennedy's understanding and perception of the latter to be rational, set the course of the outcome of the war .
 This clearly shows how much the understanding and the perception of the Soviets to be just as rational as Kennedy’s EXCOMM in terms of formulating policy responses explained . Kennedy's decision to proceed with the blockade of the Soviet Union is an example of how rational it was .
 The Bay of Pigs taught him to not to permit the CIA to act with complete independence . Also taught him not to trust the Joint Chiefs, he says .
 Brigadier General. General. Gen. John H. Johnson is the Director of Special Operations to the Secretary of Defense and Head of Operation Mongoose, Brig. Johnson .
 There was no intelligence evidence of a potential rebel uprising against the Castro regime within Cuba . But, this was false; the reason being that “there was no . intelligence evidence” of a possible rebel uprising .
 Brigadier General Andrew Goodpaster, Staff Secretary to President Dwight Eisenhower, was the staff secretary to President Eisenhower . The CIA transmitted the intelligence to the White House, calling for some U.S. assistance in support of the US-trained dissent groups . This was unsupportive of
 Operation Mongoose was a case-study mirroring intelligence failure . This, coupled with the understanding that ‘it would be easy’ as remarked by Eugene McCarthy, U.S. Senator highlighted that “it would’ve been easy”
 The claim that “these plans of the CIA were militarily feasible” by Schlesinger Jr., Special Assistant to the President, made President Kennedy decide not to trust the military and the CIA just on face value .
 President Kennedy "with himself for relying too much on the advice of others " during the Bay of Pigs . There was no ground uprising as calculated, and this left Kennedy with himself .
 Such elements caused a tremendous distrust about the CIA and the military chiefs on the part of the President, says President George W. Bush . Such elements led to a lot of distrust in the CIA, the President says .
 President Kennedy was determined not to repeat it again especially in light of the volatility of the situation . President Kennedy wanted to avoid repeat of the tragedy .
 President believes any application of military action by the U.S. will inevitably escalate the crisis instead of resolving it .
 President Kennedy instructed the Joint Chiefs to communicate to the Turks that the Jupiter missiles in Turkey will not be fired without presidential consent . The Bay of Pigs episode shows the impact of that incident on Kennedy’s thinking .
 Kennedy asked Paul Nitze, Assistant Secretary for International Security Affairs, to confirm this by stating that “what we’ve got to do is make sure these fellows do know, so that they don’t fire them off and think the United states is under attack .
 Kennedy’s hands-on navigation of the EXCOMM and his approach towards dealing with the JCS and the flow of information was significantly a product of his experience in the Bay of Pigs . Kennedy: “In other words, Kennedy's hands on navigation and approach to dealing
 Kennedy also had to constantly factor in the implications of military action not only directly on the United States itself but also on other key U.S. interests abroad . The Berlin Factor was the Berlin Factor, Kennedy says .
 The value of the consequences of a U.S. military action on Cuba and a retaliatory Soviet move on Berlin and Turkey was central to adopting any course of action, says historian John Sutter .
 President Kennedy evaluated the consequences of individual actions prior to embarking on them . Kennedy evaluated consequences of each of his actions before embarking upon them .
 U.S. response had multilateral implications for both the United States and its allies as well, he said . He underlined that whatever the US response was going to be, it was multilateral .
 President Kennedy concluded that “when we balance off that our problem is not merely Cuba but it is also Berlin and when we recognize the importance of Berlin to Europe, that’s what made this thing to be a dilemma for three days.”
 Kennedy evaluated the pro and con of a military strike on Cuba in light of a likewise retaliation from the Soviet Union on Turkey and Berlin . This would hurt the United States interests in Europe tremendously, he said .
 Turkey and Berlin factors had to be weighed into the policy calculus before embarking on a definitive foreign policy response, explains why a blockade was chosen over military attack . Hence, the blockade was decided over a military attack over military action .
 President Kennedy made foreign policy decisions during the thirteen days in 1962 . The constant flow of information also had an influence on how President Kennedy decided to make decisions .
 President Kennedy received the “hard intelligence” which he had asked from Ted Schackley, nearly a month earlier . This report, coupled with photos of the MRBMs shot by the U-2 reconnaissance on October 14, 1962, provided President Kennedy with the ‘hard
 The President’s need for hands-on intelligence evidence about the nature of the missile activities in Cuba prior to the setting up of the EXCOMM signifies the enormous amount of control Kennedy exercised on the intelligence community, and his attempts to ensure the constant flow of information to the White
 President Kennedy believed that “military policy and power cannot and must not be separated from political and diplomatic decisions” which clearly proved that ‘the use of force always remained to him merely political tools”
 George Ball was the first person in the EXCOMM to bring out this issue of morality on October 18, 1962 . Ball was first person to discuss morality in 1962. Ball was also a member of the ExCOMM.
 His argument was that a surprise military action is simply a U.S. imitation of the Pearl Harbor . He stated that “it’s the kind of conduct that one expects of the Soviet Union.”
 This was chiefly why the President was reluctant to adopt an airstrike and instead chose to proceed with a blockade . This was mainly because of the President's reluctance to adopt the airstrike .
 The argument that a surprise air attack would erode the moral position of the U.S. throughout the world was further strengthened by General Taylor’s estimation that “we’re never sure of getting all the missiles and the offensive weapons if we fire a strike”
 This made President Kennedy firmer in pursuing the course of blockade instead of a military action . President Kennedy made the decision to pursue a blockade of Syria .
 The blockade reduced the unpredictability in crisis but also restored the United States image in the world, and most importantly, preserved the unity of alliances which in turn lent credibility and legitimacy to the response itself .
 In support, from the EXCOMM conversations on October 18, 1962 in the DVD Voices from the Brink, we hear Ball saying “this business of carrying that mark of Cain on your brow for the rest of your life is something…” Here, we observe that the
 One of the crucial elements influencing President Kennedy’s decision to follow through with the blockade was the issue of legality or legitimacy of the response . Credibility and International Legality was a crucial factor in the decision to blockade .
 In addition to reducing the unpredictability in crisis, the blockade restored the U.S. image in the world . The blockade preserved the unity of alliances, which in turn lent credibility and legitimacy to the United States response .
 Kennedy perceived the placement of the missiles even after repeated warnings in his speeches on September 4th and 13th to be violating the ethics and the conventional etiquette of the international arena . To begin, Kennedy perceived . The placement of . the missiles was violating . the ethics of the . international arena
 The deployments of Soviet missiles in Cuba were seen as challenging the U.S. willingness/firmness to enact its stated policies . In addition, the deployments of . Soviet missile deployments in Cuba seen as . challenging the United States willingness to enact policies which signified the nature of the
 President Kennedy and his advisors had to articulate the response in order to maintain the unity within various alliances, including NATO, UN, OAS, Britain, and France . Hence, it was a question of the international or “hemispheric” legality and credibility of the response .
 Robert McNamara emphasized the advantages and disadvantages of a blockade in the meeting on October 20, 1962 . It explains why proceeding with the blockade would be perceived as a legitimate and credible policy by the allies .
 President Kennedy explained his reasons for choosing the blockade over a military alternative in 1962 . This cost-benefit analysis was again explicitly reflected in the President’s meeting with the JCS on October 19, 1962 .
 Kennedy underlined the significance of holding talks with NATO over Khrushchev’s proposed Cuba-Turkey deal on October 26, 1962 . Kennedy said that “the advantage of the meeting is that, if we reject it, they participate in it .
 Kennedy’s letter to Macmillan on October 22, 1962 in which he reached out to the latter, asked him to “speak forthrightly in support” of the blockade in the UN Security Council meeting . Also, Kennedy wanted to gain unanimity among his allies
 Macmillan replied in a telegram stating Britain’s support to the U.S. response on Cuba in the Security Council meeting . The telegram was sent by Britain to the United States .
 President Kennedy did not engage the allies in the decision-making process, but he definitely reached out to them for mustering international support for U.S. response .
 President Kennedy was signifying that the perception of allies does matter towards implementing the U.S. response which enjoyed international consensus . Clearly, President Kennedy's response to the crisis in Vietnam was a consensus .
 President Kennedy’s EXCOMM reflected the small group model towards formulating the policy response . President Kennedy's EXCOMm reflected the smaller group model to formulating policy .
 Policy makers come together and acting together in the same way because it’s easy and they don’t have to run the risk of facing criticism for holding a particular viewpoint which in turn could alienate them from the group and the policy process . This situation is characterized by policy
 The hallmark of group-think is “close-mindedness or a collective reluctance to question basic assumptions about the problem at hand” resulting in a “shared illusion” of consensus within the group .
 The implication of group-think in the context of a foreign policy process includes ‘collaboration and compromise” among the players whose individual beliefs harmonize and align with other members involved in the decision making process .
 Roswell Gilpatric, Deputy Secretary of Defense, recalls that the President “not only allowed open discussion, he encouraged open discussion”
 The meetings involved multiple viewpoints and insights which significantly eliminated the groupthink issue .
 President had final say as to how things were to proceed . However, it was the President who had the final say on how things would proceed .
 President Kennedy delegated the policy response to the Soviet missiles placed in Cuba through the EXCOMM in those thirteen days between October 16, 1962 to October 28, 1962 .
 This model showcases President Kennedy’s organization style as a “personal and intimate command” in delegating and constructing the U.S. response to the crisis . This model is a model of President Kennedy's organization style .
 The crisis did not end on October 28, 1962 with the confirmation of the withdrawal of missiles from Cuba in exchange for the United States assurance against the invasion of Cuba . The U.S. agreed to withdraw missiles in return for an assurance against an invasion .
 “weeks of secret, often tense, negotiations followed until a complete Soviet and United States understanding and an accompanying end to the United States blockade could be announced on November 20” The Kennedy Tapes, ed.
 Marcula was basically an American built Liberty ship which was registered from Lebanon . The ship was going to Cuba under the soviet charter . It was registered in Lebanon .
 Second, a surgical airstrike only on the Soviet missile sites and third, an invasion of Cuba . Third, an attack on Cuba would be a surgical strike on Russia's missile sites . Second, an airstrike on Cuba only on a Soviet missile site .
 Both proposals were firmly advocated by the military chiefs headed by the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff General Maxwell Taylor .
 President Kennedy’s control over the military is evident in the Executive Committee Minutes document of October 23, 1962 which clearly mentions a list of plans authorized personally by the President . Furthermore, President Kennedy's control of the military clearly shows in the Minutes Minutes document .
 President Kennedy’s personal telegram T488162 to Macmillan on October 21, 1962 in which he stressed on unity and resoluteness among the ally forces of Briton, NATO, OAS and France towards countering Khrushchev . Also see President Kennedy .
 For further understanding of the United States stance in this regard, see Zelikow and May, 178. For further explanation of the U.S. stance on the issue of the North Korea crisis, read May, May and Zelikowski .
 I’m not sure what this means/ how it would have affected Kennedys decision making process . I would be greatful for any help in understanding. I would like to see if you can help us understand how it happened .