 Subscribe to our free email list for two information-packed emails per week . Subscribe to the weekly Newsquiz.com weekly .
 Big Brother, Income Inequality, Mass Animal Deaths, Mind-Altering Drugs and Mind-altering Drugs are all revealed . Go General: Excerpts from all key 9/11 articles .
 Countless theories attempt to explain the John F Kennedy assassination . Author Presents Facts, Theories of John F. Kennedy Assassination .
 Few have taken painstaking efforts to carefully document the many steps taken by Kennedy which greatly upset the establishment in the lead-up to his assassination . Yet few have taken the painstaking efforts needed to document all of the facts .
 This may be the most definitive book ever on the many facts and theories surrounding the Kennedy assassination . The book is available on Amazon.com .
 The below concise summary of the painstaking work by Douglass both captivates and inspires . The below is a summary of Douglass's painstaking work .
 Douglass presents numerous revealing facts and powerful evidence that John F Kennedy took far too many steps towards peace and away from the secret agendas of his generals and rich industrialists .
 His behavior simply could not be tolerated by those who stood to lose billions of dollars from his ever-growing resolve to create more peace in our world . His behavior was simply unacceptable by those standing to lose millions of dollars, he said .
 Despite some of the disturbing facts presented, Douglass leaves us with great hope . Yet despite some of these disturbing facts .
 The life and death of John F Kennedy is not so much a story of one man as it is "a story of peacemaking when the chips are down" As he states, the life of JFK is not about one man but it is about peacemaker .
 If each of us is inspired to stand up and do the right thing, the whole world will change for the better, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 For how you can play your part, see the ""What you can do"" section at the end of this excellent essay . For more information, visit this essay .
 James W Douglass, author of acclaimed book JFK and the Unspeakable, says experiment into the dark truth of Dallas can be the most hopeful experience of our lives .
 It does require patience and tenacity to confront the unspeakable, but it also requires patience . "It's not easy to deal with the tragedy, but you have to confront it," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 We, first of all, need to take the time to recognize the sources in our history for what happened in Dallas on November 22, 1963 . We need to also recognize the source of the Dallas tragedy, the author says .
 The document was issued in 1948, one year after the CIA was established, and 15 years before JFK's murder . JFK was assassinated in 1968, 15 years after CIA established .
 National Security Council directive 10/2 on June 18, 1948, gave sanction for covert operations . Propaganda, sabotage, economic warfare, subversion were seen as necessary to "win" the Cold War .
 In the 1950s, under the leadership of CIA Director Allen Dulles, the doctrine of ""plausible deniability" became the CIA's green light to assassinate national leaders, conduct secret military operations, and overthrow governments that our government thought were on the wrong side .
 Harry Truman, under whom the CIA was created, had deep regrets . Truman's CIA created, and during his presidency the plausible deniability doctrine was authorized . President Harry Truman was under whose presidency he created the CIA .
 Kennan's proposal was that the CIA's criminal power could be confined to covert action outside the borders of the United States, with immunity from its lethal power granted to U.S. citizens . Kennan proposed that the Agency could be granted immunity from lethal action granted to United States citizens
 During the Cold War, the hidden growth of the CIA's autonomous power corresponded to the public growth of what was called a fortress state . The CIA's autonomy corresponded with that of the fortress state, the author says .
 The insecure basis of our security then became weapons that could destroy the planet, says David Cameron . He says the 'insecure basis' of security then led to weapons that 'destroyed the planet' The world is now at risk of being destroyed by the weapons of terrorists, he says
 To protect the security of that illusory means of security, which was absolute destructive power, we now need a ruling elite of national security managers . We now need an authority above that of our elected representatives .
 Military-industrial managers made the real decisions of state. So from that point on, our military industrial managers made our real decisions . We are now in the process of removing the power of the state.
 Truman simply ratified their decisions and entrenched their power, as he did with the establishment of the CIA, and the National Security Council did with its endorsement of plausible deniability . President Truman simply ratified their decisions, as well as establishing the CIA .
 JFK reacted to the CIA's setting him up . Kennedy sacks CIA leaders . We know how JFK reacted . JFK sacked CIA leaders after JFK's assassination .
 Robert Kennedy ordered an investigation into the affair, under the watchful eyes of his brother, Attorney General Robert Kennedy . The investigation was launched by Robert Kennedy's brother, the Attorney General .
 He fired CIA Director Allen Dulles, Deputy Director Richard Bissell, Jr., Jr. and Deputy Director General Charles Cabell . He also fired three others .
 The CIA fired the top of the CIA's hierarchy, including the legendary leader who had come to personify the agency, Allen Dulles . That was a huge decision, firing the top CIA hierarchy was a big decision .
 "He was cutting back the CIA's power in very concrete ways, step by step," says Obama . "He's cutting back on the CIA," says the president .
 JFK had to confront the unspeakable in the Missile Crisis in the form of total nuclear war . JFK alienates CIA and Pentagon, alienating CIA and the Pentagon .
 At the height of that terrifying conflict, he felt the situation spiraling out of control, especially because of the actions of his generals . He said he felt that the situation was spiraling into control .
 The White House tapes show Kennedy questioning and resisting the mounting pressure to bomb Cuba . The Joint Chiefs and the Executive Committee of the National Security Council were pressuring him to bomb the country . Kennedy was the president of the United States in 1961 .
 The U.S. and Soviet leaders had been following Cold War policies that now seemed to be moving inexorably toward a war of extermination . The United States and the Soviet Union were following Cold war policies .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev had been engaged in a secret correspondence for over a year that gave signs of hope . Yet, as we have since learned, Kennedy and KHrushchev were engaged in secret correspondence .
 Even as they moved publicly step by step toward a Cold War climax that would almost take the world over the edge with them, they were at the same time smuggling confidential letters back and forth that recognized each other's humanity .
 They were public enemies who, in the midst of deepening turmoil, were secretly learning something approaching trust in each other . They had been public enemies . But they were also learning to trust each other.
 President Kennedy sent his brother, Attorney General Robert Kennedy, secretly to Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin . The president was pressured to bomb Cuba after a Soviet missile shot down a U2 spy plane over Cuba .
 RFK told Dobrynin that the president ""didn't know how to resolve the situation" Khrushchev reported the situation to the Soviet leader . RFK said the president did not know how he would handle the situation .
 Even if he doesn't want or desire a war, something irreversible could occur against his will . Even though he didn't want it, it could happen against him against the will .
 At a moment when the world was falling into darkness, Kennedy did what from his generals' standpoint was intolerable and unforgivable . Kennedy's actions were "unacceptable" and "unforgivable"
 Even worse, the president then reached out to their enemy, asking for help . Even worse is that he then asked for help from their enemy .
 The two most heavily armed leaders in history, on the verge of total nuclear war, suddenly joined hands against those on both sides pressuring them to attack . Both sides were heavily armed and on the brink of war .
 Khrushchev ordered the immediate withdrawal of his missiles from Cuba, in return for Kennedy's public pledge never to invade Cuba . Kennedy also promised to withdraw U.S. missiles from Turkey, as he would do .
 When President Kennedy stood up to the Pentagon, the CIA, and the military-industrial complex, he was treated as a traitor . President Kennedy was treated differently by the Pentagon and the CIA for his stance .
 His attempt to save the planet from the weapons of his own nation was regarded as treason . He was killed in the attack on the planet by his own people .
 The doctrine of ""plausible deniability"" allowed for the assassination of a president seen as a national security risk himself . The doctrine was used in the case of President George W. Bush's assassination .
 Kennedy's rejection of 'a Pax Americana' was an act of resistance to the military-industrial complex . Kennedy rejected the idea of a 'Pax Americana', as a result of his rejection of the idea . Kennedy was the first president to reject the notion of a Pax American
 At his own risk, Kennedy was rejecting the foundation of the Cold War system . Kennedy rejected the idea of a Cold War with the U.S. at the start of his presidency .
 Kennedy said he wanted to negotiate a nuclear test ban treaty with the Soviet Union in Moscow as soon as possible . Kennedy: "I want a treaty in Moscow in their capitol, not ours, not theirs"
 U.S. president suspends atmospheric tests unilaterally . He says he wants to clear the way for such a treaty . Obama also says he will suspend atmospheric tests .
 Kennedy's strategy of peace penetrated the Soviet government's defenses far more effectively than any missile could have done . Kennedy's peace strategy was more effective than a missile would have been able to penetrate .
 The Soviet press, accustomed to censoring U.S. government statements, published the entire speech all across the country . The speech was published by the Soviet press .
 Soviet radio stations broadcast and rebroadcast the speech to the Soviet people . The speech was broadcast to Soviet people on radio .
 In response to Kennedy's turn toward peace, the Soviet government even stopped jamming Western broadcasts into their country .
 In contrast to the Soviet media that were electrified by the speech, the U.S. media ignored or downplayed it . The United States media ignored the speech .
 He negotiated the Test Ban Treaty without consulting them, because they opposed it . The test ban treaty was negotiated without consulting the Senate and the House of Representatives .
 In the month leading up to the assassination, Kennedy and Castro began a dialogue on normalizing U.S.-Cuban relations . French journalist Jean Daniel personally visited both men in the month before JFK's assassination .
 Daniel was actually eating lunch with Castro in his home on November 22, conveying Kennedy's hopeful words, when the Cuban premier was phoned with the news of Kennedy's death . The Cuban premier phoned Daniel when the news broke .
 JFK's top-secret order to begin withdrawal from Vietnam was made in October 2 . JFK decided on his policy of withdrawal against the arguments of most of his advisers .
 Dallas killed 58,000 Americans and over three million Vietnamese, Laotians, and Cambodians . John Kennedy was murdered on November 22, 1963, in Dallas, Texas, Texas .
 JFK ordered the Defense Department to switch huge military contracts away from the major steel companies to smaller, more loyal contractors that had not defied him . The Steel Crisis was JFK's first confrontation with the ruling elite of Big Steel .
 JFK and his brother, Robert, were denounced as symbols of ""ruthless power"" by Wall Street power brokers at the center of the military-industrial complex . After the big steel companies backed down from their price raises, JFK and Robert were denounced by the Wall St. power brokers
 Henry Luce's Fortune magazine called to readers' minds the soothsayer's warning in Shakespeare of the assassination of Julius Caesar . The Ides of April"" was Henry's first edition of Fortune magazine .
 Fortune warned Kennedy that his actions confirmed the worst fears of corporate America about his presidency . Fortune was warning Kennedy that he would have dire consequences . Kennedy's actions confirmed worst fears about corporate America .
 As interpreted by the most powerful people in the nation, the steel crisis was a logical prelude to Dallas . The steel crisis is a logical precursor to Dallas, Texas, Dallas .
 Yet another Bay of Pigs was Kennedy's diplomatic opening to the fiery Third-World leadership of President Sukarno of Indonesia . JFK reached out to the Third World leader .
 It wanted what it saw as his pro-communist ""global orientation"" obliterated . It wanted to obliterate the pro-Communist "global orientation" of his .
 During Eisenhower's presidency, the CIA repeatedly tried to kill and overthrow Sukarno but failed . The CIA was involved in the overthrow of the country's prime minister .
 President Kennedy said he was willing to accept Sukarno's invitation to visit Indonesia the following spring . Three days before his assassination, President Kennedy had said he would visit Indonesia three days earlier .
 Kennedy's visit to Indonesia would have dramatized in a very visible way Kennedy's support of Third World nationalism, a sea change in U.S. government policy .
 JFK's Indonesian policy was also killed in Dallas, with horrendous consequences . JFK's policy also killed by the assassination of Indonesian leaders in Dallas .
 The CIA overthrew Sukarno in a massive purge of suspected Communists that ended up killing 500,000 to one million Indonesians . After Lyndon Johnson became president, the CIA finally succeeded in overthrowing Sukarna .
 JFK once again stated his hope for a joint expedition to the moon in a speech to the U.N. in September 1963 . JFK proposed a joint U.S.-Soviet moon landing in the 1960s .
 Neither American nor Soviet military leaders were ready to accept his initiative . Neither U.S. nor Soviet leaders were willing to accept him .
 Nikita Khrushchev, siding with his own rocket experts, felt he was still forced to decline Kennedy's proposal . The proposal was rejected by the Soviet Union .
 Kennedy's vision to end the Cold War also died with Kennedy . That further visionary step to end Cold War was also dead with Kennedy.
 U.S. and Soviet rockets continued to be pointed at their opposite countries rather than being joined in a project for a more hopeful future . United States and Soviet missiles were fired at each other's opposite countries .
 JFK meets the Quakers in the final weeks of his presidency, President Kennedy took one more risky step toward peace . JFK met with Quakers at a Quakers meeting in his final days of the presidency .
 It can be seen in relation to a meeting he had a year before with six Quakers who visited him in his office . It can also be seen as a reference to the meeting he held with Quakers the year before .
 The U.S. should offer surplus food to the People's Republic of China, the U.N. State Department says .
 Kennedy said he knew that, and knew that it was the right thing to do, but he couldn't overcome the China lobby in Washington to accomplish it . Kennedy said, "I knew that . knew that ... but he didn't overcome that"
 A year and a half later in the fall of 1963, against overwhelming opposition, Kennedy decided to sell wheat to the Russians . The Russians had a severe grain shortage . Nevertheless, a year later in 1963, Kennedy sold wheat to Russia .
 Lyndon Johnson said he thought Kennedy's decision to sell wheat to Russia would be the worst political mistake he ever made . Vice President Lyndon Johnson thought it would be Kennedy's worst mistake ever .
 JFK's controversial decision ""to feed the enemy"" has been forgotten . JFK's decision to feed enemy has been ignored today .
 In 1963, the wheat sale was seen as a threat to our security — feeding the enemy to kill us . The sale of wheat in 1963 was considered a security threat to the nation .
 The violent reaction to his decision was represented on Friday morning, November 22, 1963, by a threatening, full-page advertisement addressed to him in the Dallas Morning News .
 JFK read the ad before the flight from Fort Worth to Dallas, pointed it out to Jacqueline Kennedy, and talked about the possibility of his being assassinated that day . JFK read it out before he left Fort Worth, Texas, on the flight .
 That was not the kind of leadership the CIA, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and the military-industrial complex wanted in the White House . That's not what the CIA and the Joint chiefs of Staff wanted, they say .
 Given the Cold War dogmas that gripped those dominant powers, Kennedy's assassination followed as a matter of course . Given the turn toward peace, his assassination followed by his assassination .
 John Kennedy chose peace on earth at the height of the Cold War, he was executed . John Kennedy was executed because he chose peace in peace . He was executed at the age of 50 .
 "Because he turned toward peace, in spite of the consequences to himself, humanity is still alive and struggling. But because he turned to peace, despite the consequences, humanity still lives and struggles, he says . He says, "I'm not going to go to war. I'm
 "That is hopeful, especially if we understand what he went through and what he has given to us as his vision," she says .
 The void of the unspeakable is the dark abyss, the midnight reality of plausible deniability, that we face when we peer into our national security state's murder of President Kennedy . A profile in courage is a portrait in courage .
 At a certain point in his presidency, John Kennedy turned a corner and didn't look back . John Kennedy's presidency was at a turning point in history .
 Kennedy was already in conflict with his national security managers . The missile crisis was the breaking point for Kennedy .
 "At that most critical moment of us all, he turned from any remaining control his security managers had over him," he writes . "He turned from . a deeper ethic, a deeper vision in which the fate of the earth became his priority," he says .
 He began to home in, with his new partner, Nikita Khrushchev, on the hope of peace for everyone on this earth . Without losing sight of our own best hopes in this country, he began to .
 A propaganda campaign has been waged to keep Americans from understanding that story, from telling it, and from re-telling it to our children and grandchildren . And what's been waged is a propaganda campaign to keep us out of that story .
 When a nation is under the domination of an idol, namely war, it is a story that will be covered up . But when a nation . is under a continuing domination of . an idol - namely war - it is covered up by the government .
 When the story can liberate us from our idolatry of war, then the worshippers of the idol are going to do everything they can to keep the story from being told, says the author of the book .
 "From the standpoint of a belief that war is the ultimate power, that's too dangerous a story," he says . "War is not a story. It's a very dangerous story," says the author of a new book .
 "It shows a different kind of security than always being ready to go to war," says President Obama . Obama: "I'm not going to war. I'm going to be in a state of mind. It's not a war zone," says Obama .
 It's unbelievable that a president was murdered by our own government agencies because he was seeking a more stable peace than relying on nuclear weapons . President Obama was assassinated by his government agencies, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 For the sake of a nation that must always be preparing for war, that story must not be told . The story must be kept from the public eye, he says .
 President John F Kennedy was a man of courage, President Kennedy . He was assassinated in 1963 . Kennedy was the first president to be elected to office in 1968 .
 In the end, it is not so much a story of one man as it is the story of peacemaking when the chips are down . "In the end of the story, the story is not about one man but it is about peacemaker," says the author .
 JFK and the Unspeakable: Why He Died and Why It Matters is JFK's story . JFK was assassinated in 1968 . JFK and JFK's legacy will be marked by his legacy .
 History Channel documentary presenting powerful evidence that President Lyndon Johnson had a direct hand in the Kennedy assassination . Click here to watch the History Channel Documentary .
 Kennedy stopped his generals from staging a terror attack in the U.S. and falsely accusing Cuba, according to documents . For documents on Kennedy stopping his generals, click here. Click here.
 For lots more reliable facts, videos, and revealing information on the John F Kennedy assassination, click here .
 U.S. News and World Report, July 25, 2004, Mission Impossible . Mission Impossible. Mission Impossible is a mission to find out what happened .
 Letter from Harry S Truman to William B Arthur, June 10, 1964 . Originally in letter from Truman to Arthur, it was written in 1964 .
 President John F Kennedy to the UN General Assembly, September 20, 1963 . President Kennedy to address the UN in 1963 .
 See also the July 24, 2010 Dallas Morning News article which includes this story as reported by JFK aide and friend Kenneth O'Donnell .
 Inform your media and political representatives of this important information on John F Kennedy assassination facts and theories . Inform the media with this information . Inform your political representatives about the facts .
 For lots more facts, information, videos, books, and more John F Kennedy assassination theories, see the excellent Kennedy assassination information center at this link .
 For a collection of highly revealing major media articles and government documents on the John F Kennedy assassination, click here . Click here to read the full transcript .
 For an inspiring essay on how we can work together to build a brighter future, click here . Click here to read the essay .
 WantToKnow.info believes it is important to balance disturbing cover-up information with inspirational writings which call us to be all that we can be and to work together for positive change .
 For an abundance of uplifting material, please visit our Inspiration Center . For more information, visit our inspirational center .