 Fidel Castro's radical Cuban government alarmed U.S. officials because it advocated revolution throughout Latin America . Castro's government built economic and military ties with the Soviet Union, the United States’ primary Cold War adversary .
 Since 1959, the Eisenhower and Kennedy administrations had sought to overthrow Castro through such operations as the failed Bay of Pigs expedition . Kennedy was understandably cooler on military solutions to the Cuban problem as a result of the failure of the failed operation .
 Nikita Khrushchev sought to counter the threat raised by the Jupiter missiles America recently placed in Turkey . China's Mao Zedong had begun to challenge the Soviet Union's leadership of the Communist world .
 The Central Intelligence Agency monitored Cuba through U-2 reconnaissance flights . The U.2 were used to spy on Cuba during the Cold War .
 CIA predicted some Soviet missiles could shortly become operational, perhaps even with nuclear warheads . CIA predicted that some Soviet missile missiles could soon become operational . CIA: Some Soviet missiles may soon be operational .
 On 16 October, an alarmed President John F Kennedy assembled key advisers, soon designated the Executive Committee . The Executive Committee debated how to respond to the crisis .
 ExComm advisers ruled out an air strike because it might leave missiles untouched . ExComm also ruled out a strike on missiles because of the lack of missiles in the area .
 Kennedy readied U.S. forces for an invasion, but hesitated because of potential high casualties and possible Soviet retaliation . Bay of Pigs also provided little positive precedent, with little precedent .
 ExComm shelved the negotiations option because U.S. officials refused to negotiate with Castro . They feared that Khrushchev would simply stall until missiles were operational .
 ExComm endorsed a naval blockade, or “quarantine,” to stop further Soviet military shipments . The blockade was intended to force Khrushchev to retreat in the face of superior U.S. power in the region .
 140,000 U.S. troops in Florida prepared for an assault against Cuba . United States war vessels patrolled the Caribbean to intercept ships . 140,500 troops in the state of Florida were prepared for a Cuban invasion .
 Moscow denounced the blockade as a violation of international law and an intrusion into Soviet–Cuban affairs . Nervous observers sketched doomsday scenarios .
 Khrushchev proposed to remove the ‘defensive” Soviet missiles if the U.S. pledged not to invade Cuba . The missiles would be removed if the United States pledged to not invade Cuba, Khrushchen wrote .
 Attorney General Robert Kennedy met with Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin, exploring missile-swap option . President's brother, Robert Kennedy, met privately with Dobrynins to discuss missile swap .
 A SAM shot down a U-2 over Cuba and an Alaska-based U.S. spy plane strayed into Soviet territory . That day, 27 October, the crisis escalated when a SAM shot .
 President Kennedy publicly agreed to the no-invasion pledge . Robert Kennedy privately assured Dobrynin that the Jupiters would be withdrawn . President Kennedy later struck a deal with the Soviets .
 Khrushchev feared losing control over the events, especially because of Castro's unpredictability, accepted these terms . The terms were agreed by Khrushchchev, who feared losing his control .
 Castro bitterly resented the settlement and rejected U.N. inspections to confirm missile removal . Castro rejected United Nations on-site inspections to verify missile removal from the site .
 The U.S. and the Soviet Union never signed a formal agreement to leave Cuba . The missiles and bombers departed Cuba, but the United States and the Soviets did not sign a formal deal .
 Kennedy enhanced his image for boldness and courage . Kennedy took credit for effective crisis management, taking credit for .
 In retrospect, McNamara attributed success less to Kennedy's competence than to happenstance . McNamara: “misinformation, miscalculation, misjudgment, and human fallibility” that dogged all leaders in crisis .
 Soviet leaders in 1964 deposed Khrushchev, apparently believing he had undertaken a reckless gamble . The former Soviet leader was deposed by the Soviets in 1964 .
 Washington and Moscow worked to soothe tensions, installed a ‘hot line’ and signed the Limited Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty in 1963 . The treaty was the first nuclear test-ban treaty signed by the two nations .
 Some analysts argue that Kennedy's success in driving missiles from Cuba may have emboldened him to become more interventionist in Vietnam . Still, some analysts say that Kennedy may have been emboldened by the success of the missiles .
 U.S. policy toward Cuba remained hardline, with new assassination plots and CIA sabotage . New assassination plots, CIA sabotage were among the most recent examples . United States policy against Cuba was hardline in Cuba .
 The Soviets vowed to end their nuclear inferiority by building more weapons, escalating the nuclear arms race . The Soviets built more weapons than any other nation in the world .
 The Cuban missile crisis was perhaps the Cold War's most perilous moment . With its potential for thermonuclear exchange, the crisis has potential to be the most dangerous moment .