 On Tuesday morning, October 16, 1962 President John F Kennedy awoke to a political and security nightmare . President Kennedy was assassinated in September 1963 .
 At 9 A.M., McGeorge Bundy, his National Security Adviser, informed him that a U-2 reconnaissance mission over Cuba had photographed Soviet medium range ballistic missiles . The missiles had a range of 1,200 miles .
 In public and private statements, Nikita Khrushchev had stated that he sent only defensive armaments to Cuba . In September the U.S. president had warned that the United States would not tolerate offensive weapons .
 Meeting that morning with 14 handpicked advisers, known as the ExComm, agreed that missiles would have to be bombed and Cuba invaded . Kennedy agreed that the missiles would be bombed, Cuba invaded and that the invasion would be illegal .
 The first move was to force Khrushchev to withdraw his missiles from Cuba . But a week later, he announced his decision to “quarantine” Cuba as the first move .
 It required shedding firmly held Cold War doctrines and resisting the arguments of hard-line advisers who favored attacking Cuba and overthrowing Castro . The U.S. President Barack Obama's victory in Cuba required shedding Cold War doctrine .
 It was a political risk, but in light of the possibility that an attack could lead to a war with the Soviet Union, Kennedy reasoned . Kennedy reasoned that possibilities had to be treated as probabilities . Kennedy: "It was a risk"
 Secret recording of a meeting with the Joint Chiefs of Staff on the fourth morning of the crisis . How he reached this conclusion is revealed in a secret recording of the meeting .
 It offers a cardinal lesson in presidential leadership in the nuclear age, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "It's a lesson in leadership in nuclear age"
 The meeting in the Oval Office on October 19th began at 10m. with JCS chairman, Gen. Gen. Michael E. O'Neill .
 Khrushchev’s highest priority since 1958 was taking Berlin . On the other hand, if we attack the missiles or invade Cuba it gives them a clear line to take Berlin,” he said .
 “Our blockade of Cuba will give Khrushchev an excuse to blockade Ber­lin, which will infuriate our allies,” he said . To complicate the situation further, he continued .
 Berlin is a key part of the U.S. relationship with Europe and its allies, says President Obama . "When we recognize the importance of Berlin to Europe, that’s what has made this thing be a dilemma for three days," he says .
 Of course “we’ve got to do something,” he conceded, because “doing nothing will not make the Berlin problem go away.” He conceded . Of course, “We've got to . do something”
 The blockade, he worried, will provide the Soviets with time to hide their missiles . The blockade will even encourage them to move against Berlin, he said .
 It is a loss to history that there is no photograph of Ken­nedy’s face at that moment, he says .
 But one can imagine his jaw tightening, his temples pulsing, and his eyes fixed firmly on LeMay . LeMay's jaw tightened, his eyes tightened, and he looked at LeMay.
 Chief of Naval Operations, Admiral George Anderson and Army Chief of Staff Earle Wheeler backed LeMay . Marine Corp Commandant David Shoup also supported LeMay's decision .
 As long as Castro was supported by the Soviet Union, a military assault was the only good option, they believed . The U.S. government believed it would be the only option .
 It was impossible to be sure that all the missiles were destroyed, Gen. Gen. David Cameron says . Gen. Cameron: It's impossible to say if all missiles are destroyed .
 “I feel that the lowest risk course of action is the full gamut of military action by us. From a military point of view, he concluded, he said .
 LeMay then reminded the president that he had made several strong public statements warning the Soviets against sending offensive weapons of any type to Cuba .
 Despite their mutual interest in deposing Fidel Castro’s communist government, the chiefs’ and the president viewed the crisis differently . The chiefs' view of the crisis in Cuba was different .
 The chiefs' objective was to be in the best position to fight a war, while the president’s aim was to select the strategy that was least likely to start a war . The chiefs’ objective was . to be the best place in the . best position . to fight
 Both assumptions are plausible, and perhaps the Soviets would not have responded militarily . Both assumptions were plausible, but perhaps they were plausible .
 President Barack Obama is driven by obligations and pressures that could force him to retaliate if his missiles were attacked . But he was driven by pressures to act as a nation's president .
 President Obama's decision would depend on too many variables for the president to accept the chiefs’ blithe assumptions .
 President John F Kennedy's TV announcement of Cuban blockade during the missile crisis in a department store in California .
 Focus on diplomacy and make it as easy as possible for Khrushchev to back down, says John Defterios . Focus should be on diplomacy, he says. Focus on making it easy to persuade him to withdraw .
 The additional firepower that the missiles in Cuba added to the Soviet arsenal didn't add “particularly to our danger,” he insisted . He insisted that the additional firepower didn’t add ‘particularly to the danger”
 The missiles in Cuba might add to the danger, but they didn't create it, he says . The missiles added to the problem, he insists, but not to create it .
 The Soviet Union’s ICBMs, bombers, and sub­marines can kill eighty to one hundred million Americans . The Soviets can kill up to 100 million Americans, including millions of Americans .
 Had the president not insisted on a blockade, had he accepted the Chief’s recommendations (also favored by the majority of his ExComm advisers, he unwittingly would have precipitated a nuclear war . The president would have had to accept the Chief's recommendations .
 As American troops assaulted the island they would have confronted four times the 10,000 Soviet troops the CIA estimated in Cuba . They would have been massacred by an array of Soviet tactical nuclear weapons that American intelligence had not discovered .
 The decision to blockade rather than invade Cuba led to the most dangerous week of the Cold War . The decision was made to block Cuba rather than go to war .
 Khrushchev agreed to withdraw the missiles on Sunday morning, October 28 . The crisis ended peacefully when the missiles were withdrawn from the Soviet Union in Moscow .
 No other event in history offers as many relevant lessons about leadership in the nuclear age as those thirteen days in October . President Barack Obama's presidency is the subject of many questions .
 The economy is great, but the economy is not great, and the Supreme Court is great . The Supreme Court will decide whether to overturn Roe-Wera's decision .
 Ukraine Food Price Crisis is Just a Preview of What Could Happen as Climate Change Worsens . U.S. is in a 'Controlled Pandemic' Phase of COVID-19 .
 This year's Met Gala will be held in New York City . It will be the first time the event has been held in the U.S. since 2008 .
 TIME Ideas hosts the world's leading voices, providing commentary on events in news, society, and culture .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your photos to CNN iReport.com .
 I Was Shot and Lost My Sight for Protesting Inequality in Chile . I was shot and lost my sight for protesting against inequality .