 Kennedy traveled to Vienna, Austria, for a summit with Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev . Kennedy was in Austria for a meeting with Khrushchchev in 1960s .
 The summit was unsuccessful in its goal of building trust, but it also increased tensions between the two superpowers . It also increased tension regarding the divided city of Berlin, especially in discussions regarding Berlin .
 West Berlin became highly attractive to East Berliners, who were suffering economically and had no freedom of speech . West Berliners were also suffering economically . East Berlin was suffering economically, had no free speech .
 More than 3 million East Germans moved to West Berlin; problem was that they were highly skilled workers/academically trained, and were vital to EG economy .
 By 1961, Soviets knew they had to stop exodus in fear of economic decline . Soviet Union feared economic decline and feared it would be hard to survive .
 Khrushchev demanded the Western powers leave Berlin, but the US refused . The US refused to leave Berlin in 1961, and the West refused .
 A 27 mile long wall of barbed wire was put up, which separated West Berlin from East Berlin, with tanks/gunmen placed at strategic points to stop people from entering West Berlin . Building the Wall On 13 Aug., 1961, a 27 mile-long wall was put down,
 The three essentials of U.S. foreign policy were not affected, and so the Western response was moderate . The wall made from barbed wire so to gauge Western response . The Western response is moderate .
 Concrete construction of wall began on 17 Aug . This permanent wall had: A touch alarm fence Steel mesh Steel mesh A pipe too large in diameter for climbers to grip on top of the wall .
 West side: had graffiti/drawings all over it, showing how they felt about the divide . West side had graffiti all over them, showing their feelings about it .
 Creation of Berlin Wall only increased strain on already tense US-USSR relations . US-Russia relations strained by Berlin Wall's creation of Wall .
 The East German government sealed off all access roads between East and West Berlin and began construction of the Berlin wall . A long wall of barbed wire was put up, with tanks/gunmen placed at strategic points .
 The symbol of the closed society that was at the heart of the Soviet’s communist system is the symbol of its closed society .
 Concrete example of the differences between the communist world and the non-communist world . Concrete examples of differences between communist world .
 Since 1933 Cuba was governed by a Pro-American dictator, Batista, who was committed to preserving a repressive, authoritarian regime . America supported Batista to avoid the rise of anti-Batista communists .
 The United States bought the majority of all Cuban exports in 1959 . Batista’s government was overthrown in a communist revolution by Fidel Castro .
 Supporters of Batista, industrialists, bureaucrats and the privileged class, ﬂed to the United States – they were welcomed to the U.S. They were welcomed. Supporters of the Batista were welcomed .
 Right wing Cuban refugees planned a counter-revolution to overthrow Castro . Bay of the Pigs was the site of the Cuban uprising against Castro .
 JFK endorsed the plan and so the CIA trained Cuban exiles for invasion and counter-revolution – April 1961 the invasion took place . The landing brigade was captured by Cuban army loyal to Castro – humiliation to the United States – propaganda for the Soviets .
 Soviets stepped in to support the Castro government they received aid from the USSR and the Cubans allowed Soviets to construct military/missile bases . Soviets stepped into support the government of Cuba .
 JFK warned Khrushchev against installing the missiles in Cuba . JFK agreed not to invade Cuba and accepted that the missile bases would be dismantled . Soviets stepped in to support the Castro government – Cubans allowed Soviets to construct military bases .
 Kennedy is informed of this, and was given a variety of options, including a quarantine/blockade of the Cuban island . A bombing raid to destroy the missile sites, invasion or a diplomatic solution involving the removal of the missiles . Kennedy is given a range of options .
 On 24 Oct. the Soviet ships reached the line of United States ships and were stopped . The Soviet ships were stopped by the U.S. ships .
 Khrushchev sent a message to Kennedy on 24 Oct., and another, more aggressive, note on 26 Oct. 1962 . Kennedy was the prime minister of the Soviet Union in Moscow .
 Kennedy responded to the first message on the advice of his brother, but ignored the second message . Kennedy said he did not respond to the second, but did respond to both messages .
 October 1962 – United States naval cordon set up around Cuba – ships going into Cuba searches Soviet ships escorted by a Soviet submarine sailed towards Cuba with no intention to stop – realisation a ‘hot’ war, likely to involve nuclear weapons, seemed like a possibility . October 1962
 Reduced the bargaining power of the USSR in negotiations with the West . Brought to the U.S. reconsiderations about theories about nuclear war . Increased bargaining power with West .
 January 1968 – liberal reformer Alexander Dubcek chosen as new leader of the communist party . January 1968 - Dubcec chosen as leader of communist party in Czechoslovakia . February 1968 – Dubceka becomes leader of Czech Republic's Communist Party .
 Reformers were still pro-communist, but wanted to implement changes, such as freedom of speech . Reformers wanted to introduce changes to the law, including free speech .
 Censorship of TV/press is lifted in May; this starts to worry Brezhnev in May . In June censorship was formally abolished in Czech. in June .
 UN calls for peace/moderationation in Czech Republic . Czech students/artists protest against the move . UN has called for peace and moderation .
 Tensions heighten with Romania/Yugoslavia, who proclaim support for Czech . Czech Republic: Czech Republic, Czech Republic and Czech Republic . Tensions rise with Romania and Yugoslavia .
 President Johnson of the United States warns the USSR against invasion, and none comes . Soviet troops appear to be readying themselves to invade Romania . President Johnson warns against invasion .
 Dubcek was forced to sign a treaty with the USSR while under arrest in Moscow in Oct. In Oct. Dubcec was arrested in Moscow and forced into signing a treaty . Dubcke was forced into a treaty signed by the USSR .
 Most Czechs did not resist – although there were rocks thrown at tanks, street signs removed to confuse tanks, etc. But there was also a number of road signs removed from tanks .
 Dubcek and his colleagues’ were arrested and replaced with dictator, Gustav Husak . Dubcecke was replaced with Husak, who was replaced as dictator . Dubckek was arrested and was replaced by Husak. Husak was the first dictator to take over
 Brezhnev Doctrine decreed the Soviet Union’s right to intervene in the affairs of another country when the interests of socialism were being threatened . Warsaw Pact countries invaded Czechoslovakia to restore Soviet control . Most Czechs did not resist – although there were rocks thrown at tanks
 Dubcek and his colleagues’arrested and replaced with pliable dictator, Gustav Husak A new pro-Moscow government is introduced . The Brezhnev Doctrine was born. Dubcec and Husak were replaced by a pro-Russian government . Dubcke
 It was the justiﬁcation for the invasion and said that Warsaw Pact countries were not allowed to follow policies involving any departure from a one-party state . If any developments took place in any Warsaw Pact member country which seemed a threat to socialism, it was the right/
 This Soviet military imposition on a supposedly sovereign country provoked international outrage . Western countries offered only vocal criticism .
 In the USSR there were a number of open acts of dissentg.g. activists protested against the use of military force in Czechoslovakia in the Red Square on 25th August 1968 . Brutal reminder of the Soviet Union’s paranoia about protecting its frontiers .
 If any developments took place in any Warsaw Pact member country which seemed to be a threat to socialism, it was the right/duty of other member states to intervene militarily to bring reforms to an end, says historian .
 Warsaw Pact countries were not allowed to follow policies involving any departure from a one-party state . Warsaw Pact member states were banned from leaving a one party state . Poland was one of the Warsaw Pact members .