 The White House has not responded to requests for information from the National Security Council .
 Library of Congress wRi Kirirsheaswir'fl performed a test for the National Institute of Health and Human Services . The report was published in the Federal Research Division of Congress .
 Prepared under the Interagency Agreement 12a DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT 12b. 12b .
 This study provides comparative perspectives of the October 1962 Cuban missile crisis . The study provides a look at the Cuban missiles crisis in October 1962 .
 The purpose of this article is to present briefly the alternative perceptions of the U.S. and the Soviet Union during the crisis . The purpose is to compare these perceptions with each other and with current appraisals of the actual course of events .
 The major events of the crisis are summarized in chronological order, with the perspectives of the U.S. and the Soviet Union summarized separately .
 A current appraisal of the actual course of events, based on the most recent available declassified primary and secondary literature, is also provided . The author of this article provides an assessment of the events in the U.S. in the aftermath of the 9/11 .
 Soviet Union — Foreign Relations 16.30 pages . Cuba, Cuba, Soviet Union, Russia, Cuba .
 The Federal Research Division is the Library of Congress's primary feefor-service research unit . It is the library of Congress' primary research unit.
 The subjects researched include the broad spectrum of social sciences, physical sciences, and the humanities . Subjects researched include social sciences and physical sciences . The subjects were researched include .
 Federal Research Division provides research and analytical services . For additional information, please call 202/707-9905, fax 202/705-9920 or email frd@mail.loc.gov .
 The Soviet Conventional Weapons Buildup in Cuba: July-October 1962 . April-July 1962 . September 8-October 14. April-September 14. 1962 . The Soviet nuclear weapons build-up was a major event in Cuba's history .
 The major events of the missile crisis are summarized in chronological order, with the perspectives of the U.S. and the Soviet Union summarized separately . The events are followed by the perspective of the United States .
 The deployment of missiles of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics in Cuba was taken at the initiative of Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev . April-July 1962 .
 The operation to introduce medium-range and intermediate-range ballistic missiles was conceived by Khrushchev in April . The Soviet government planned to introduce the missiles from May to July 1962 . The operation was planned by the Soviet government .
 Premier Khrushchev was alerted by Soviet Defense Minister Marshal Rodion Ya. While vacationing in the Crimea, he was alerted to the incident by Marshal Ya.
 Malinovsky to the presence of United States Jupiter missiles just over the horizon in Turkey . U.S. Jupiter missiles have been seen in Turkey in recent years .
 The proximity of U.S. missiles in Turkey and Italy to the USSR was considered a major threat to the small Soviet intercontinental ballistic missile force . The small Soviet missile force had become vulnerable to decimation by a United States nuclear firststrike .
 Khrushchev proposed that comparable Soviet missiles be based secretly in Cuba in order to quickly reduce the strategic imbalance and deter an expected U.S. invasion of the island . The missiles were based in Cuba .
 Khrushchev discussed the proposed missile deployment to Cuba informally with First Deputy Chairman of the Council of Ministers Anastas I Mikoyan, who opposed the plan, considering it dangerously provocative .
 Early May-Deliberations regarding possible installation of missiles in Cuba were held by a small ad hoc group of Soviet officials .
 Khrushchev, First Deputy Minister Mikoyan, Presidium Member Frol R Kozlov, Foreign Minister Andrei A Gromyko, Marshal Malinovsky, and Marshal Sergei S Biryuzov, Commander in Chief of the Strategic Rocket Forces, attended first meeting .
 The group decided to proceed with the Cuban deployment, pending approval from the Cuban government . During the second meeting, the group was joined by the newly-designated Ambassador to Cuba .
 A secret delegation headed by Rashidov would be sent to Cuba to gain support from Cuban Prime Minister Fidel Castro Ruz . The delegation would try to gain the support of the Cuban prime minister .
 On the second day of talks, the Cuban government granted the Soviets permission to install MRBMs and IRBMs on Cuban territory .
 Cuban military delegation headed by Commander of the Revolutionary Armed Forces . General Raul Castro travelled to Moscow to formalize deployment of Soviet conventional and nuclear weapons to Cuba .
 Operation Whip Lash is a Caribbean military exercise designed to test contingency plans for a possible U.S. invasion of Cuba . US naval, air and ground forces conducted the exercise May 8-18 . The exercise was conducted in the Caribbean .
 The United States had no established intention of invading Cuba at the time . The U.S. forces engaged in extensive training for such a contingency throughout the summer and fall of 1962 .
 Soviet and Cuban authorities claim to have interpreted Whip Lash and similar exercises as evidence of advanced U.S. preparations to invade the island . The exercises were believed to have been part of an advanced United States preparations .
 Cuban military mission to USSR failed to produce an agreement on the sale or transfer of Soviet weapons to Cuba . US intelligence incorrectly concluded that the Cuban mission to the USSR had failed .
 This conclusion is based on the absence of public announcements of an agreement by either Cuban or Soviet representatives . This conclusion was based on a lack of public announcement of a deal by either Soviet or Cuban representatives .
 The Cuban mission succeeded in formalizing the secret agreement to install Soviet MRBMs and IRBMs in Cuba . In fact, the agreement was formalized .
 The covert deployment of Soviet missiles in Cuba coincided with a large-scale buildup of Soviet conventional forces on the island . The buildup included 42,000 Soviet combat personnel armed with state-of-the-art military equipment .
 The parallel deployments of troops and strategic missiles were successfully concealed from US intelligence until the missile installations were detected by a United States U-2 high-altitude reconnaissance aircraft on October 14 .
 The Soviet missile deployment to Cuba was preceded by a series of negotiations between the Soviet and Cuban governments . The negotiations culminated in a five-year agreement between Cuba and the USSR on military cooperation .
 The agreement was not signed by Moscow, it served as a framework for the Soviet deployment and arms transfers to Cuba . It served as the framework for Soviet deployment of Soviet weapons to Cuba, which was never signed .
 Soviet combat personnel and conventional weapons transported to Cuba . July 25-October 24-Soviet combat personnel sent to Cuba. October 25-Oct. 24- Soviet weapons and combat personnel transported to Cuban territory .
 Discussions at the 1992 Havana Conference on the Cuban missile crisis revealed that the Soviet force may also have been equipped with nine rocket-launched tactical nuclear weapons . The local Soviet commander may have been authorized to fire these weapons in the event of a United States invasion without further clearance from Moscow
 Aerial surveillance showed a large number of Soviet ships bound for Cuba riding ""high in the water," a common indicator of weapons deliveries . The United States was immediately alerted to the increased shipment of Soviet weapons to Cuba .
 Eyewitness reports from Cuban refugees and French intelligence alerted the U.S. to the presence of large numbers of Soviet personnel in Cuba .
 These were not identified as a Soviet combat force until after the detection of the missile bases .
 The Soviet deployment was initially interpreted as a conventional arms transfer involving some Soviet trainers and technicians, intended to strengthen Cuba's defensive capabilities . The deployment was therefore interpreted as an arms transfer .
 Director of Central Intelligence John McCone discussed the possible significance of the stepped-up Soviet deployment to Cuba .
 McCone suggested the possibility that the Soviets might be constructing MRBM and IRBM bases in Cuba . Among the scenarios considered is the possibility of the bases being built in Cuba.
 McCone urged the NSC to consider imposing a naval quarantine of Cuba to avoid such an eventuality .
 In the absence of solid evidence proving missile base construction, the NSC could not find sufficient justification to take overt action against Cuba . The NSC opted instead to accelerate covert efforts to destabilize the Castro government .
 United States & USSR unusually large amount of Soviet military equipment had been transferred to Cuba since late July . Up to 5,000 Soviet bloc personnel had recently disembarked at Cuban ports .
 The report concluded that ""something new and different is taking place,"" and noted evidence suggesting the construction of a SAM air defense network and an electronic and communications intelligence-gathering station .
 The Department of State recommended that Soviet arms deliveries be accepted in principle as long as they were limited to defensive weapons . The U.S. should publicly declare that it would not tolerate the introduction into Cuba of offensive weapons, particularly nuclear, weapons .
 The Soviet conventional weapons buildup in Cuba also prompted the US to accelerate the schedule of Operation MONGOOSE, a covert program of sabotage against the Castro government . The US accelerated the program after the Soviet buildup of conventional weapons in Cuba prompted the U.S.
 The combat role of Soviet personnel in Cuba was discovered by low-altitude aerial reconnaissance of the island . Soviet armored groups were deployed with their weaponry in combat configurations .
 U.S. estimates of the size of the Soviet force rose incrementally during the crisis, reaching 22,000 by late October . United States estimates of size of Soviet force in the 1980s began to rise incrementally .
 The actual size of the Soviet force was not known by the United States until 1979 . The U.S. did not know the size of Soviet forces until 1979 when it was discovered .
 Soviet news agency Tass said Cuban government had met with Soviet officials . Cuban government negotiated transfer of armaments and sending of technical specialists to Cuba .
 The Soviets began to ship missiles and support equipment to Cuba . September 8—The Soviets began the shipings of missiles and equipment to the island nation .
 USSR originally intended to construct twenty-four SS-4 MRBM launchers and sixteen SS-5 IRBM launchers, with two missiles per launcher, for a total deployment of eighty missiles to Cuba to be deployed at four complexes . The USSR originally planned to construct 24 MRBM laun
 Of the eighty missiles slated for transport to Cuba, forty-two of the missiles arrived on the island before the U.S. naval quarantine was established on October 24 . None of the SS-5 IRBMs ever made it to Cuba . The United States has established a naval quarantine
 The presence of warheads in Cuba has never been confirmed, yet statements by former Soviet officials suggest that twenty strategic warheads, in addition to nine suspected tactical warheads, may have arrived in Cuba prior to the start of the quarantine .
 The lack of camouflage may have resulted from a failure by the Soviets to adapt standard missile-base construction practices to the special security requirements of deployment in Cuba .
 Khrushchev stated that weapons being shipped to Cuba were exclusively for defensive purposes . No nuclear missiles were being sent to the island . The weapons were intended to protect the Cuban people .
 Khrushchev stated that the Soviet Union had no need to deploy nuclear missiles beyond its borders because its missiles were powerful enough to reach any conceivable target from their bases in Soviet territory . The Soviet Union claimed that its missiles could reach anywhere conceivable target anywhere from its bases .
 Early September-US intelligence agencies began to consider the likelihood of a Soviet nuclear deployment in Cuba . US intelligence agencies considered the possibility of a nuclear deployment .
 Attorney General Kennedy met with Soviet Ambassador to the US Anatoly Dobrynin to seek assurances that the Soviet weapons transfers to Cuba consisted solely of defensive weapons and did not include offensive missiles .
 Ambassador Dobrynin assured the Attorney General that only defensive weapons were being shipped to Cuba . The U.S. ambassador to Cuba assured the attorney general that only . weapons were not being shipped .
 President Kennedy believed that the Soviets did not intend to introduce nuclear missiles into Cuba . Kennedy responded to concerns of some members of Congress on the issue by stating that weapons in Cuba were defensive in nature .
 The President reiterated his earlier remarks that the new Soviet shipments did not constitute a serious threat to any part of the Western Hemisphere . The President said that the Soviet shipments were not serious threats .
 CIA Special National Intelligence Estimate concluded that the USSR could derive considerable military advantage from the deployment of MRBMs and IRBMs in Cuba . Such action would be inconsistent with Soviet policy and past practice, the estimate says .
 An underlying assumption was that the Soviets would not rationally choose Cuba as the theater for a superpower conflict . The Soviets were aware of overwhelming U.S. security interests and military capabilities in the Western Hemisphere .
 The missile bases were first photographed by a high-altitude U-2 aerial reconnaissance plane . U.S. & USSR October 14, 1962 .
 The Soviets were not aware that the United States had detected the missiles . Ambassador Dobrynin was informed by Secretary of State Rusk of the discovery on October 22 .
 Ad hoc group of administration officials and presidential advisors convened to address the Cuban crisis . High-level policy discussion on the significance of the Cuban missile deployment and the formulation of a response was carried out .
 ExComm's primary functions were to brief the President on day-to-day events, present and develop strategies for dealing with Soviet actions, assess United States readiness and capabilities .
 After confirming the presence of missiles in Cuba, the ExComm briefly discussed possible Soviet intentions . The ExComm also discussed the possibility of Soviet intentions in Cuba .
 The consensus was that the Cuban deployment was somehow related to Soviet ambitions in Europe and to Khrushchev's personal preoccupation with Berlin . The consensus of opinion was that it was related to the deployment of Cuban troops .
 A response based solely on diplomacy, as advocated by U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations Adlai Stevenson, was dismissed early on as insufficient . A response to the crisis was rejected by the U.N. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton .
 The ExComm transcripts show that US decision makers, particularly the President, felt compelled to respond militarily in light of recent U.S. policy statements that warned the Soviets not to introduce nuclear missiles to Cuba .
 Available evidence suggests that the Soviets misjudged the manner in which the U.S. would react to the missile deployment . The Soviets had not anticipated the reaction to the deployment of the missiles .
 Soviet decision makers overestimated the domestic and international pressures that might have compelled the U.S. to accept a Soviet fait accompli of secretly installed missiles .
 Khrushchev intended to announce the missile deployment in November 1962 . Soviet statements prior to the crisis indicate that the deployment would be announced in November 1963 .
 Khrushchev believed that the Soviet missiles in Cuba could be justified on the basis of their similarity to U.S. missiles in Turkey . The Soviet missiles were launched in Cuba in 1959 .
 Moscow apparently did not anticipate the strong U.S. reaction to the deception that had surrounded the Cuban missile deployment . Moscow did not expect the strong United States reaction . Moscow apparently didn't anticipate the reaction .
 The secret nature of the buildup in Cuba invalidated later Soviet claims that their installations there were comparable to U.S. Jupiter missile bases in Turkey . Soviet claims there were similar to those of the United States in Turkey in the 1950s .
 U.S. missiles in Turkey were installed openly in accordance with a publicly acknowledged agreement of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization . The Soviet-Cuban Agreement on Military Cooperation and Mutual Defense was negotiated and implemented in secrecy .
 The United States argued Turkey was a legitimate recipient of large-scale U.S. military assistance based on NATO membership . Cuba was not a member of the Warsaw Pact, the United States said .
 The Soviets failed to anticipate the nearly unanimous support for the US quarantine among Latin American countries . The U.S. invoked the Treaty of Interamerican Reciprocal Assistance of 1947 to reaffirm the special security relationships within the hemisphere .
 Moscow may have expected Western European governments to restrain the U.S. from precipitating a crisis that would compromise European security . Moscow may also have expected the United States not to precipitate a crisis in Europe .
 U.S. & USSR Imposition of the Naval Quarantine of Cuba: October 24-November 20 . Cuba was placed under quarantine by the United States & USSR . Cuba is now under quarantine .
 The quarantine order became effective on October 24 and remained in effect until November 20 . The order was intended to prevent further shipments of offensive weapons to Cuba .
 All ships approaching Cuba were tracked, and, upon reaching the quarantine line, were to be boarded and inspected for offensive military cargoes . All ships approached Cuba were tracking and were inspected for military cargo .
 The U.S. task force had standing orders to disable and forcefully board vessels that ignored hailings to halt and be inspected . The task force was based on standing orders from the Navy .
 Vessels found to be carrying offensive military cargoes would be ordered to turn back or else be impounded . Vessels would be turned back or face being impounded if found to have offensive military cargo .
 The boarding order was applied selectively on a case-by-case basis as individual ships approached the quarantine line . In actual practice, boarding orders were applied selectively .
 Throughout the crisis, the quarantine operation was closely supervised by the President and the Secretary of Defense .
 The quarantine represented a middle course between the alternatives of negotiation or outright military action through an air strike . U.S. policymakers say the quarantine was the middle course .
 US decision makers believed that it allowed the U.S. flexibility in demonstrating its resolve without provocatively destroying Soviet military assets . The decision was made to allow the United States flexibility .
 The quarantine also provided the Soviets with time to reconsider and modify their behavior and it shifted on them some of the responsibility for escalation . The quarantine provided time for the Soviets to reconsider their behavior .
 U.S. decision makers believed quarantine by itself would not compel the Soviets to remove the missiles already in Cuba . Further measures would have to be contemplated to gain their withdrawal, they said .
 The United States had generally accurate intelligence throughout the crisis on which Soviet vessels carried missile components and other offensive weapons . The U.S. had intelligence on the vessels .
 U.S. Navy reconnaissance planes spotted all Soviet ships bound for Cuba . They plotted their position, speed, and direction . The planes plotted the ships' position and speed .
 U.S. policymakers could not anticipate whether Soviet ships would run the blockade and how Soviet crews would respond to forcible boarding if necessary .
 The Soviets could not accurately predict the general Soviet military reaction to a potential armed clash at sea . Nor could they accurately predict a potential military reaction .
 Available evidence suggests that the Soviets failed to uncover U.S. plans for a naval quarantine prior to the Kennedy announcement of October 22 .
 Only a small token force of Soviet attack submarines was available for escort duty in the wake of the Kennedy announcement . No prepositioning or alerts of the Soviet Atlantic fleet had been undertaken in anticipation of U.S. moves .
 The placement of nuclear weapons near the end of the Soviet shipping schedule to Cuba gave the U.S. an opportunity to intercept roughly one-third of the missiles and possibly all of the warheads at sea . The placement gave the United States an opportunity .
 A potential confrontation between U.S. warships and Soviet transports and submarines bound for Cuba was avoided when the latter halted their approach and reversed course on October 24 . The Soviet ships and submarines were heading for Cuba .
 An aggressive campaign of public diplomacy against Soviet actions in Cuba was central to U.S. policy during the Cuban missile crisis .
 President Kennedy addressed the nation October 22 to reveal the presence of Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba . President Kennedy announced the United States quarantine of the island .
 President outlined the legal basis for U.S. action . He invoked the right to enforce regional security arrangements under Article 53 of the United Nations Charter .
 The Treaty of Interamerican Reciprocal Assistance of 1947 authorized collective defense of Western Hemisphere nations against extra-hemispheric powers . The corresponding regional arrangement in this instance was the Treaty of INTERamerican .
 The United States achieved a key victory at the Organization of American States when a unanimous vote of the member states condemned the missiles as a threat to peace and called for their removal . The vote was unanimous .
 Ambassador Stevenson publicly released the U-2 photographs of the missile bases in Cuba at a special session of the UN Security Council . The photos discredited Soviet claims that only defensive weapons were being shipped to Cuba .
 The USSR failed to anticipate the United States plan to announce publicly the secret Soviet missile deployment to Cuba on October 22 . The U.S. planned to announce the deployment of the secret missile deployment .
 Moscow took no steps to preempt the US announcement and thus avoid international censure . Moscow therefore took no preemptions and thus avoided censure from the U.S.
 The Soviets also failed to respond to the U.S. diplomatic initiative . The Soviets did not respond to a diplomatic effort .
 By declining to publicly address U.S. charges, the USSR made it possible for the United States to outmaneuver Soviet diplomats and discredit Soviet positions in international forums . The USSR declined to address United States charges, making it possible to .
 The USSR failed to anticipate unanimous support for the US blockade from Latin American countries in the OAS . The U.S. would invoke the Rio Treaty in asserting the special security relationships among Western Hemisphere nations .
 In addition to putting into effect a naval quarantine of Cuba, the U.S. armed forces were directed to prepare for further military action to remove missile bases or to respond to Soviet military challenges . The United States ordered a quarantine and a naval quarantine .
 As part of the DEFCON 2, a ""one-eighth"" airborne alert was put into effect, requiring one out of every eight nuclear-armed B-52 bombers to be airborne at any given moment .
 The B-47 medium bomber force was dispersed among thirty-three civilian and military airfields nationwide to reduce its vulnerability to Soviet bombardment . The force was spread across the country to reduce the vulnerability of Soviet bombardment.
 The United States military mobilization was designed to achieve both practical and psychological objectives . The U.S. military mobilization is designed to be both physical and psychological .
 Military preparedness demanded immediate mobilization of US forces in order to reduce vulnerability and provide opportunities for timely action . U.S. military preparedness demands immediate mobilization, says Pentagon .
 The general alert was intended to deter Soviet military challenges by demonstrating US resolve and revealing Soviet strategic inferiority . The alert was also intended to demonstrate US resolve by demonstrating Soviet military weakness .
 The Soviet Union appears to have anticipated strong localized military pressure by the US upon discovery of the missile bases . The large Soviet military contingent was stationed on the island to deter invasion .
 Moscow apparently did not expect the U.S. to declare a nuclear crisis involving a global United States military alert . Moscow apparently didn't expect the United States to declare the nuclear crisis .
 Soviet nuclear forces remained at a normal level of preparedness throughout the crisis, possibly deterred by the danger that any move on their part might provoke a preemptive strike by the United States .
 Moscow was well informed of US military preparations after October 22 . Despite their initial misreading of the U.S. reaction, Moscow was informed of the US military plans .
 Soviet surveillance of United States military activities was facilitated by the sheer scale of the mobilizations and by high-profile displays of U.S. military might . The Soviet Union was able to monitor the sheer number of mobilizations .
 As part of a deliberate campaign of psychological warfare, the U.S. made little effort to conceal the alerts and mobilizations of its forces after October 22 .
 SAC Commander in Chief transmitted the orders to assume DEFCON 2 ""in the clear" through open channels of communication . This may have been done to display confidence in the overwhelming superiority of U.S. strategic forces .
 The Soviet Union took almost no military action in response to the massive mobilization and heightened readiness of U.S. forces . The United States mobilized the Soviet Union in response .
 USSR and Warsaw Pact headquarters publicly announced alerts of their conventional forces . October 23--The USSR and Poland Pact headquarters announced alerts to their forces. October 23 .
 These had minimal practical effect, however, involving mainly symbolic steps such as cancellation of military leaves . Military leaves were cancelled in the wake of the crisis .
 The Soviet naval response to the quarantine was generally restrained . October 22-November 20- The Soviet Navy response was restrained . The quarantine lasted for two weeks .
 At no point during the crisis did the Soviet Atlantic fleet set sail for Cuba . At no significant steps were made to reinforce Soviet naval forces approaching the quarantine area .
 The most likely reason for the lack of a major Soviet naval response was the deterrent effect of the overwhelming United States naval presence in the Caribbean . The U.S. naval presence was also a deterrent effect .
 The Soviets may also have been deterred from reinforcing their submarine forces in the Caribbean by their knowledge of the capabilities of NATO's antisubmarine warfare net in the North Atlantic . NATO's anti-submarine warfare nets in North Atlantic may have deterred the Soviet Union from reinforcing its submarine
 The response of Soviet vessels directly involved in the convoy to Cuba was initially confrontational but became increasingly compliant with minor exceptions . October 22-November 20- The response to the convoy was initially confrontational but became increasingly compliant .
 Soviet weapons transports did not attempt to cross the quarantine line . Despite isolated challenges to U.S. forces, Soviet tankers refused inspection .
 After October 22, work on the sites was performed on a 24-hour basis to bring them to operational status as quickly as possible . Work on October 22 was done to bring the sites back to operating status as soon as possible.
 A Soviet SAM shot down a U-2 on a reconnaissance overflight of Cuba, killing its pilot . The pilot was killed by the Soviet SAM .
 The incident was in fact an independent action by Soviet air defense commanders in Cuba . The incident appeared to be a deliberate challenge to the US, but was actually a Soviet action .
 Soviet authorities in Moscow were seeking a negotiated solution to the crisis . The shootdown was unintended and accidental, according to Soviet authorities . Soviet authorities at the time were trying to negotiate a deal with Russia .
 Cuban military and militia forces were mobilized and placed on highest alert on October 23 . In contrast to the main Soviet forces, Cuban forces were rapidly mobilized and mobilized . The Cuban military was rapidly mobilized .
 Cuban antiaircraft batteries were given standing orders to fire on U.S. reconnaissance aircraft . Cuban batteries inflicted damage on at least one low-flying United States plane . Cuban anti-aircraft fire on reconnaissance aircraft and inflicted damage .
 The absence of significant Soviet military preparations was noted by United States intelligence . U.S. intelligence noted significant absence of Soviet preparations in the summer .
 The United States was immediately alerted to the retreat of most of the Soviet weapons transports that had been approaching Cuba . The U.S. ordered United States warships to refrain from engaging Soviet vessels . October 24 .
 CIA Daily Report: No significant mobilization of Soviet ground, air, or naval forces detected . October 27--No significant mobilization had been detected by Soviet forces .
 Low-powered depth charges fired at the submarine escorts of approaching Soviet transports . Submarine escorts forced to surface and partially disabled one Soviet vessel .
 U.S. U-2 reconnaissance plane accidentally stray into Soviet airspace over Chukotski Peninsula, near Alaska . Plane was on a routine air-sampling mission .
 The U-2 incursion was detected by the Soviets, who scrambled their MiG fighters in the area to intercept the U.2 . The Soviet Union scrambled MiG fighter jets to intercept it . The U.-2 was the first U.S. aircraft to make an incursion
 Several F-102 fighter aircraft, possibly armed with nuclear air-to-air missiles, also scrambled to assist the U-2 . U.2's distress signal was received by several U.S. F-103 fighter jets responding to the distress signal .
 An engagement was avoided when the U-2 successfully exited Soviet airspace without incident . The U.2 was escorted out of the Soviet Union airspace .
 Another U-2 on a reconnaissance overflight of Cuba was shot down by a Soviet SAM battery . October 27-Two hours after the incursion over the USSR, another U.2 shot down .
 Incidents of military action between United States and Soviet forces alerted U.S. policymakers to the high risks of inadvertent escalation and demonstrated the limitations of crisis management by nuclear powers . United States & USSR The United States .
 The President and Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara became acutely aware of the dangers of inadvertent escalation as the crisis progressed . The president and secretary of defense McNamara were acutely aware .
 The ExComm was aware that low-powered depth charges were being used in a manner that would disable Soviet submarines . It was apparently not aware that such charges were used to disable Soviet subs .
 President Kennedy ordered all air sampling missions near the USSR to be cancelled . President Kennedy did not raise the incident before the Soviets .
 The ExComm could not determine with certainty the circumstances surrounding the U-2 downing over Cuba . An apology was later issued to the Soviet government in response to a Soviet protest .
 The President intervened to block execution of standing orders to retaliate by air strike against the offending SAM installation . President Obama intervened to allow for possibility that the shootdown was unauthorized .
 In the event of further U-2 downings, the President was prepared to reconsider selective air strikes against SAM installations involved . The President was also prepared to consider selective strikes on SAM installations .
 The President rejected automatic reprisal and called for continuing high-level consideration of specific incidents . In a November 8 memorandum to the ExComm, the President called for continued high level consideration .
 The President instructed the ExComm to draft a message to Premier Khrushchev outlining the United States policy of measured retaliation in case of further downings of U-2s over Cuba . The message was intended to outline the U.S. policy .
 Soviet submarines subjected to the aggressive use of depth charges by US quarantine forces declined to take effective countermeasures . October 24~Faced with an overwhelming U.S. naval presence and lacking readily available reinforcements, Soviet submarines .
 Soviet captains may have calculated that any aggressive action against the U.S. ships would have resulted in the destruction of their vessels .
 The vulnerability to seizure by the United States of highly valuable Soviet missiles and warheads aboard Soviet transports approaching Cuba may also have constrained Soviet options . Soviet options may have been constrained by the U.S.
 Soviet strategic forces may have witheld their response because Soviet decision makers recognized the accidental nature of the incident or because they were reluctant to confront superior US strategic forces without clearer provocation .
 Soviet decision makers in Moscow became aware of the downing of the U-2 over Cuba after the fact . October 27~Soviet decision makers were not aware of downing .
 The shootdown was not authorized by the Soviet national command, nor by the overall commander of Soviet forces in Cuba, but was instead an independent action taken at the initiative of a local Soviet air defense commander . General Georgy A Voronkov was identified at the 1989 Moscow Conference on
 General Voronkov apparently interpreted vague standing orders to resist a U.S. attack on Cuba as authorization to fire on United States reconnaissance aircraft overflying the island . The Russian general apparently interpreted standing orders as authorization .
 The shootdown apparently contravened Soviet policy at the time . The officers involved were reprimanded and standing orders were subsequently clarified to prohibit firing upon U.S. reconnaissance aircraft .
 Eleven messages were transmitted by the political leadership of the U.S. and the USSR from October 22 to October 28 . 11 messages were sent by the leaders of both countries .
 Kennedy accused the Soviet Union of attempting to disrupt the global balance of power by introducing bases for nuclear missiles and other offensive weapons into Cuba . Four communiques were sent to Premier Khrushchev by President Kennedy .
 The President asserted U.S. resolve to remove this new threat to hemispheric security . President Obama asserted United States resolve . The President said the threat was not a threat to the United States .
 President Kennedy charged the Soviet government with responsibility for the secret weapons shipments to Cuba . The U.S. and the Soviet Union were accused of supplying secret weapons to Cuba.
 President Kennedy argued that the Soviet Union had deliberately provoked a crisis in Cuba . President Kennedy said the U.S. had ignored clear warnings not to introduce missiles into Cuba .
 President Kennedy accepted the first, more conciliatory, Soviet communique . Khrushchev offered to order dismantling of Cuban bases and return of missiles to the Soviet Union under UN inspection in exchange for a United States pledge not to invade Cuba .
 The United States disregarded the second Soviet message, which, in addition to the above conditions, required the United States publicly to announce the dismantling of Jupiter missile bases in Turkey . The U.S. did not comply with the conditions, which required the U.K. to publicly announce
 Khrushchev accused the United States of aggression against Cuba and the Soviet Union, and of violation of the UN Charter and the laws of navigation . Seven communiques were sent to President Kennedy, October 23, and October 23 .
 Khrushchev rejected any type of ultimatum by the U.S. regarding removal of the missiles . October 24-Premier Khrushchell rejected any kind of ultimeatum . October 25-191919 . Khrushchevsvsvs. October 24 .
 Khrushchev reiterated his claim of the defensive nature of Soviet weapons in Cuba . He recommended mutual acceptance of an interim UN agreement with Cuba .
 Khrushchev added removal of U.S. missiles from Turkish bases as a new condition for withdrawal of Soviet missiles from Cuba . The move was made in response to revised Soviet intelligence memoranda .
 The USSR would remove under UN inspection its weapons in Cuba that President Kennedy described as ""offensive,"" in exchange for a United States pledge not to invade Cuba and a prompt lifting of the United States naval quarantine . The USSR agreed to remove the weapons under inspection under the UN inspection in exchange
 Khrushchev attempted to formalize the secret US concession to remove its Jupiter missiles in Turkey in exchange for the withdrawal of Soviet missiles in Cuba . October 28~An additional message .
 Attorney General Kennedy and Ambassador Dobrynin established a channel to communicate with the U.S. Ambassador to Russia . The channel was established by Attorney General John Kennedy and the Ambassador to Moscow .
 A second channel was established by ABC News correspondent John Scali and the chief of the KGB's Washington station, Aleksandr Fomin . The channel was set up by the KGB chief in Washington .
 The parties to secret negotiations served as spokesmen for their respective governments . They relayed confidential proposals for resolution of the crisis . Faceto-face talks helped defuse tensions and contributed to a peaceful settlement on October 28 .
 There were at least three Kennedy-Dobrynin meetings and three Scali-Fomin meetings during the crisis . There were also three meetings between Kennedy and Fomin .
 Attorney General Kennedy met secretly with Ambassador Dobrynin on three occasions during the crisis . Kennedy expressed the strong objection of the United States to the deception that had been used to introduce Soviet missiles .
 Attorney General Kennedy, at the direction of the President, first raised the possibility of a quid pro quo removal of U.S. missiles in Turkey in exchange for withdrawal of Soviet missiles in Cuba . Ambassador Dobryinin and other Soviet sources say .
 Robert Kennedy's memoir on the missile crisis states that the meeting was held to inform the Soviets of the imminent threat of U.S. military action in the absence of an immediate peaceful resolution .
 The United States reaffirmed its intention to withdraw Jupiter missiles from Turkey within a short time once the crisis was peacefully resolved . Concurrently, the U.S. reaffirmed the intention of withdrawing Jupiter missiles .
 According to Kennedy, the U.S. declined any quid pro quo withdrawal of Jupiter missiles from Turkey in exchange for Soviet dismantling of missile bases in Cuba . Kennedy: The United States declined any exchange of exchange for the withdrawal of missiles in Turkey . Kennedy says the United States did not
 John Scali met informally with KGB Washington Station Chief Aleksandr Fomin on three occasions during the crisis . Scali and Fomin met in Washington, D.C., at the beginning of the crisis.
 The first meeting was initiated by Fomin, in what appears to have been an independent effort to explore options for resolving the crisis . Fomin: "The first meeting is a meeting of people who want to resolve the crisis"
 Scali's request for the meetings to be held at the request of the Italian government . The meetings were backed by official backing from Scali . Scali has been in charge of the government since 2007 .
 Scali met with Fomin at the latter's request and was encouraged to approach officials at the Department of State with a proposal for resolution of the crisis in which missiles in Cuba would be removed under UN supervision . Castro would pledge not to accept future shipments of offensive weapons in exchange for lifting
 October 26—7:35 PM~Scali met with Fomin and relayed a message from Secretary of State Rusk expressing United States interest in the proposal of October 26 .
 Scali accused the Soviets of betrayal in abandoning their original proposal . Scali warned of imminent United States military action against the missiles in Cuba if a settlement were not achieved forthwith .
 Ambassador Dobrynin revealed he had not been informed of deployment of missiles to Cuba . Ambassador was responding to Attorney General Kennedy's charge of Soviet duplicity in introducing missiles .
 Ambassador Dobrynin defended the right of the Soviet Union to install missiles in Cuba by comparing them to U.S. missiles in Turkey . The ambassador compares the situation to that of the United States .
 Attorney General Kennedy offered to introduce U.S. missiles in Turkey into a potential settlement of the crisis . Dobrynin says Kennedy offered the missiles to be used in a settlement . Kennedy's offer was rejected by the Turkish government .
 Fomin presented his first proposal for a resolution of the missile crisis . October 26--Fomin presented the first proposal to resolve the crisis .
 Soviet participants at the 1989 Moscow conference on the Cuban missile crisis claimed that the first Fomin proposal was made without authorization from Moscow . Fomin's proposal was first made without permission from Moscow, according to Soviet participants .
 Fomin acknowledged Secretary of State Rusk's favorable reaction to the proposed crisis resolution terms as relayed by Scali . Fomin also informed Moscow of the informal US response to the proposal .
 Fomin assured Scali that no duplicity was intended and that the introduction of new conditions by the Soviets resulted from a communications failure .
 Fomin relayed the U.S. warning of an invasion to higher authorities in Moscow . Fomin says he relayed the United States warning of a possible invasion to Moscow .
 The terms of the agreement were established in the KennedyKhrushchev correspondence and in secret meetings of U.S. and Soviet representatives .
 Cuba, which opposed withdrawal of the missiles, was not a party to the negotiations . Cuba was not part of the talks .
 Ships carrying missiles returning to the USSR from Cuba were subject to boarding and close naval and aerial surveillance by U.S. quarantine forces .
 One of the terms of the agreement, that of on-site inspection of the dismantled missile sites by the UN, remained unfulfilled . The Cuban government refused to allow UN inspection of its territory .
 President Kennedy ordered the lifting of the naval quarantine of Cuba on November 20, 1962, and informally pledged not to invade the island . In response to the Soviet missile withdrawal and a Soviet pledge not to reintroduce offensive weapons into Cuba, Kennedy lifted the quarantine .
 United States & USSR also gave private assurances to the USSR that its Jupiter missiles in Turkey would be withdrawn within a short time after resolution of the crisis . U.S. & USSR gave assurances that the missiles would be removed from Turkey within short time .
 The United States began to dismantle its Jupiter installations in Turkey six months after the crisis was settled . In accordance with this secret agreement, the U.S. began dismantling the installations six months later .
 The most critical U.S. decision making on resolution of the missile crisis occurred on October 27 and 28: October 27-4:00 PM-The ExComm met to discuss the two most recent messages received that morning from Premier Khrushchev .
 The first message proposed milder terms for a resolution of the crisis . The second, more demanding message called for a public ""trade"" involving mutual withdrawal of Soviet missiles from Cuba and United States Jupiter missiles from Turkey .
 President Kennedy decided to partly concede on the Jupiter missile issue by privately assuring the Soviets of United States intentions to withdraw the Jupiters shortly after peaceful settlement of the crisis .
 The President instructed the Attorney General to warn Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin of the imminent possibility of U.S. military action against the missiles in Cuba in the absence of an immediate settlement . In addition, the President also instructed the attorney general to warn the Soviet ambassador .
 Attorney General Kennedy and Ambassador Dobrynin discussed possibility of imminent U.S. military action against missiles in Cuba . Diplomatic talks were the third and final meeting between the two during the crisis .
 Dobrynin was assured that U.S. Jupiter missiles in Turkey would be withdrawn soon after a peaceful resolution to the crisis . As an incentive for speedy resolution of the dispute, Dobrynins was assured .
 Letter from President Kennedy to Moscow was transmitted to Moscow . President Kennedy's letter was sent to Moscow on October 27 .
 Khrushchev's letter responded to the proposal contained in the first, more conciliatory of the two messages received that morning . The letter was written by the then-Krushchev government .
 ExComm met to review military contingency planning and readiness for an invasion of Cuba . October 27-9:00 p.m. ET-The ExComm reviewed military contingencies and readiness .
 President Kennedy instructed Secretary of State Rusk to contact Andrew Cordier, a former UN undersecretary . Cordier is a member of the Council of Nations and a former undersecretaries of the U.N.
 Cordier was given the text of a compromise settlement of the crisis in which U.S. missiles in Turkey were publicly ""traded"" for Soviet missiles in Cuba . The deal was a compromise deal between the United States and the Soviets .
 Cordier was told to stand by and await instructions from Rusk to approach Acting UN Secretary General U Thant with the proposal . Cordier has been told to stay on the sidelines and wait for instructions .
 Secretary General U Thant would have been asked to offer the proposal to both sides as a UN-initiated agreement, to which the US would have acceded . U.N. Secretary General would have had to offer both sides the proposal .
 The readiness status of the missiles was not known, although it was assumed that these, too, were operational . It is assumed that the missiles were operational, although the readiness status is not known .
 Khrushchev ended missile crisis by accepting terms for resolution offered by U.S. The message was broadcast on a radio broadcast message from the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev agreed to withdraw weapons in exchange for lifting of quarantine and U.S. pledge not to invade Cuba . U.K. agreed to lift quarantine in return for a lifting of the quarantine and a United States pledge to not invade Cuba.
 Soviet intelligence may have reported hard evidence of U.S. preparations for an imminent attack on Cuba . Khrushchev sent his ""first"" crisis settlement proposal to President Kennedy .
 Castro wrote to Khrushchev warning of an imminent U.S. invasion of Cuba . Castro urged the USSR to retaliate against the US in the event of such an attack . Castro was prime minister of Cuba in 1959 .
 Castro's letter may have raised concerns over the ability of Soviet forces to maintain control over the missiles . Castro may have been concerned about the control of the missiles in the Soviet Union .
 Soviet intelligence estimate of U.S. attack on Cuba less imminent than previously believed . Khrushchev toughen terms for withdrawal of missiles in his ""second" settlement proposal .
 Ambassador Dobrynin agreed to an explicit deal with Attorney General Kennedy to remove Jupiter missiles in Turkey in exchange for withdrawal of Soviet missiles from Cuba . The deal was made during the third Kennedy-Dobrynin meeting .
 Prime Minister Castro's letter to Premier Khrushchev on October 26, which warned of impending U.S. military action against Cuba . Such an estimate would have been corroborated by the letter, which would have corroborated the letter .
 Khrushchev ended the crisis by drafting a letter to President Kennedy that restored the original settlement terms issued in the ""first" proposal of October 27 .
 Khrushchev agreed to remove ""offensive weapons"" from Cuba under UN supervision . In exchange for a US noninvasion pledge toward Cuba and a prompt lifting of the United States naval quarantine .
 The USSR accepted a secret, informal agreement for withdrawal of U.S. missiles from Turkey in exchange for a publicly acknowledged withdrawal of Soviet offensive weapons from Cuba . Instead of a deal, the USSR accepted withdrawal of United States missiles .
 The President ordered this line to be established closer to Cuba in order to allow greater time for approaching Soviet ships to change course .
 McGeorge Bundy, Danger and Survival; Choices About the Bomb in the First Fifty Years, 439. Bundy: "Danger and Survival" Bundy: The bomb was the first bomb to be detonated in the first 50 years of the war . Bundy: Bomb was the only weapon
 David Welch, David A ""Crisis Decision Making Reconsidered,"" Journal of Conflict Resolution. Welch: Crisis Decision Making . Welch: A crisis decision making decision making should be reconsidered . Welch says crisis decision-making should be considered more carefully .