 18-year-old Anthony Anthony was called into a briefing room at the fleet anti-warfare training center one Thursday morning with a group of about 30 men . He was called to the training center with about 30 other men .
 Fresh out of Ferris High School, Manocchio plans to go back to Jersey City for the weekend to visit his girlfriend . He hadn't seen his girlfriend in two months, police say .
 Little did Manocchio know he would soon find himself in the middle of one of the most tense political and military standoffs in American history .
 President John F Kennedy ordered a naval blockade that intercepted and turned around armed ships bound for the island . The blockade was a response to the Soviet's strategic power play .
 The standoff came to a dramatic conclusion when the Soviet Union agreed to remove its missiles as long as the U.S. did not attack Cuba . The standoff ended in a dramatic end when the United States did not strike Cuba .
 Manocchio spent a month in Cuba working as a hatchman loading and unloading ships at Guantanamo Bay . He spent the time working at the Guantanamo Bay base .
 More than 50 years had passed since Manocchio served in the Navy . His brother-in-law, Army Lt. Col. John, was killed in the Vietnam War .
 In February, he received a letter saying he was being honored with the Armed Forces Expeditionary Medal and the National Defense Service Medal .
 Manocchio's 6-year-old granddaughter Alexis Rose surprised him with the medals . Alexis Rose, 6, surprised him inside the kitchen of the Colgate Street home where he grew up and still lives .
 He said his "pride and joy" was seeing his daughter so enthusiastic and proud of her grandfather . What was even more special, he said, was seeing her so enthusiastic .
 While stationed in Cuba, Manocchio said he didn't fear the looming threat of war . He said he was stationed in the country's capital, Cuba .
 While he was there, he sent his girlfriend, Dolores whom he married in 1965, a letter so she knew he was OK, but it didn't arrive at her house until three years later .
 In the 1960s, Manocchio said, there was talk that his crew was supposed to be honored for their service . But it didn't cross his mind again until recently, he said .
 Nuclear warheads were in Cuba for Soviet missiles targeted at major U.S. cities . Soviet missiles were aimed at major United States cities .
 Washington had photographic proof that there were nuclear-capable Soviet missiles deployed in Cuba . But the Americans never were sure if nuclear warheads were on the island .
 The Soviet Union had only ""about 20" intercontinental ballistic missiles capable of reaching the U.S. from its own territory . The United States had only about 20 intercontinental missiles capable of reaching the United States .
 One surprised American said the CIA estimate was a "shockingly low" number . That was only a fraction of the total estimated at the time by the CIA, said one surprised American .
 Two days before the crisis peaked, Fidel Castro reportedly sent a message to Soviet leader Nikita S Khrushchev urging that the missiles be fired . Two days later, the Cuban leader reportedly told the Soviet leader to fire missiles .
 Castro spent the night of Oct., 1962, in an air raid bunker because he feared a U.S. attack . Castro spent that night in a bunker because of fears of an attack on the United States .
 Khrushchev agreed to U.S. demands that the missiles be withdrawn . Castro's cable convinced him the confrontation had gone too far, and he agreed to withdraw missiles .
 Participants included McGeorge Bundy, Kennedy's national security adviser during the crisis . Former Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko, former ambassador to Washington Anatoly Dobrynin and Sergei Khrushchev, son of Soviet leader .
 The United States delegation also included former Defense Secretary Robert S McNamara . Former Secretary of State Robert S. McNamara was in attendance .
 United States sources quoted a Soviet panelist as saying Castro sent his message to Khrushchev urging a Soviet attack . U.S. sources say Castro sent the message to the Soviet leader urging a strike .
 Sergei Khrushchev told reporters that the missiles could have been operational within a few hours if his father had given the word . Sergei said he would have been able to launch the missiles within hours of his father's announcement .
 With only about 20 missiles in the Soviet Union capable of reaching the United States, the 42 missiles in Cuba by October, 1962, represented two-thirds of Moscow's ability to deliver a nuclear strike . The 42 missiles were either installed or in transit to Cuba .
 Cuban officials said they were not even permitted onto the bases . They were always under full Soviet control, he said . Cuban officials say they were never allowed onto bases .
 Cuban and Soviet officials believed a U.S. invasion of the island was a possibility, participants say . United States participants say they previously underestimated the extent of the Cuban officials' fears .
 In the fall of 1962, Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev ordered a secret deployment of nuclear missiles in Cuba . The missiles were soon detected by U.S. spy planes .
 U.S. officials say medium-range missiles would be able to reach Washington, Dallas, Cape Canaveral, Fla., or other sites within 1,000 miles of Cuba within minutes . Kennedy was briefed on photographic proof of the missile sites being developed .
 The U.S. learned of longer-range missiles in Cuba able to reach most of the country . Soon after they learned of the missiles, they learned they could be longer range .
 Kennedy team debated how to respond but agreed missiles would not be tolerated . Kennedy's team debated whether to respond to the missiles but agreed it would be unacceptable .
 The ensuing standoff with Khrushchev over 13 days became ""the most dangerous moments the world has ever faced," historian and journalist Michael Dobbs said . The ensuing stand-off was "one of the most dangerous" moments in history .
 Both Kennedy and Khrushchev had made mistakes leading to this point, Dobbs says . Dobbs: "Both of these men made mistakes. Both made mistakes"
 Khrushchev gambled by deploying nuclear weapons so far from the Soviet Union on the U.S. doorstep . The U.N. has never seen nuclear weapons on the United States' doorstep .
 Kennedy fumbled his first major foreign policy crisis at the Bay of Pigs . The failed effort to topple Fidel Castro failed to topple the Castro Castro .
 The Kennedy administration's strategy, called Operation Mongoose, to overthrow Castro, triggered a dramatic reaction from the Soviets . The strategy was called 'Operation Mongoose' and 'Operation Mangoose'
 The archives lays out the crisis in chronological order with sounds of heated debates in the White House over whether to respond with military force . An attack speech is the sound of an attack speech by President Obama .
 Some military advisers thought it was a weak response . Kennedy leaned toward a blockade order to prohibit Soviet ships from sending more military supplies to Cuba .
 As the blockade went into effect, Soviet ships approached, along with submarines, leading to tense moments . The blockade was the first time Soviet ships had been allowed to enter the strait .
 Kennedy ordered small ""depth charges"" to be fired from U.S. ships to encourage submarines to surface . The charges were fired from the United States ships . Kennedy ordered the use of the charges to encourage submarine activity .
 He didn't know they were carrying nuclear-tipped tactical missiles and came close to using them . What he didn't realize was that they carried tactical missiles with them . The U.S. didn't want to use them .
 The exhibit is on view in Washington until February and then moves to Boston's Kennedy Presidential Library in April . The exhibit will be on view until February .
 Kennedy briefed on photographic proof of missile sites being developed . Kennedy was briefed on the sites in Oct. 1962 .
 The medium-range missiles would be able to reach Washington, Dallas, Cape Canaveral, Florida, or other sites within 1,000 miles of Cuba, likely within minutes . U.S. officials determined from the size of the images that the missiles could reach Washington .
 North Korea learned of longer-range missiles that could reach most of the country . Soon after they learned of the missiles, they learned that they could reach much of the nation .
 The ensuing standoff with Khrushchev over 13 days became "the most dangerous moments the world has ever faced, either before or since &mdash," said historian and journalist Michael Dobbs .
 Kennedy administration's campaign called Operation Mongoose to overthrow Castro triggered a dramatic reaction from the Soviets . The Kennedy administration campaign triggered the Soviets' reaction to the campaign .
 There were also emergency plans developed for White House staff in case of an attack on Washington .
 One special assistant to the president was directed to go to Camp David in Maryland in case of attack . The president has been ordered to stay at Camp David, Maryland, in the event of an attack .
 The archives lays out the crisis in chronological order with sounds of heated debates in the White House over whether to respond with military force . The archives includes the sounds of debates over whether the U.S. should respond to the crisis .
 Kennedy leaned toward a blockade order to prevent Soviet ships from sending more military supplies to Cuba . Some military advisers thought it a weak response to the Soviet response .
 Library Director Tom Putnam said they include attorney general's notes from national security meetings during the crisis . Library director said they also include drafts of a memo he sent to the president after meeting with the Soviet ambassador .
 Some think the movie is so dramatic that Hollywood must have shaped it for entertainment purposes . Some might think it's so dramatic Hollywood has shaped it up to make it more dramatic .
 The film is an astonishingly accurate account of what happened in 1962 . Within the constraints of two hours and 20 minutes, the film is remarkably accurate .
 Kennedy, and no one else else, stopped them from bombing the Russian missile sites and invading Cuba . Kennedy and the U.S. stopped the invasion .
 Many Congressional leaders refused to support Kennedy's strategy of restraint . Kennedy was the president of the U.S. House of Representatives in 1968 .
 We're going to have to fight the Russians anyway, they said; let's get it over with. They said . We're not going to fight Russia anyway. Let's get over with it. We're fighting the Russians, they say .
 The fact that many of ""us,"" perhaps most of "us," would have been killed didn't seem to dissuade anyone . Many of the "us" would have died if they had been killed, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Kennedy's decision was the most important in the history of the country, perhaps in the world, perhaps even the world . "I have studied it closely_reading all the literature and the transcripts of tapes from the Oval Office," he says .
 Each time I read the story, I am convinced that there is going to be a war . Each time we read the book, we are convinced there will be war, says author .
 The pressure on the president to risk nuclear annihilation was enormous . The pressure was enormous. President Obama was under pressure to take action against the threat .
 Kennedy prevented war and finessed a Russian withdrawal of atomic weapons from Cuba . Kennedy was cool, aloof, ironic man that he was, but he was also cool .
 This achievement alone qualifies him for a high ranking in the list of great American presidents . This is the first time a president has been in the top five .
 Perhaps because those 13 days were so scary, they have disappeared from our collective memories . Perhaps because of the horror of the nightmarish 13 days, they haven't been remembered .
 Kennedy's critics on the right and on the left had a field day after the crisis was over . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 The right said that he'd been too weak, and the left said he should have let the Russians keep their weapons in Cuba . The left and the right said he was too weak to allow the weapons to be kept .
 Perhaps they realized that many other presidents would have given the signal to start a nuclear war . Perhaps they realize that many others would have started a war .
 Three years later, the same team of men under President Lyndon Johnson approved the escalation of the Vietnam War . That Kennedy was almost the only restraining force becomes clear when one realizes .
 If he had escaped the bullet in Texas, he probably would have died of Addison's disease before the end of his second term . If he'd died of the disease, he would have been able to escape the bullet .
 When the fate of the human race was at issue, he displayed more character than any of the men around him . Private virtue is a prerequisite for public virtue, he says .
 The previous summer, Kennedy had read Barbara Tuchman's book The Guns of August, which had led to the First World War, which none of the countries in Europe stumbled into the conflict .
 Kennedy perceived the same dynamics at work in the relationship between the U.S. and Russia in the missile crisis . Kennedy: "The dynamics were similar to that of the Cold War"
 It's better to have a president who reads history than one who does not . Other things being equal, it's better than a man who doesn't read history .
 Teresa once said that if she had to choose between a holy confessor and a wise confessor, she would choose the wise one . She would choose a wise one, she said .
 If Americans have to choose between a virtuous president and a wise one, they should choose the latter . President Barack Obama should be a wise leader, says CNN's John Sutter .
 In retrospect, given the pressures on him, Kennedy was almost preternaturally wise . Kennedy was also almost pre-aturally wise, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: Kennedy was 'almost pre-born'
 In 1965, we had a president who, for all his bluster and machismo, was not wise . President Lyndon Johnson's bluster, machismo and bluster were not wise, he says . President Johnson died in 1964 at the age of 65 .
 In 1965, the country blundered into a war that did incalculable harm to our society . The war was a mistake that led to the deaths of millions of people, many of whom were killed .
 Today, the two major political parties are so similar that it doesn't matter who is president . Today's two major parties are similar, one hears it said that it's not matter who's president . The two parties are too similar to each other .
 Richard Nixon, a man of deep personal instability, won the 1960 election . Imagine if you will that Richard Nixon had won the election in 1960 . Richard Nixon's personal instability led to him winning the election .
 Almost certainly he would have given the go-ahead to bomb the Russian bases, kill Russian troops and invade Cuba . He would have been able to bomb Russian bases and kill Cuban troops .
 The crisis started on Oct. 1962, when Kennedy was told that a U-2 spy plane had photographed Soviet nuclear missiles being installed in Cuba, 90 miles from Key West . The crisis began when Kennedy told that the missiles had been installed in Cuban territory .
 Kennedy originally argued for a diplomatic solution to the crisis . Many of his advisers favored risking war with the Soviets, according to transcripts of the conversations .
 Among the hawks, the transcripts indicated, were Vice President Lyndon Johnson, Defense Secretary Robert McNamara, Secretary of State Dean Rusk, Treasury Secretary C Douglas Dillon . CIA director John McCone and CIA director Llewellyn Thompson, the ambassador to Moscow, were among the haw
 Kennedy's views hardened after Soviet missiles shot down a U.S. spy plane over Cuba on Oct. 1962, according to the records .
 Transcripts show he favored launching an air strike on Oct. 31 if there were any more attempts to shoot down U.S. planes . Transcripts also show he favors launching air strikes if there are any more attacks on United States planes .
 The superpowers reached agreement a day before the date of the contemplated air strike . The agreement was reached by the superpowers just a few days before the scheduled air strike was due to take place .
 Khrushchev withdrew nuclear missiles from Turkey after receiving assurances that the U.S. would pull similar missiles out of Turkey . The Soviet leader withdrew the missiles after receiving secret assurances from the United States that the missiles would be withdrawn .
 The 82-page transcript records four hours and 40 minutes of meetings involving Kennedy and key advisers . The transcript is a transcript of four hours of meetings with Kennedy .
 The key Kennedy comments followed urgings by McNamara for firm action if other U.S. surveillance craft were fired upon by SAM surface-to-air missiles .
 McNamara was among the chief proponents of military action, transcripts show . The transcripts show he was a key proponent of the military action .
 Even before the crisis, the U.S. considered removing the United States Jupiter missiles from Turkey and replacing them with modern weapons .
 The Cuban crisis is no more relevant than the wars of ancient Greece, experts say . But some arms experts say the superpower nuclear equation has shifted dramatically since 1962 .
 In October 1962, President John Kennedy and Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev became embroiled in the most dramatic confrontation of the Cold War .
 U.S. spy planes discovered Moscow was deploying rockets capable of carrying nuclear warheads in Cuba . Cuba is only 90 miles from Florida . The rockets could carry nuclear warheads .
 The president imposed a naval blockade around Cuba and threatened tougher action bombing and invasion if missiles remained . The president was stung by a year earlier when a U.S.-backed anti-Castro invasion ended in disaster at Cuba's Bay of Pigs .
 Moscow agreed to remove the rockets in exchange for a U.S. pledge not to invade Cuba . Moscow agreed in return for a United States pledge to not invade Cuba. After nearly two weeks of mounting tension, Moscow agreed .
 Kennedy also promised to remove some aging nuclear rockets based in Turkey . Kennedy also secretly promised to take down some aging Soviet-era nuclear rockets . Kennedy promised to do so in order to get rid of the aging nuclear weapons .
 Kennedy then pressed ahead with arms-control efforts that signaled a thaw in the Cold War . Arms-control talks led to nuclear arms limitation talks that have continued over the years .
 The present Soviet leader, Mikhail Gorbachev, and President Reagan are expected to meet this year to sign a pact scrapping medium-range nuclear missiles .
 Stand firm, consult experts and apply force slowly, giving the foe a graceful way out . Stand firm and consult experts before applying force slowly . Give the foe an easy way out.
 Many U.S. arms experts today question such ''lessons'' because the world has changed so much in the past 25 years . But many United States arms experts now question such 'lessons'
 An article in the current issue of Foreign Affairs magazine says this school of thought holds the missile crisis no more pertinent to current superpower ties than the Peloponnesian Wars of ancient Greece . The article says the crisis is no more relevant to today's superpower ties .
 Moscow thus had no choice but to back down, experts say . Experts dismiss as a myth the view that the crisis brought the world to the brink .
 Dmitri Simes, a Russian emigre and Soviet expert at the private Carnegie Endowment, put them at near zero . Dmitri . Simes: "It's not a good idea that Russia is going to be in the next few years"
 Since 1962, the Soviet Union has accomplished its goal of gaining rough parity with the U.S. in nuclear weapons . Steinbruner: The goal was reinforced by Moscow's humiliation in the missile crisis .
 Moscow today has roughly 10,300 intercontinental nuclear warheads compared to America's 12,500, a think tank says . The Center for Defense Information says the U.S. has more than a dozen nuclear warheads than Russia .
 Kremlin watchers say Moscow would be in a much stronger position in a crisis today . Moscow would have been stronger today if it had been in a similar situation . Moscow has a long history of instability in the world, including in Ukraine .
 Soviet leaders would have a powerful incentive to reject concessions in any new confrontation, an arms control analyst says . The Soviet Union has a strong incentive to refuse concessions, he says .
 U.S. president would be under enormous pressure to stand firm and maintain American prestige, Frye says . Frye said in such a crisis the United States president would stand firm, even if Moscow proved intransigent .
 The complexity of modern superpower arsenals and the problem of preventing unauthorized or accidental attack would make a crisis much harder to control than the Cuban missile crisis, Steinbruner says .
 The main lesson of the 1962 missile crisis was to maintain emergency communications with Moscow, says Frye . Frye said the main lesson was to keep emergency and informal contacts with Moscow .
 'Legendary face-off 25 years ago missile crisis gripped world', St. Cit Cit at ion at ion CHRISTOPHER HANSON .
 In October 1962, the United States discovered that the Soviet Union had secretly installed nuclear missiles on Cuba and aimed them at the U.S. The missiles were aimed at Cuba, but were not aimed at the United.
 After President Kennedy reacted by imposing a blockade on the Caribbean island, the Soviets backed down . After President John F Kennedy reacted to the blockade, the Soviet Union backed down on the island .
 Castro says Soviet command had been authorized to use nuclear weapons . Castro says that the Soviet command was authorized to do so . Castro: "I'm not going to be surprised"
 Castro voices regrets at the resolution of the crisis's resolution as well as its consequences . Castro: "I'm sorry for what happened to me and my family" Castro says he regrets the resolution and the consequences of that decision .
 Castro criticizes Khrushchev's ''almost unconditional concessions'' made by the Soviet Union . Castro notes Khushchev left everything the way it was . Castro says 'almost unconditional' concessions were made .
 Asked if he would accept the missiles, Castro said he would not . Castro: "Knowing what he now knows, knowing what I now know, would not"
 Iran test-fired a ballistic missile in violation of U.N. Security Council resolutions in January . The drama intensified when Iran tested a missile in a violation of UN Security Council resolution .
 In response, the Trump administration slapped economic sanctions on Tehran . The U.S. has also imposed economic sanctions against Iran .
 Iran threatened a retaliation of its own, most likely additional missile tests . That led to Iran threatening a retaliation against the U.S. President Obama .
 Iran also fired a surface-to-air missile Wednesday in what officials say may have been connected to the country's 10-day commemoration of the 1979 revolution . Officials say the missile launch may be connected to Iran's 10th anniversary of the revolution .
 Iran specifically vowed to take action on Feb. 14, which is Revolution Day there . Iran has vowed to act on the day of the day .
 Buckley: Plan was to hold a long-range missile test, which would violate the nuclear agreement . Buckley: Based on the evidence, it appears the plan was to use a missile test . He says the test was likely to violate the agreement .
 WND.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Visit CNN.com/Travel next Thursday for a new gallery of snapshots of the world's most beautiful landscapes .
 The test Iran conducted on Jan. 6 violated that agreement because the missile could reach targets much farther than 2,000 miles away . However, the test Iran carried out violated the agreement because of the missile's ability to reach targets far more distant .
 Buckley said there are two primary targets in mind for Iran as it develops longer-range missiles . Buckley: Iran is developing missiles capable of hitting targets such as Iran and Israel . Buckley said Iran has a long-range missile program aimed at Israel .
 Buckley: Iran's longrange missile ambitions are very clear . Buckley: Based on translations of written and spoken statements from Iranian officials, it's very clear Iran's ambitions are clear . Iran has a history of missile ambitions, Buckley says .
 Buckley: Iran has designs on a space-based weapons program as well . Buckley says Iran has plans to use space weapons as well as space weapons .
 The dramatic missile launch apparently set for Feb. is now canceled, satellite images show . Satellite images show the missile and launching pad have been taken down .
 The supreme leader, Khamenei usually fulminates about death to Satan and all of that. Khamenei often fulminations about Satan and that. That's not the case .
 Buckley urges the Trump administration to divulge the contents of the Iran deal and the side deals to the American people . Buckley: The deal should be disclosed to the public .
 The impact on America's other allies could be very demoralizing, he said . And he said the impact on U.S. allies could also be demoralizing . He said it could also have a big impact on other allies .
 "We basically threatened Israel that we would shoot down their planes if they tried to attack Iran,"" Buckley explained . Buckley said .
 Buckley suggested stronger responses from the Trump administration when Iran acts in a provocative way . Buckley suggested even stronger responses to Iran's provocative actions .
 Trump cannot stop all commerce between Iran and U.S. firms, he said . But he said sanctions should be applied immediately in some important areas .
 He went to East Tennessee State College for a couple of years, where he studied business administration . He got out and went back to college .
 Los Angeles Times/Washington Post Service contributed to the death toll .
 Each of the three sides has its own version of what happened when the Soviets built nuclear missile bases in Cuba . The U.S. blockaded the island and demanded and obtained the rockets' removal from Cuba .
 The weeklong confrontation between President John Kennedy and Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev brought the world closer than at any time in history to triggering a nuclear war . All agreed that the world was at risk of nuclear war, all agreed .
 At the time of the crisis, Gorbachev said in the message, read by Soviet delegate Valentin Falin, ""it became clear that general human principles must be considered"" in U.S.-Soviet relations .
 Kennedy's defense secretary, Robert McNamara, and his special assistant for national security, McGeorge Bundy . Seated on one side of a large oval table were McNamara and Bundy . Bundy was Bundy's special assistant to national security .
 Andrei Gromyko recently retired as the president of the Soviet Union . Anatoly Dobrynin, the former Soviet ambassador to Washington, now serves as a special adviser to Gorbachev .
 The Cubans had never before encountered their American counterparts from the days of the missile crisis . The Cuban government had never met with the U.S. in the past .
 Some Soviets and Americans had met to discuss the subject once before in Cambridge, Mass., in October 1987 . The Soviets, Americans had also met in the same town in 1987 .
 The meeting will be devoted to understanding the tensions that lay behind the confrontation . The meeting is expected to focus on understanding tensions between the two sides .
 The Cubans may have a special interest in the U.S. covert operations, including alleged attempts to assassinate Castro or destabilize the Castro regime . Both before and after the crisis, the Cuban regime may have been destabilized .
 October 1962 was the target date for Castro's overthrow after a U.S.-supported insurrection on the island . The document was obtained by the Washington-based National Security Archive . Operation Mongoose set October 1962 as the target of the overthrow .
 The document, which was circulated to only 12 people, including President Kennedy, was dated Feb. 22, 1962 . The document was circulated only to 12 people .
 McNamara denied that the U.S. had any plan or intent to invade Cuba, report says . McNamara was at the meeting in Cambridge, according to the book-length account of the conference .
 The book says Soviet missiles in Cuba were never armed with nuclear warheads . The book also says that Soviet missiles never had nuclear warheads in Cuba . It was revealed in a secret meeting with President Kennedy .
 The ship on which the warheads were to be delivered, the Poltava, was prevented from reaching Cuba by the U.S. naval blockade . The ship was to deliver the warheads, but was stopped by the United States .
 Had the White House known the missiles were ""blanks,"" Kennedy would have ordered an attack on Cuba within hours of discovering them, the book says .
 Asked privately whether the Moscow symposium could lead to improved U.S.-Cuban relations, Risquet was relatively sanguine .
 Cuban and Soviet officials disclosed there were more than 40,000 Soviet troops and 270,000 armed Cubans on the island . Instead, Cuban officials disclosed, there were 40,00 Soviet troops on island .
 Cuba had expected to lose as many as 800,000 people if the U.S. attacked, Cuban president says . Cuba expected to expect to lose thousands of people if it attacked the United States .
 Yesterday's disclosures were only the latest of several surprises at the conference . The conference was organized jointly by the Soviets and Harvard's Nuclear Crisis Project .
 Kennedy learned Cuba had Soviet nuclear missiles capable of reaching the U.S. The crisis began in October 1962, when Kennedy learned that Cuba had missiles .
 Castro and McNamara studied newly declassified documents on the role U.S. covert action played in months leading up to the crisis . Castro, McNamara, and other Cuban and American protagonists in the Cold War drama studied documents .
 Many of the papers will be made public at the gathering, including documents from the Cuban government, the CIA, the Pentagon, the White House and the Soviet Foreign Ministry .
 Documents show that the crisis did not end with the Soviet Union's agreement to remove offensive weapons, as is widely believed . The documents were made available to the Associated Press . A portion of the documents are made public .
 Khrushchev still worried that an ""irrational" Castro would renew tensions with the United States perhaps even provoke war . Weeks after that, Khrushvic still worried about an 'irrational' Castro reaction to the Castro regime .
 Cuba "wants practically to drag us behind it with a leash," he said in a Nov., 1962, letter to diplomatic aides in Cuba . Cuba wants to pull us into a war with America by its actions, he said .
 At issue were U.S. surveillance flights to monitor dismantling of the missiles Moscow had installed on the island . At issue was the United States surveillance flights .
 Khrushchev worried Castro would order his forces to shoot down the low-flying surveillance planes . The Cuban leader saw the planes as an intolerable intrusion on Cuban sovereignty . The planes were seen as a 'intolerable intrusion'
 September 2001 led to a march of brick-sized headlines across the front pages of the world's newspapers to match it . September 2001 was September 11, 2001, when the U.S. was attacked by al Qaeda in Afghanistan .
 The standoff between the U.S. and the USSR, between President John F Kennedy and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev, over the buildup of Soviet missiles in Cuba, began on Oct. 1962 .
 The paper devoted 13 pages the first day of the story, including the complete text of Kennedy's warning . The paper dedicated 13 pages to Kennedy's story .
 Local man-on-the-street interviews strongly supported the president's actions . Local man on the street interviewed strongly supported Obama's decision .
 Some Soviet vessels sailing toward Cuba change course, even as Cuban housewives empty food stores . Red ships turn off some Soviet vessels, even though Cuban citizens empty stores .
 U.S. Ambassador Adlai Stevenson displays photos of Soviet missile bases in Cuba before the United Nations . U.N. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton accused Zorin of trying to cover up the fact that Cuba had a missile base .
 JFK says a proposal from Khrushchev indicates the basis for a negotiated settlement of the crisis . JFK says Reds Hint At Missile Removal hints at a possible solution to the crisis in the 1960s .
 Nikita Khrushchev agreed to tear down his Cuban missile bases under U.N. inspection . UPI: "Krushchev agrees to tear them down under United Nations inspection"
 Cuban missile crisis gripped the world's attention . Don't touch my football: Cuban football fan says . Cuban missiles were launched in 1961 .
 On the same Sunday, the Rocky chose page 5, where all week's tense news of the standoff had been well-reported, for a shabby piece of work .
 Staff photographer staged a deer head behind the steering wheel of an automobile, with a rifle seemingly aimed out the driver's window . A rifle seemed to be aimed at the driver of the car .
 Two local hunters posed as if they were draped over both front fenders in the classic 1920s transport of dead game . Local hunters joined in the fun, posing as if the vehicle was draped over .
 Harold Koinzan, 45, of 3310 W Wesley aveve., and John M Davis, 30, of 1685 S Mabry way . His bag includes Harold Koinszan, . 45, at left, at right, of . 3310 S Wesley Ave.,
 It is high time for a new approach to avoid a nuclear stand-off worse than the 1962 Cuban missile crisis . It is time for new approach .
 The Cuban crisis did not end in catastrophe mainly because the leaders on both sides did not misjudge each other's intentions . John F Kennedy and his advisers, and Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev and his politburo — did not miss the plan .
 In the present Korean crisis, there is arguably a greater chance of the leaders miscalculating each other's intentions . Donald Trump and Kim Jong Un may have miscalculated their intentions, writes Andrew Hammond .
 North Korea is not an island that can be blockaded , a similar course of action is much harder to find . Moreover, because North Korea isn't an island it can blockade, it's not a good idea to block it off .
 Khrushchev's aggressive rhetoric and rambling speech invited misinterpretation . But he was constrained in his course of action by the fact that he was part of a collective leadership .
 Kennedy was known for his calm, rational demeanour and clear communication . Kennedy is known for being calm and rational in his public speaking .
 Now we have a U.S. president more reminiscent of Khrushchev , and a young, untested North Korean tyrant . North Korea tyrant enjoys absolute powers over an opaque regime, writes CNN's John Sutter .
 "The potential for both sides to misjudge each other's intentions is significantly greater," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Getting Pyongyang to freeze — let alone give up — its nuclear and missile programme would be very difficult, given decades of mistrust and hostility between it and the United States . North Korea claims these systems are indispensable for its national self-defence .
 An eventual comprehensive deal with Washington will deliver real economic and security benefits to Pyongyang . It will outweigh the loss of national prestige associated with backtracking on its nuclear ambitions and boost Mr Kim's standing .
 The first step in facilitating such a scenario should be improving communication and contacts between the two sides so as to prevent mutual misperception .
 Moscow and Washington had regular high-level contacts before the Cuban crisis . They had full diplomatic relations with embassies in each other's capital cities since 1933 .
 Washington and Pyongyang have never had extended, regular high-level contacts, let alone full diplomatic relations . In contrast, Washington and North Korea have not had regular, regular diplomatic contacts .
 Imaginative symbolic peace overtures must capture Pyongyang's attention and produce a mood conducive to mutual reconciliation, says North Korean leader Kim Jong-un .
 For such a goodwill gesture to become feasible, tension must be lowered . The tension must also be lowered in order to make such a gesture feasible .
 Washington could offer to temporarily halt its joint military exercises with Seoul if Pyongyang halts its tests and comes to the negotiating table . Washington could also offer a temporary halt to its military exercises if Pyongyang temporarily halts tests .
 The eventual goal is a comprehensive settlement comparable to the Iran nuclear deal . The goal is to reach an agreement similar to that of Iran's nuclear agreement .
 North Korea rolls back its nuclear and missile programme in return for economic benefits and security guarantees . North Korea has agreed to a peace treaty and full diplomatic relations with the U.S.
 Pyongyang makes more nuclear and missile progress while a chasm divides Washington, Seoul and Tokyo . Beijing and Moscow on the other, paralysing the global response . North Korea has made more nuclear, missile progress .
 The medium-range missiles would be able to reach Washington, Dallas, Cape Canaveral, Florida, or other sites within 1,000 miles of Cuba, likely within minutes . U.S. officials determined from the size of the weapons that the weapons would be .
 The U.S. learned of longer-range missiles in Cuba that could reach most of the country . Soon after they learned of the missiles, they learned they could be used in Cuba .
 By 1962, Kennedy and Khrushchev made a final agreement through a radio broadcast from Moscow that the Soviets would begin dismantling the weapons . By Oct. 1962, the Soviets had already begun dismantling their weapons .
 The United States agreed not to invade Cuba and to remove the ship blockade . The U.S. agreed to remove a ship blockade and remove a Cuban ship blockade from Cuba .