 Historians have performed an invaluable service for historians and political scientists . They have performed a invaluable service to both historians and scientists .
 Research methodology that Allyn, Blight, and Welch (henceforth AB&W) have used is not without its drawbacks . Nevertheless, the research methodology that they have used has some drawbacks, such as its methodology .
 We have a better understanding of the American side of the Cuban missile crisis, says author . But I'm not sure we yet have a greater understanding of Soviet side, he says .
 Our ‘knowledge’ of certain aspects of the Soviet role may, if anything, be more confused than before . Indeed, our “knowledge” of certain . aspects of . the Soviet . role may . be more confusing than before. Indeed, perhaps, our knowledge of
 The reservations I express below, though applied to the AB&W article, are intended as general notes of caution . The reservations are intended to be a general note of caution, though .
 Mark Kramer teaches international relations at Brown Uniziersity and is a research fellow at the Center for Foreign Policy Development at Brown . Kramer: "I'm not going to be surprised if you're going to have to live with the world"
 On the Brink contains abridged transcripts of the Hawk’s Cay and Cambridge conferences, with detailed annotation by the authors .
 In the Cuban missile crisis, the failings and selectivity of memory are especially acute because the events transpired nearly 30 years ago . Almost all of those who played any part in the crisis are now elderly .
 "There are bound to be honest divergences in the way aging men recall events of nearly three decades ago," says CNN's John Sutter .
 There is the more nettlesome issue of ulterior motives . Along with inevitable failings of memory, there is also the more  ulterior motive .
 Many officials will ”recall” events in a way that puts the best gloss on their own role or that supports causes they have come to promote . Thus, many officials will "recall" events in the best way possible to put a gloss on themselves .
 Robert McNamara strenuously denies that U.S. strategic nuclear superiority in 1962 had even the slightest effect on the outcome of the crisis . McNamara has become an antinuclear crusader in recent years, now strenuously denying that .
 On the Soviet side, the question of ulterior motives is far more intractable than on the Russian side . The Soviet Union is still trying to find a way out of the world .
 The Soviet attendees may have hoped that the conferences would lend a sense of urgency to Gorbachev’s proposal for the elimination of nuclear weapons . These weaknesses of oral history-both the lapses of memory and the attempts to slant things or mislead- can be compensated for if
 An enormous amount of declassified material is already available to cross-check the recollections of former officials . More will be released over the next several years .
 American documents and recollections of American officials provide keen insights into the Kennedy administration’s handling of the Cuban missile crisis .
 Our institute, which deals with the military problems of history, possesses quite large possibilities, although I must say straight away that, as before, many archives are closed . Many archives are still closed, but many archives have never been closed .
 In particular, in the party archives, and even in the military archives, there are still stocks to which they do not give us access . The party archives are still not open to the public, but they are still giving us access to some stocks .
 General Volkogonov’s statement is especially important because it implies that wellstocked Soviet archives do exist . The problem is simply getting access to them, he says .
 At the Moscow conference, Volkogonov read aloud from documents that he claimed had come from the archives . Indeed, at the conference he read aloud, he claimed to have come from archives .
 AB&W allege that Soviet archives on the 1962 crisis are ‘sparse” that would create the severest problems of all for practitioners of critical oral history . Furthermore, even if, as AB&w allege , the Soviet archives are “sparse,”
 It also would raise troubling questions about how the Soviet attendees could have learned what they claim to have learned from archives .
 We will have to wait until Western scholars are granted full access to them- including the opportunity to test their authenticity- before we can accept major Soviet ”disclosures” about historical events like the Cuban missile crisis .
 The notion of ”critical oral history” may work well when assessing the American side of the Cuban missile crisis, but thus far it has been irrelevant when we come to the Soviet side . In short, the notion of . “critical oral . history’s work well
 The main thing we have gotten from the Soviet Union up to now is uncritical oral history . We have been told that oral history is the key to our understanding of the history of Soviet history .
 Most Western journalists suggested that it brought together, for the first time, the top officials on both sides of the Cuban missile crisis . But, in fact, none of the conferences brought together the highest-level participants from both sides .
 The three conferences featured nearly all of the key American statesmen, but on the Soviet side, no comparable representation was possible because all the key officials were long dead . The Soviet side of the Soviet Union was long dead.
 The Soviet foreign minister at the time of the Cuban missile crisis, Andrei Gromyko, attended the Moscow conference . The former Soviet ambassador to the United States, Anatoly Dobrynin, also attended .
 A few peripheral members of the 1962 Presidium were still alive and healthy at the time of the Cambridge and Moscow conferences; 9.9.9 . 9.10 .
 Gromyko in 1962 was not even a candidate member of the Presidium (as the Politburo was then known) and therefore ordinarily would have taken no part in the highest-level deliberations . In 1962 he was not considered a candidate candidate member .
 Gromyko’s recollections of being consulted by Khrushchev are undoubtedly accurate . This by no means implies that the late foreign minister was a key figure in the Soviet handling of the crisis .
 The same applies a fortiori to Dobrynin, who was not even informed of the missile deployments until well after the U.S. had discovered them . The Russian president did not know about the missile deployment until after the United States had discovered it .
 Dobrynin subsequently became an important conduit for back-channel negotiations, but aside from that, his role was negligible . He became a key figure in negotiations with the British government .
 Also not present was Andrei Kirilenko, the only full member of Khrushchev’s Presidium who is still alive . He is the only member of the Presidium still alive and not present at the ceremony .
 Khrushchev's son, Sergei, and Mikoyan’s son, Sergo, were among the surrogates for the conference . The conference organizers were forced to rely primarily on surrogates like Sergei, Sergei and Sergei .
 Up to a point, the use of surrogates is valid , so long as proper care is taken . The use of surrogate surrogates can be used in the U.S.
 Surrogates, no matter how well-informed, are not the same as principals . But surrogates can't be trusted to be trusted by the principals, says CNN.com .
 General Volkogonov, by his own admission, has often been denied access to documents that he needs . He has admitted that he is often denied access by the government .
 Until Western scholars get access to documents that will corroborate the claims of Soviet oral history participants, the best we can do is speculate, as we have in the past, about Soviet motives and actions .
 I would not recommend abandoning attempts to make use of ”uncritical” oral history from the Soviet side, but I would be wary of deriving broad conclusions from ‘knowledge” that is unsubstantiated or, worse, untrue . -Mark Kramer Cambridge, Mass.
 Mark Kramer’s cautionary remarks about the shortcomings of purely oral history are sensible and salutary . Mark Kramer's cautionary comments about oral history should be sensible .
 He is correct to note that the Soviets’ continuing refusal to release official documents diminishes the confidence that can be placed in some of their claims . But he is correct that the continuing refusal of release of official documents reduces the confidence .
 We apologize if our own caveats on these points are insufficiently clear, because we share his concerns . We apologize for not making clear that we share our concerns with him .
 Kiriil Mazurov died in December 1989; Vladimir Shcherbitskii, who died in February 1990; and Viktor Grishin, who is still alive, died in March 1990 .
 Kramer correctly notes that Gromyko was not a member of the Presidium in 1962 . By all accounts the foreign minister was present at Presidium meetings where Cuban initiative was discussed .
 We were told that Volkogonov had been given special dispensation to examine the relevant records prior to the Moscow conference . He read from what he claimed were documents from Soviet archives at the conference itself .
 It is possible, of course, that we have been the unwitting victims of an elaborate fraud, but we doubt it . We doubt it, but it is possible that we were the unwitting victim of an extravagant fraud .
 Few of the participants at the Moscow conference currently hold political positions of political importance . Few of those who did not hold political posts are likely to hold such positions . Kramer is concerned for the reasons that concern Kramer .
 We have taken Gromkyo’s claims with a grain of salt, for example, because of his reputation for dissimulation . We have also taken his claim with a 'grain of salt'
 We do not maintain that their memories are infallible; but we are confident that they have treated our endeavors with due seriousness. We do maintain that . We do . maintain that they . .
 Scholars have never had access to Soviet documents, and only recently have begun to speak out . Only recently have Soviets begun speaking out .
 We should not fail to recall that for almost a decade after the Cuban missile crisis, virtually all serious scholarly interpretation of American decisionmaking was based on five books devoid of doc~mentation .
 The crucial question scholars must now ask is whether we should put greater faith in the old Sovietology-based on conjecture and intuition- or in the recollections, however imperfect, of those who were in a position to know something about the matter .
 Oral history, to paraphrase Winston Churchill, may not seem very impressive until you consider the alternatives . Oral history is a form of oral history that may not be very impressive .
 Knowledge is never absolute; it is never anything more than the current best guess . Knowledge never absolute, it is just the best guess, it's just the most accurate thing .
 We have tried to articulate that best guess while noting its inherent weaknesses . We have also noted that there are inherent weaknesses in the system .
 Gromyko’s article prompted by the Moscow conference is considerably more informative than his remarks at the conference itself . The article is more interesting than his Moscow conference remarks .
 We look forward to the day when all relevant Soviet archives are open to Western scholars . We should not permit the opportunities presented by even limited glasnost to slip through our fingers . -Bruce Atlyn Cambridge, Mass. -james G Blight Providence, R.I.