 The authors relate with often intriguing detail the State’s tactics of increased monitoring to stiﬂe intellectual openings and debate .
 By the early 1990s it had become evident that reforms would be economic, not political . By the 1990s, it was clear that the reforms would not be political .
 The assessment that economic reforms were introducing a type of economic apartheid was not welcome . The assessment of economic reforms is not welcome, the government said .
 CEA’s incursion into Cuban affairs using the same intellectual prowess and critiquing capacity that it had applied to other countries in the Americas was not acceptable . This response signaled that CEA's incursion was unacceptable, he says .
 Continual reminders that academics could never successfully separate themselves from political objectives were part of a generational difference of expectations and experimental space for socialism . Continual reminder that academics can never successfully . separate themselves . from political . objectives .
 State intervention in the CEA’s respected journal, Cuadernos de Nuestro América, underscored its transformation into mediocrity and ideological purity . The placement of hardline government functionaries on the editorial board, coupled with the appointment of personnel from the armed
 The example of the CEA’s decline adds to the critiques of the failure of authoritarian rule to create an atmosphere favorable for intellectual creativity in the social sciences .
 A moderate left, concerned with socioeconomic and political inequalities, cannot, as yet, be part of the Cuban public debate or institutional framework . Furthermore, a moderate left is concerned as it is internationally with socioeconomic . and political . inequalities .
 A redeﬁnition of the State and the role of nationalist critics must await a future date . A re-nationalist state must be re-evaluated and replaced .
 Authors appear to be doing just that from their posts in Canadian and Puerto Rican academic venues . The authors appear to have been doing that from posts in Canada and Puerto Rico .
 The book is basically a political tract, full of the ofﬁcial rhetoric of the Cuban government . The book was published in Cuba in 1998 .
 According to Lechuga, Khrushchev came out of his meeting with John Kennedy in Vienna convinced that the Americans were going to invade Cuba . The meeting took place in Vienna in June 1961 .
 Khrushchev repeatedly told Fidel Castro that the Americans were coming . From then onward, the Americans would be coming, Khruschev repeatedly warned Castro .
 Lechuga afﬁrms that, indeed, the Kennedy administration planned to topple the Castro government with an invasion by the U.S. military . The Kennedy administration, after the Bay of Pigs experience, planned an invasion .
 A Soviet delegation offered the Cuban government deployment of nuclear weapons in the island . Lechuga tells us that, at the end of May 1962, a Soviet delegation traveled to Cuba and offered to Cuba .
 The two main motivations for deploying the missiles in Cuba were to defend Cuba against an attack by the United States, author says . The author says that the main motivation was to strengthen the nuclear capabilities of the Soviet military .
 Lechuga emphasizes that the foremost cause of the missile crisis was growing threats of a military invasion of Cuba by U.S. armed forces . Yet, he says, the first cause was the threat of an invasion by the United States .
 He asserts that an attack by the U.S. against the island appeared imminent at the time . He says an attack on the island was imminent .
 Not even after the U.S. discovered the Soviet missiles in Cuba was an invasion (advocated by some top ofﬁcials) of the island a choice for Kennedy . Kennedy made the decision to invade Cuba a ﬁrst choice .
 Had Kennedy wanted to attack Cuba, he would not have discarded and abandoned the Cuban exiles at the Bay of Pigs, he says . Kennedy would have abandoned and abandoned them, he adds .
 Of the two main reasons for stationing the missiles in Cuba that Lechuga presents, he wants to emphasize the defense of the Castro regime from a possible American invasion . Of the other reasons, he says: The Cuban government is prepared to defend itself from an invasion .
 The main motivation for the Soviets was to gain a bargaining chip in their worldwide confrontation with the United States. But from the story he tells, one could also conclude that the Soviets were to gain the U.S. leverage .
 Lechuga’s book does not refute this alternative explanation as the main cause for the deployment of the Soviet missiles, it says . The book is published in Russia and Ukraine .
 Soviet rulers saw an opportunity to put missiles in Cuba . They intentionally played on fears of the Cuban government that the Marines could land on the island .
 The Soviets got the Americans to remove their missiles from Turkey, and the Americans promised not to do what they did not want to do anyway—invade Cuba . The U.S. agreed not to invade Cuba anyway .
 Despite the superior scholarly quality of Levine’s work, one thing the two books have in common is that they present distorted views . Lechuga's of the Cuba policies of the Kennedy administration and Levine's of activists in Miami .
 Most Cubans arrived in Miami practically penniless and that through hard work ended up being responsible for the growth and progress of the Miami metropolitan area . Levine does justice to the fact that most Cubans came in the U.S. in poverty .
 Levine has compiled a lot of details about interactions between the Cuban and American governments during the Carter and Reagan administrations . Levine has made an important contribution in compiling a number of details .
 Fidel Castro, Bernardo Benes, and Cuban Miami end up presenting a biased characterization of the Cuban-American community . Cuban Miami is a small city of Cuban-Americans .
 The book intends to portray the nature of the Cuban-American community from 1959 to 2000 . The book will be released in spring 2015 .
 Extending analysis to recent times makes the image of the exiled community even more illusory . Extending the analysis makes the constructed image of exiled communities even more difficult to understand .
 Levine uses the story of Cuban American Bernardo Benes who attempted to normalize relations between the Castro and U.S. governments . Benes advocated engagement with the Cuban regime .
 Levine equates groups or activists opposed to the Castro dictatorship with being ‘right-wing’’ and prone to terrorism . He equates them with having a tendency to suppress the freedom of speech of those who deviate from certain political views .
 Author implies that these attributes also apply in a more general sense to the Cuban-American community in Miami .
 Anti-Castro groups in the U.S. and even in Miami, have never been homogeneous in their political views or in their strategies . The facts are that anti-Cuban groups in Miami have never had a homogeneous political view or strategy .
 Exiles all along the politico-ideological spectrum want to see a democratic regime in Cuba . Exiles want a more democratic Cuba .
 To attach the label ‘right-wing’ to all those opposed to the Castro regime is unreasonable, says the author of the book . ‘Right-wingers’ are ‘unreasonable’, he says .
 Cuban exiles have been active in the anti-embargo, pro-dialogue movement . Some radio programs in Miami are quite sympathetic to the Castro government .
 ‘The anti-Castro militants’’ are not perpetrating violence against them . Yet ‘‘the anti-Cristristian’s’ aren’t perpetrating violent acts against them, he says .
 The vast majority of pro-democracy groups in the exile community have adopted the position that change in Cuba should be sought by peaceful means . For quite some time, the vast majority have adopted a peaceful approach to Cuba .
 Cuban American support for opposition groups in Cuba has increased with time . It is very clear that the activists in the island want to bring about a transition by peaceful means .
 The Varela Project was created and promoted by a leading democratic activist in Cuba, Osvaldo Payá, in Cuba . The project has gained widespread support among Cuban Americans .
 The project has petitioned the Castro government to hold a referendum on steps toward democratization based on legal statues of the 1976 communist constitution . The project is petitioning Castro government .
 Many groups and individuals in Miami do not support the Varela Project, in large part because it is perceived to be a strategy for change . disagreements about the project have not led to threats or violence in the community .
 Cuban American National Foundation has adopted a position in favor of negotiations with ofﬁcials in the Castro regime . In one last example that shows how far removed from current reality Levine’s book is .
 Kapcia believes that scholars have been reluctant to deal with the issue of Cuban ideology, and that whenever they did, they ‘misunderstood’’ it . Kapcia says he believes that his book will help bridge the gap .
 To him, Cuban revolutionary ideology is cubanía rebelde, which he claims is the line that runs throughout Cuban history and which he argues should not be confused with cubanidad, or Cubanness . He argues that Cubanidad is Cubanness, not Cubanness.
 A chapter analyzes the concepts of nationalism (as ‘imagined communities’’), political historical myth, symbols and icons, political totemization, political culture, ritual, gender, and language .
 Each of these concepts is brilliantly discussed and on those grounds alone the introductory chapter makes a contribution to the book .
 The problem is that most of these conceptual concerns are subsequently hardly touched upon in the book . The book is fundamentally intended to elucidate what the author calls ‘‘codes’ in both prerevolutionary and postrevolutionary Cuban history .
 Throughout Cuban history there has been ‘an emerging potential code’’ struggling to become reality only to be repeatedly frustrated . His central thesis is that throughout Cuban history, there has always been an 'emerging potential code'