 The following views on Cuba are expressed by/to. Ernesto Bettencourt, Pan American Onloa\ H . The views expressed in this article are those of Ernesto Betttencourt .
 Caatro came to power almost exclusively on a pledge to provide political freedom to the Cuban people with essentially no social program . The Missile Crlala tfeakened Caatro .
 Even without any social reforms, Caatro would have achieved a heroic mold in the eyes of the people I or this battle against tyranny . Caatro is a hero in the history of his country .
 He haa no further basis for demanding I and Justifying sacrifices from his people, he said . He said: "He haa . No further basis to demand I and justify sacrifices from my people"
 Castro's decision to accept the Soviet Union -3 weapons and military personnel dried up the emotional resources available to him . Castro has been left, despite his ' S irrevocable commitment to communism, with only the mutual sense of personal dancer % among the elite of hia regime to hold
 Castro came along and showed that this relationshin need not continue . Then Castro showed that it was not going to continue . Castro's arrival in the Castro era was a sign of hope .
 "His early captures of 7S military personnel were the beginnings of his effort in this regard," he said .
 Caatro had to provide physical proof of Cuban people's ability to withstand U.S. strength . Hovever, in order to cement the Movement of the Cuban people from their attitude of inferiority to a stiffened attitude .
 Keep pressure on Caatro to accelerate disintegration of hia regime . Keep the pressure on the Caatro regime .
 Do^t "" further, through public declaration, specify the details of the anti-invasion ' guarantee keep it fuxzy. m the long run, the invasion vill probably not be necessary .
 It ia very important in vlev of the general Latin American situation to continue all diplomatic measures necessary to isolate Caatro. Caatro . Caatro is located in the southern part of the country .
 The use of troops remains optional Sr members, it is mandatory for all members of the Rio Pacf to comply with the necessary majority . Remember that although the use of soldiers remains optional, it remains optional .
 Evenlf Brazil oTot^-s \*m disinclined to do so, all Latin American nations could be required to sever dlplanatlc relations vlth Cobs, sever trade relations, etc.
 In order for the United States to avoid the Giant/Pigmy image* Caribbean nations vfaich enjoy general respect . Honduras and Coeta Hlca rather than Nicaragua and Guatemala should be uaed t'o take the lead in advocating such measures, vlth the United
 In this regard, It la necessary for all concerned to understand the dimensions of the Cuban situation . Involving the entire free world. Involves the whole free world .
 Cubans must be brought to realize that the 0.0.0 percent unemployment rate is 0.2% . Vith regard to the national aspects, thiif lng Cubans should realize that 0. 0% unemployment rate will be 0.3% .
 The U.S. cannot control the outccee of the Cuban internal5 situation exclusively as an international matter . Conversely the U. S. must realize that In the conduct of the . conduct of . the  ""great . pover politics"" she cannot control . the out
 Inere must he a monitoring 1 of the developing political internal and of external groupings to ascertain g how . "best to Integrate this dynamic situation with the national aspects," he said .
 The Cuban political situation has been atomized as a result of first Batista and then Castro purges . Government must be aware of that, the Cuban government must also be aware .
 Any attempt to tring unity among varicng ""splinter"" groups is hound to fail . Therefore, any attempt to  tring unity among varicung groups is unlikely to succeed .
 She U.S. should follow the policy of en§ couraging several groups, continuing to evaluate them all, until one or two bid ™ fair to attract a following . She U S. should .
 Perhaps some coalescing around these stronger £ groups frcm amongst the other ""splinter"" groups may be possible . Perhaps later some coalesce around these strong £ groups .
 Ho £ opposition group could muster the forces necessary even when the U.S. was prepared to help overtly . U. S. was willing to help even though it was not prepared to overtly .