 After the war, Henry Ford II hired McNamara and a group of other Army Air Force veterans to work for Ford Motor Company . McNamara was the first to be hired by Ford after World War II .
 These ""Whiz Kids" helped reform Ford with modern planning, organization, and management control systems . Ford was founded in 1945 and helped develop the Ford Corporation .
 After briefly serving as Ford's president, McNamara accepted appointment as Secretary of Defense . McNamara was appointed by President Ford in 1964 .
 Kennedy and McNamara instituted a Cold War defense strategy of flexible response, which anticipated the need for military responses short of massive retaliation . The Cold War strategy was designed to avoid massive retaliation against any threat .
 During the Kennedy administration, McNamara presided over a build-up of U.S. troops in South Vietnam . McNamara oversaw the build up of troops in Vietnam during his administration .
 After the 1964 Gulf of Tonkin incident, the number of U.S. soldiers in Vietnam escalated dramatically . The number of American troops in Vietnam increased dramatically .
 McNamara feared fall of South Vietnam would lead to fall of other governments in the region . McNamara and other U.S. policymakers feared that the fall of a Communist regime could lead to other fall-alleged governments .
 In October 1966, he launched Project 100,000, the lowering of army IQ standards which allowed 354,000 additional men to be recruited . Despite criticism that they were not suited to working in high stress or dangerous environments .
 McNamara grew increasingly skeptical of the efficacy of committing U.S. troops to Vietnam . McNamara became increasingly skeptical about the effectiveness of the war effort .
 In 1968, he resigned as Secretary of Defense to become President of the World Bank . He resigned from his post as President of World Bank in 1968 .
 He remains the longest serving Secretary of Defense, having remained in office over seven years . He remains in office for more than 7 years .
 World Bank shifted focus of the World Bank from infrastructure and industrialization towards poverty reduction . He served as President of the Bank until 1981, shifting the focus away from industrialization to poverty .
 After retiring, he served as a trustee of several organizations, including the California Institute of Technology and the Brookings Institution .
 In his later writings and interviews, he expressed regret for the decisions he made during the Vietnam War .
 Ford Motor Company was Secretary of Defense . He was secretary of Defense, secretary of defense and secretary of state . His career spanned three decades .
 Robert McNamara was born in San Francisco, California . McNamara's career spanned more than 40 years . His final years were in a career that spanned the world .
 He graduated from Piedmont High School in California in 1933, where he was president of the Rigma Lions boys club . He earned the rank of Eagle Scout .
 He was a member of the Phi Gamma Delta fraternity, was elected to Phi Beta Kappa in his sophomore year, and earned a varsity letter in crew . He was also a Phi Beta Kappa member .
 In 1946, Tex Thornton, a colonel under whom McNamara had served, put together a group of former officers from the Office of Statistical Control to go into business together . The Ford Motor Company was founded by McNamara .
 Thornton had seen an article in Life magazine portraying Ford as being in dire need of reform . Thornton had read the article and called Ford a 'desperate need for reform'
 Henry Ford II, himself a World War II veteran from the Navy, hired the entire group of ten, including McNamara . McNamara was the only person to get the job at Ford II .
 The ""Whiz Kids" helped the money-losing company reform its chaotic administration through modern planning, organization, and management control systems . The Whiz Kids helped the company's chaotic administration reform .
 McNamara advanced rapidly through a series of top-level management positions . Starting as manager of planning and financial analysis, McNamara rose rapidly .
 McNamara had Ford adopt computers to construct models to find the most efficient, rational means of production, which led to much rationalization . McNamara led the company to adopt computers and find the best way to make money .
 McNamara's style of ""scientific management"" with his use of computer spreadsheets featuring graphs showing trends in the auto industry were regarded as extremely innovative in the 1950s . His style of 'scientific management' was much copied by other executives in the following decades .
 Ford Falcon was a small, simple and inexpensive counter to the large, expensive vehicles prominent in the late 1950s . The Falcon sedan was introduced in the fall of 1959 . Ford was a force behind the Ford Falcon sedan .
 On November 9, 1960, McNamara became the first president of Ford Motor Company from outside the Ford family since John S Gray in 1906 . McNamara was the company's first president from outside of the family .
 President-elect John F Kennedy first offered the post of Secretary of Defense to Robert A Lovett, who had already served in that position in the Truman administration . Lovett declined but recommended McNamara for the position .
 McNamara had read Kennedy's ghostwritten book Profiles in Courage and asked him if he had really written it himself, with Kennedy insisting that he did . McNamara read the book and asked Kennedy to write it himself .
 McNamara's salary as the CEO of Ford ran to some $3 million dollars per year while by contrast the position of the Defense Secretary paid only $25,000 per year . McNamara was the highest paid defense secretary at the time of his tenure .
 McNamara insisted to Kennedy that he have the right to appoint his officials and run the Pentagon his own way . Given the financial sacrifices, McNamara was able to insist to Kennedy .
 McNamara was one of the few members of the Kennedy Administration to work and socialize with Kennedy . McNamara became close to Attorney General Robert F Kennedy, eventually serving as a pallbearer at the younger Kennedy's funeral .
 U.S. Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara with United States Air Force Chief of Staff General Curtis LeMay at The Pentagon on April 10, 1963 . McNamara and LeMay met in 1963 .
 During World War II, McNamara served under LeMay's command as a statistician for the U.S. Army Air Forces . McNamara also served as a statisticsian during the Second World War .
 McNamara ordered the U.S. to increase the nation's ""limited warfare" capabilities in 1961 . The decision was part of a major review of the military challenges confronting the United States . McNamara's decision was made in 1961 to increase capabilities .
 McNamara was abandoning Eisenhower's policy of massive retaliation in favor of a flexible response strategy . McNamara's strategy relied on increased U.S. capacity to conduct limited, non-nuclear warfare .
 The Kennedy administration placed emphasis on improving the ability to counter communist ""wars of national liberation" The enemy avoided head-on military confrontation and resorted to political subversion and guerrilla tactics . The Kennedy Administration placed particular emphasis .
 McNamara: "The military tactics are those of the sniper, the ambush, and the raid" As McNamara said in his 1962 annual report, the military tactics were "the sniper"
 In practical terms, this meant training and equipping U.S. personnel, as well as allies such as South Vietnam, for counterinsurgency operations . South Vietnam was one of the key allies in Vietnam's anti-war efforts .
 He was a strong proponent of the blockade option over a missile strike . He helped persuade the Joint Chiefs of Staff to agree with the blockade .
 Increased attention to conventional strength complemented these special forces preparations . Increased attention also focused on conventional strength in the US .
 In this instance, he called up reserves and also proceeded to expand the regular armed forces . The president also expanded the regular forces .
 Active duty strength had declined from approximately 3,555,000 to 2,483,000 between 1953 and 1961 . It increased to nearly 2,808,000 by June 30, 1962 . active duty strength increased from 3,500,000 in 1953 to almost 3,800,000
 The Vietnam military buildup began in 1965, reaching a peak of nearly 3,550,000 by mid-1968, just after McNamara left office . Then the forces leveled off at around 2,700,000 until the Vietnam buildup began .
 Kennedy was fascinated with counterinsurgency warfare . He made a major push to develop the Special Forces, popularly known as the Green Berets .
 The United States Army leadership was, for the most part, strongly opposed to the counterinsurgency vogue . The U.S. Army leadership stoutly resisted the presidential pressure for more training and forces . President Barack Obama has been criticized for his lack of support in Afghanistan .
 The U.S. Army wanted to be equipped to fight a conventional war in central Europe against the Soviet Army . Instead of having small teams of Special Forces armed with relatively low tech weapons like assault rifles fight in a Third World country .
 McNamara took over the Pentagon in 1961 . The United States relied on an all-out nuclear strike to respond to a Soviet attack .
 This was the same nuclear strategy planned by the Strategic Air Command, led by General Curtis LeMay . General LeMay led the Air Force in the 1960s .
 He sought other options after seeing that this strategy could not guarantee the destruction of all Soviet nuclear weapons, thus leaving the U.S. vulnerable to retaliation . The United States was left vulnerable to a possible retaliation .
 The subject educated NATO members on the Cold War doctrine of deterrence . The subject was the subject of discussion with NATO members about the doctrine .
 McNamara's alternative in the doctrine of counterforce was to try to limit the U.S. nuclear exchange by targeting only enemy military forces . McNamara was trying to limit nuclear exchange with only enemy forces . His alternative was to target only enemy troops .
 This would prevent retaliation and escalation by holding Soviet cities hostage to a follow-up strike . This would keep Soviet cities from being held hostage by a strike . The strike would also avoid retaliation and escalate by holding cities hostage .
 McNamara concluded counterforce was not likely to control escalation but to provoke retaliation . McNamara later concluded that counterforce would not likely control escalation .
 McNamara took other steps to increase U.S. deterrence posture and military capabilities . McNamara also took steps to strengthen the U.N. defense system .
 McNamara increased long-range airlift and sealift capabilities and funds for space research and development . McNamara also increased long range airlift capabilities .
 The end effect was to remove the Intelligence function from the control of the military and put it under the . control of . the . Secretary of Defense .
 Defense Supply Agency set up to work toward unified supply procurement, distribution, and inventory management . The agency is under the control of the Secretary of Defense rather than uniformed military .
 McNamara's system of systems analysis as a basis for making key decisions on force requirements, weapon systems, and other matters . McNamara: "Systems analysis" is basis for decision on force decisions, weapons systems .
 The word 'analysis' emphasizes the need to reduce a complex problem to its component parts for better understanding . Analysis emphasizes the importance of reducing complex problems to their component parts .
 Enthoven and Smith said they used mainly civilians as systems analysts because they could apply independent points of view to force planning . They said mainly civilians were used as analysts for the project .
 McNamara's tendency to take military advice into less account than had previous secretaries . His tendency to override military opinions contributed to his unpopularity with service leaders .
 Systems Analysis, rather than being objective, was tailored by the civilians to support decisions that McNamara had already made . It was also generally thought that Systems Analysis was tailored to support McNamara's decisions .
 U.S. Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara visited Rhein-Main Air Force Base in Frankfurt, Germany, September 7, 1962 . McNamara was accompanied by Air Force Chief of Staff General John P McConnell .
 The most notable example of systems analysis was the Planning, Programming and Budgeting System instituted by U.S. Department of Defense Comptroller Charles J Hitch .
 McNamara directed Hitch to analyze defense requirements systematically and produce a long-term, program-oriented defense budget . Hitch was tasked with analyzing defense requirements and producing a long term program of defense .
 The FYDP was a series of tables projecting forces for eight years and costs and manpower for five years in mission-oriented, rather than individual service, programs .
 16 DPMs appeared between 1961 and 1968 on such topics as strategic offensive and defensive forces, NATO strategy and force structure, military assistance, and tactical air forces . Sixteen of the DPMS were published by NATO in the 1960s .
 OSD sent the DPMs to the services and Joint Chief of Staff for comment . In making decisions, McNamara included a statement of alternative approaches, force levels, and other factors .
 DPM was hated by the JCS and uniformed military in that it cut their ability to communicate directly to the White House . The DPM is now the most powerful military agency in the world .
 In practice, what it proved to be was a cost burden that became a barrier to entry for companies attempting to deal with the military . But in practice, the cost burden was a barrier .
 It aided the trend toward a few large non-competitive defense contractors serving the military . The move was aided by the trend of large defense contractors not only but also by the military.
 Robert McNamara was serving as Secretary of Defense and one of John F Kennedy's trusted advisors . During this time, he was one of the most influential advisors to Kennedy .
 This committee included U.S. government officials, including Robert McNamara, to advise Kennedy on the crisis . Committee included United States government officials including McNamara .
 Kennedy instructed ExComm to come up with a response to the Soviet threat unanimously without him present . ExComm came up with the plan unanimously without the president present .
 The Joint Chiefs of Staff favored launching air strikes against the Soviet missile sites in Cuba . McNamara advised Kennedy against the chiefs, warning that air strikes would almost certainly be crossing the Rubicon .
 McNamara's relations with the hawkish Joint Chiefs of Staff had been strained during the crisis . His relations with Admiral George Anderson and General Curtis LeMay were especially testy .
 Both Admiral Anderson and General LeMay had favored invading Cuba . Both favored the prospect of a war with Soviet Union under the grounds that a war was inevitable .
 Admiral Anderson had at one point ordered McNamara out of the Naval Operations Room, saying that as a civilian he was unqualified to be making decisions about naval matters, leading McNamara to say that he was the Defense Secretary . McNamara said that Anderson was not qualified to be ordering him
 The crisis had to be resolved within 48 hours by receiving two messages from Nikita Khrushchev . During this time it was confirmed the crisis had been resolved by the two messages . During the crisis the crisis was confirmed to have been resolved within two hours .
 The first message, an informal one, stated if the U.S. guaranteed to not invade Cuba then they would take the missiles out . The first . message was that if the United States guaranteed not to invade Cuba, the missiles would be removed .
 The second message, a more formal one, was broadcast on the radio stating if the U.S. attacked then Cuba was prepared to retaliate with masses of military power . The message was broadcast by Cuban radio .
 Defense planning focused on using nuclear weapons . Kennedy and McNamara saw it was clear the use of strategic weapons could be suicidal .
 The majority of officials favored an air attack on Cuba in hopes to destroy the missile sites . The vote was not unanimous which brought them to other alternatives .
 A quarantine was a way to prevent the Soviets from bringing any military equipment in or out of Cuba . The quarantine was designed to stop the Soviets bringing military equipment into Cuba . A quarantine would be a form of quarantine for Cuba .
 McNamara presented the argument against the attack and for the quarantine . The final review of both alternatives was conducted on Sunday, October 21, upon Kennedy's request .
 After the crisis McNamara recommended to Kennedy that Admiral Anderson and General LeMay be sacked . McNamara also recommended that the two generals were sacked .
 Kennedy was afraid of a Congressional backlash if he sacked two of the chiefs at once . Kennedy feared of a backlash from the Congressional backlash .
 Kennedy did not wish for his disagreements with the Joint Chiefs to become public . He felt sacking two of the chiefs at once would lead to speculation in the media about such a disagreement .
 Admiral Anderson was the new American ambassador to Portugal in 1963 . The White House released a White House release announcing the appointment .
 McNamara's staff stressed systems analysis as an aid in decision making on weapon development and many other budget issues . McNamara: "Systems analysis" is an aid to decision making .
 McNamara instituted a much-publicized cost reduction program, which, he reported, saved $14 billion in the five-year period beginning in 1961 . McNamara: "Cost reduction program" was based on principles of McNamara .
 He closed many military bases and installations that he judged unnecessary for national security . Although he had to withstand a storm of criticism from senators and representatives from affected congressional districts, he closed many bases .
 McNamara was equally determined about other cost-saving measures . Total Obligational Authority increased greatly during the McNamara years .
 Not until FY 1984 did DoD's total obligational authority surpass that of FY 1968 in constant dollars . FY 1984 was the first time DoD had the authority to take control of the U.S. military budget .
 McNamara believed redundancy created waste and unnecessary spending . McNamara's program consolidation was a hallmark of his cost reductions .
 McNamara directed the Air Force to adopt the Navy's F-4 Phantom and A-7 Corsair combat aircraft . The consolidation was quite successful .
 His actions in mandating a premature across-the-board adoption of the untested M16 rifle proved catastrophic when the weapons began to fail in combat . Congressional investigations revealed the causes of these failures as negligence and borderline sabotage .
 McNamara tried to extend his success by merging development programs as well . The TFX dual service project combined Navy requirements for a Fleet Air Defense aircraft and Air Force .
 His experience in the corporate world led him to believe that adopting a single type for different missions and service would save money . He believes adopting a one type for each mission and service will save money.
 He insisted on the General Dynamics entry over the DOD's preference for Boeing because of commonality issues . General Dynamics was chosen over Boeing over the Pentagon's preferred Boeing .
 Though heralded as a fighter that could do everything, the end it involved too many compromises to succeed at any of them . "The best fighter in the world has never been able to do everything," says Floyd Mayweather .
 The Navy version was drastically overweight and difficult to land, and eventually canceled after a Grumman study showed it was incapable of matching the abilities of the newly revealed Soviet MiG-23 and MiG25 aircraft . The Navy's version of the aircraft was also canceled after it was found
 The F-111 would eventually find its niche as a tactical bomber and electronic warfare aircraft with the Air Force . Many analysts believe that even though the TFX project itself was a failure, McNamara was ahead of his time .
 Truman and Eisenhower committed the U.S. to support the French and native anti-Communist forces in Vietnam in resisting efforts by the Communists in the North . Neither administration established actual combat forces in the war .
 The U.S. role was initially limited to financial support, military advice and covert intelligence gathering . The United States role expanded after 1954 when French withdrew .
 McNamara was closely allied in debates in the cabinet with Dean Rusk, the Secretary of State, with both favoring greater American support for South Vietnam . U.S. involvement in Vietnam escalated after the Gulf of Tonkin incidents in August 1964 .
 Initially, the main concern of the new Kennedy administration was Laos, not South Vietnam . Laos was the focus of the Kennedy administration, not Vietnam .
 Rusk said bombing was ineffective in the jungles and six planes were not enough . Rusk shot down that proposal, saying his World War Two experiences in Burma had taught him that bombing is ineffective in Burma .
 In the spring of 1961 Kennedy seriously considered intervening in Laos where the Communist Pathet Lao, supported by North Vietnam, were winning the civil war . North Vietnam was winning the war in Laos .
 Laos was a backward, landlocked country with barely any modern roads and only two modern airfields, both of which were quite small by western standards . Laos is now a landlocked landlocked nation, with only two airfields and two modern roads .
 It was accepted if the U.S. sent in troops into Laos, it was almost certain that China would do likewise, thus leading to another Sino-American war . Furthermore, memories of the Korean War were still fresh, and it was generally accepted that if the United States sent
 The Southeast Asia Treaty Organization was split with its European members such as France and Britain stoutly opposed to intervention in Laos . Its Asian members such a Thailand and the Philippines were all for intervention in .
 McNamara noted to Kennedy it was quite possible that the two airfields in Laos could be seized by the Communist forces, which would cut off any U.S. forces in Laos, thus turning the intervention into a debacle . McNamara: "It was quite . possible that it was
 At a meeting on 29 April 1961, when questioned by the Attorney-General, Robert F Kennedy, McNamara stated that ""we should take a stand in Thailand and South Vietnam"", pointedly omitting Laos from the nations in Southeast Asia to risk a war over .
 On 1 May 1961, he advised President Kennedy to send in ground troops into Laos, saying ""we must be prepared to win" He also advised using nuclear weapons if China should intervene .
 Kennedy sought a diplomatic solution to the Laos crisis at a peace conference in Geneva in 1961-62 . It led to an agreement to make Laos neutral in the Cold War . Kennedy was distrustful of the advice given by the Joint Chiefs of Staff after the failure of the Bay of Pigs invasion
 The problems posed by the possibility of a war with China and the logistical problems of supporting a large units of troops in Laos led McNamara to favor a small number of U.S. Army Special Forces .
 McNamara rejected recommendation of sending 8,000 combat troops to South Vietnam as inadequate . McNamara said that the troops would not "probably not tip the scales decisively" in Vietnam . The Joint Chiefs recommended sending 6 divisions to Vietnam .
 Vietnam altered a map that showed too much of South Vietnam under Viet Cong control, and massaged the statistics to make the Viet Cong appear weaker than what they were . Led by General Paul D Harkins, the officers of the Military Assistance Command altered the map to make it appear weaker
 McNamara's ""quantitative"" style based upon much number-crunching by computers about trends in Vietnam missed the human dimension . McNamara: "Quantitative" style based on much number crunching by computer misses the human dimensions of Vietnam .
 Aspects of the war such popular views and attitudes in South Vietnam were missed by McNamara's ""quantitative" approach as there was no way that computers could calculate these aspects of war . Aspects such as the South Vietnamese president Ngô Đình Di�
 McNamara had supported plans to intervene in Laos in 1961 . By 1962 he had changed his mind . McNamara changed his view .
 McNamara had stumped him by asking him what the U.S. would do in the event of several scenarios in Laos, none of which Lemnitzer and the Joint Chiefs of Staff were capable of answering . McNamara: "What the United States would do?" McNamara asked
 In late 1962, McNamara ordered planning to withdraw American advisers from South Vietnam in 1964 as according to Pentagon calculations the war should be won by then . Pentagon calculations: Vietnam should have won by 1964 .
 The Battle of Ap Bac began when three Viet Cong companies were encircled by the ARVN's 7th Division . The battle began on January 2, 1963, in the village of the village .
 The VC defeated the 7th Division in the ensuing battle and escaped into the jungle . Despite being outnumbered by a factor of 10-1 and being outgunned having only rifles compared to tanks, artillery, armored personnel carriers .
 Vann was a colorful figure whose outspokenly blunt criticism of how the war was being fought made him a favorite of the media . Vann's reports criticizing Diệm's regime as corrupt and incompetent were most unwelcome to McNamara who contended that the reforms advocated by Vann
 In March 1963, Vann resigned from the Army as he was informed that his career was over . Vann was told he had to leave the Army in March 1963 .
 After the Battle of Ap Bac, a debate began in the Kennedy cabinet about the viability of the Diệm regime, which was reinforced by the Buddhist crisis, which began in May 1963 . The Buddhist crisis in Vietnam was the biggest crisis in the country's history, with the
 When the subject of supporting a coup against Diệm was first raised by Kennedy at a National Security Council meeting in August 1963, McNamara spoke in favor of retaining the Vietnamese leader . The subject of backing a coup was raised by McNamara at a meeting of the National Security
 Paul Kattenburg suggested at a meeting attended by McNamara and McNamara that the U.S. should end support for Diem and leave South Vietnam to its fate .
 President Kennedy sent McNamara and General Taylor on a 'fact-finding mission' to South Vietnam in September 1963 . The mission was unsuccessful .
 At a meeting in the Gia Long Palace, President Diem showed McNamara various graphs and charts that purported to be proof that the war was being won . The performance convinced McNamara the war in Vietnam was as good as won .
 Kennedy wanted a negative assessment of Diệm to justify supporting a coup . McNamara and Taylor instead wrote about the ""great progress" achieved by Di�ỉm and confidently predicted that the ""bulk"" of the American advisers would leave in 1965 as by that
 The CIA and the ambassador Henry Cabot Lodge Jr. urged support for a coup while the Pentagon was opposed . Kennedy vacillated and finally being unable to make up his mind, gave the decision to Lodge .
 Lodge, who detested Diệm, gave his approval to the generals plotting against him . Lodge's approval of the coup was given by the generals .
 Diệm was captured trying to flee Saigon and executed on 2 November 1963 . After the presidential palace was overrun in the fighting, he was captured and executed .
 Kennedy was assassinated on 22 November 1963 . He was succeeded by Lyndon Johnson .
 In December 1963, Johnson sent McNamara on another ""fact-finding mission"" to South Vietnam to assess General Minh's performance . Johnson sent him on a mission to assess the general's performance in Vietnam .
 He also admitted that computer models and statistics, which he had attached such importance to, were ""grossly in error"" and that government control of rural areas had been deteriorating to a far greater extent than we realized .
 On 30 January 1964, General Minh was overthrown in a bloodless coup d'état by General Nguyễn Khánh . General Khanh overthrown by Nguyên Minh in 1964 .
 The same month saw a VC battalion in the Mekong Delta escape from a larger force of South Vietnamese troops, who had been rated as some of the very best in the ARVN by the U.S.
 McNamara pressed Khánh to put South Vietnam on a war footing by conscripting all able-bodied young men into the military, which he promised he would do . McNamara: "The South Vietnam is on a footing"
 Khánh did not keep his promise as wealthy and middle class South Vietnamese families objected to having their sons conscripted . As a result the burden of conscription fell only on sons of poor families .
 McNamara recommended that the United States make it "emphatically clear" its willingness to support Khánh to the hilt . The ""greatest weakness"" accordingly to McNamara was the ""uncertain viability"" of the ARVN's government, which might be overthrown
 Other recommendations called for an increase in the ARVN, provide the Republic of Vietnam Air Force with more planes and helicopters, and for more civil servants to administer rural South Vietnam .
 The 'action memorandum' redefined the Vietnam War as important for Asia, and for the entire world . The document asserted the global credibility of the United States was now at stake .
 In May 1964, Senator Richard Russell advised Johnson against relying too much on McNamara . Russell said: "McNamara is the smartest fella any of us know"
 The advice that McNamara and other American officials gave to the South Vietnamese to make reforms to crack down on corruption and make the government more effective was always ignored . The South Vietnamese government knew very well that the Americans, having repeatedly promised in public that they would never permit the ""loss""
 The South Vietnamese knew that the United States could not abandon them without damaging its own prestige . For the South Vietnamese, the U.S. knew that they could not abandoned them without risking their own prestige.
 Despite their reliance on American aid, they could safely defy U.S. dictates . So far, they have been able to defy American dictates .
 By late winter of 1964, senior officials in the Johnson administration were advocating U.S. intervention in the war in Vietnam .
 Fearful of causing a war with China, Johnson was opposed to the plans of Khánh to invade North Vietnam . Johnson was even less enthusiastic about having the United States invade North Vietnamese .
 To declare war on North Vietnam would lead to irresistible political pressure at home to invade North Vietnam, says U.S. President Richard Nixon .
 By 1964, the United States Navy sent destroyers into the Gulf of Tonkin to support raids by South Vietnamese commandos on North Vietnam and to gather intelligence . As such, the solution was floated for Congress to pass a resolution granting Johnson the power to wage war .
 On 2 August 1964, one destroyer was involved in a naval skirmish with North Vietnamese Vietnam People's Navy torpedo boats in North Vietnamese waters .
 The Maddox and another destroyer, the USS Turner Joy, initially claimed to have been attacked by the North Vietnamese torpedo boats in international waters on 4 August 1964 . However, shortly afterward reported there was probably no attack, and said it was probably a mistake .
 Captain John J Herrick of the Maddox reported that the ""torpedo boats"" were almost certainly just radar ""blips"" caused by the ""freak weather effects"" of the storm . The reports of an attack on his ship were due to an ""overeager"" radar
 Johnson seized upon the reports of an attack on a Navy warship in international waters to ask Congress to pass a resolution giving him the authority to wage war in Vietnam . Johnson promptly seized upon reports of the attack on the warship .
 Grant Sharp Jr. of the Pacific fleet, put strong pressure on Herrick to say that his ship had been attacked by torpedo boats, despite his strong doubts on the subject . Herrick's ship was attacked by torpedoes .
 On 5 August 1964, McNamara appeared before Congress to present proof of what he claimed was an attack on the Navy's warships in international waters of the Gulf of Tonkin . McNamara stated it was imperative that Congress pass the resolution as quickly as possible .
 McNamara presented the event to Congress and the public as justification for escalation of the war against the communists . McNamara was also instrumental in presenting the event as justification .
 In 1995, McNamara met with former North Vietnam Defense Minister Võ Nguyên Giáp, who told his American counterpart that the August 4 attack never happened . President Johnson ordered Operation Pierce Arrow, retaliatory air strikes on North Vietnamese naval bases .
 Regardless of the particulars of the incident, the larger issue would turn out to be the sweeping powers granted by the resolution . The resolution was passed by the House of Representatives .
 Johnson gave him virtually unfettered authority to expand retaliation for a relatively minor naval incident into a major land war involving 500,000 American soldiers .
 Though Johnson now had the authority to wage war, he proved reluctant to use it . He ignored advice of the Joint Chiefs of Staff to bomb North Vietnam .
 Operation Barrel Roll was a bombing offensive against part of the Ho Chi Minh Trail in the southern part of neutral Laos, which was approved by the president . On 1 December 1964, McNamara recommended a ""graduated" response program .
 On Christmas Eve 1964, the VC bombed the Brinks Hotel in Saigon, killing two Americans . Two Americans were killed in the attack .
 Despite McNamara's recommendations to bomb North Vietnam, President Johnson still hesitated . Johnson: "I'm not sure if I'm going to bomb"
 In 1965, in response to stepped-up military activity by the VC in South Vietnam, the U.S. began bombing North Vietnam, deployed large military forces and entered into combat . The United States bombed North Vietnam in 1965 .
 McNamara's plan led to the commitment of 485,000 troops by the end of 1967 and almost 535,000 by June 30, 1968 . The plan was supported by requests from top U.S. military commanders in Vietnam .
 Both Bundy and McNamara stated that they favored the latter, arguing that the commitment of U.S. troops to fight in South Vietnam and a strategic bombing campaign against North Vietnam were needed .
 In February 1965, the VC attacked the American airfield at Pleiku, killing 8 Americans and destroying 10 aircraft . McNamara's hawkish stance on Vietnam was well known in Washington and many in the press often referred to the war as ""McNamara's war"
 Only Mansfield and the Vice President, Hubert Humphrey, objected to Johnson's plans to bomb North Vietnam . Johnson's plan was approved by Mansfield .
 Aircraft from the carrier, USS Ranger, launched Operation Flaming Dart bombing the North Vietnamese army base at Đồng Hới later that day . Aircraft from USS Ranger bombed the base .
 McNamara forced to tell Johnson that the Flaming Dart raids had done little damage owning to the heavy clouds, which caused the pilots to miss when dropping their bombs, and more raids would be needed . McNamara told Johnson that more raids were needed .
 Operation Rolling Thunder was originally planned to last eight weeks, and instead went on for three years . The bombing offensive against North Vietnam originally planned for eight weeks . It was originally intended to last 8 weeks, but it ended up lasting 3 years . Johnson ordered more bombing raids in February .
 General William Westmoreland of the Military Assistance Command, Vietnam cabled Johnson to say that Da Nang Air Base was vulnerable . He had no faith in the ability of the South Vietnamese to protect it, leading him to ask for American troops to be deployed .
 On 8 March 1965, two battalions from the United States Marine Corps were landed at Danang, making the beginning of the ground war for the U.S. Marine Corps . Two battalions of the Marines were landed in Danang .
 Later in July 1965, McNamara visited South Vietnam on yet another ""fact-finding mission"" for President Johnson . He met the new South Vietnamese Premier, Air Marshal Nguyễn Cao Kỳ, who overthrown Khánh .
 McNamara was not impressed with Kỳ, reporting to Johnson that he saw little evidence that he was capable of winning the war . U.S. would have to send more troops to South Vietnam, McNamara said .
 McNamara advised the president that by early 1966 he would have to send 100,000 more troops to South Vietnam in order to win the war . McNamara also advised that he would need to mobilize the Reserves and state National Guards as well .
 Bundy's warnings that to send more troops would paradoxly mean less leverage over South Vietnam . Johnson accepted the first recommendation while rejecting the latter . Bundy warned that sending more troops to South Vietnam would mean less power .
 To mobilize the Reserves and National Guards would mean having to call up hundreds of thousands of men from civilian life, which would inevitably disrupt the economy, which in turn would require ending the peacetime economy and putting the economy on a war footing . The Reserves would mean .
 Johnson rejected wartime economy as imposing too many sacrifices on ordinary Americans . Johnson rejected the wartime economy while threatening his chances of reelection .
 Because the Reserves were never called up, the Army had to send much of its manpower to Vietnam, leaving the U.S. divisions in Western Europe in a ""skeletal"" condition . There was a shortage of volunteers .
 The draft system offered generous exemptions for those attending university and college, leading to the burden of the draft falling disproportionately upon men from poorer families . To make up the shortfall, the Army had to rely upon the draft, which caused much domestic opposition .
 Because of the refusal to call up the Reserves, McNamara had to increase the draft call in July 1965 from 17,000 to 35,000 per month . The draft call was increased in 1965 to 45,000 .
 Most of the 18 and 19-year-old draftees had a high school diploma or less . This led to a decline in the Army's intellectual standards, with many officers complaining that most of the draftes were not intelligent enough to be trained for technical duties .
 Throughout the war, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, General Earle Wheeler, pressed very strongly for the reserves and national guards to be called out . Wheeler said the war was steadily ruining the United States Army .
 McNamara warned the president in July 1965 that the war would cost an extra $10 billion dollars in defense spending over the next year . Johnson at a press conference said his administration would be spending only $300–400 million dollars until January 1966 .
 McNamara warned that the increased spending would spark inflation and raise the deficit . McNamara advised Johnson to ask Congress to increase taxes to forestall those eventualities .
 Norman Morrison burned himself alive in the parking lot of the Pentagon to protest the war . Morrison was a Quaker who burned himself to death in protest of the war in 1965 .
 All McNamara saw from his office was the smoke rising from the parking lot . McNamara refused to discuss the incident with his family . His wife Margey was opposed to the war and sympathized with Morrison's feelings, if not suicide .
 On 7 November 1965, McNamara sent Johnson a memo saying that the ""substantial loss of American lives"" in Vietnam was worth the sacrifice in order to contain China, which McNamara called the world's most dangerous nation .
 The casualty lists have mounted as the number of troops and the intensity of fighting escalated . The casualties have been rising as the fighting intensified .
 He concluded that there were a limited number of VC fighters in South Vietnam and that a war of attrition would destroy them . He concluded there were only a few of the fighters in the country .
 Faced with a guerrilla war, the question of holding territory was irrelevant . The VC never operated for extended periods in areas where the Americans were strong . If the Americans occupied an area in force, the VC simply moved to other areas where it was weaker .
 Westmoreland had decided, with the support of McNamara, to defend all of South Vietnam . He believed that he could win via a strategy of attrition as he would simply inflict enough losses to end the enemy's ability to wage war .
 McNamara devised the ""body count" measurement to determine how well the Americans were doing, reasoning if Americans were inflicting heavy losses, it must be a sign that they were winning . McNamara: "If the Americans inflicted heavy losses as measured by the body count"
 In Vietnam, this led to divisions, whose size limited them and their supply trains to the road, using massive amounts of firepower against guerrillas who were often ""nimble"" enough to evade all of the firepower brought to bear . This led to division's size limiting them to the
 The Special Forces did fight in Vietnam, but only as an adjutant to the traditional infantry and armored divisions . Special Forces fought in Vietnam only as adjutants to the infantry, armored divisions, which did most of the fighting .
 In a 1966 memo, McNamara admitted that the sort of counterinsurgency war envisioned by Kennedy with the Special Forces leading the fight had not occurred . McNamara wrote that the responsibility for this ""undoubtedly lies with bad management"" on the part of the Army .
 Up to November 1965, McNamara, who been a supporter of the war, first started to have doubts about the war . McNamara said at a press conference that ""it will be a long war"", which completely contradicted his previous optimistic statements that the war would be brought to a
 McNamara became skeptical about whether the war could be won by deploying more troops to South Vietnam and intensifying the bombing of North Vietnam . He would publish in a book years later about the war's success .
 He also stated later that his support of the war was given out of loyalty to administration policy . He also said later that he also stated that he was loyal to the administration .
 As a Christmas gesture, Johnson ordered a bombing pause over North Vietnam and went off to his ranch in Texas for the holidays . He traveled to South Vietnam many times to study the situation firsthand .
 McNamara went with his family for skiing in Colorado, but upon hearing that the president was open to extending the bombing pause for a few more days, he left his family at the sky lodge in the Rockies to fly to the Johnson ranch in 1965 .
 McNamara knew that Johnson tended to listen to the advice of Rusk who saw extending the bombing pause as weakness . McNamara wanted a meeting with Johnson without Rusk present .
 McNamara argued to the president in a three hour long meeting that the North Vietnamese would not open peace talks unless the bombing were stopped first . McNamara persuaded Johnson to extend the bombing pause into January .
 McNamara expressed doubts about America's ability to win the war . At a New Year's Eve party attended by Washington's elite to welcome 1966, he expressed doubts . McNamara: "I'm not optimistic about winning the war"
 McNamara stated that victory was unobtainable, and the best that could be achieved was an ""honorable withdrawal"" that might save South Vietnam as a state . A week later at a dinner party attended by the economist John Kenneth Galbraith and Johnson's speechwriter Dick Goodwin,
 In February 1966, during an ""off-the-record"" chat with a group of journalists, McNamara spoke about the war in very jaded terms, stating frankly that Operation Rolling Thunder was a failure .
 McNamara stated that North Vietnam was a backward Third World country that did not have the same advanced industrial infrastructure of First World nations, making the bombing offensive useless . McNamara said that the bombing was useless because of the lack of industrial infrastructure .
 McNamara's personality had changed, one of the journalists present during the ""off-the-record" conversation, described McNamara as having changed .
 McNamara reported to Johnson that American forces were inflicting heavy losses on the North Vietnamese and VC . He added that they could ""more than replace"" their losses and that ""full security exists nowhere" in South Vietnam .
 The students refused to let the car move until McNamara debated their leader, Michael Ansara . Ansara is the president of the Harvard chapter of Students for a Democratic Society .
 McNamara agreed to the debate, standing on the hood of his car, answered the charge from a student in the crowd that the United States was waging aggression by saying the war started in 1954, not 1957, which he knew .
 McNamara escaped via underground tunnels to see Kissinger . As McNamara continued to insult the crowd, he fled into Quincy House .
 The effects of Operation Rolling Thunder were more easily measured than with the ground war . McNamara was especially troubled by the revelation that the bombing offensive had not caused the collapse of North Vietnam's economy as predicted .
 In June 1967, American bombers hit North Vietnam's hydroelectric plants and reduced North Vietnam capacity to generate electricity by 85%, according to McNamara's calculations . The U.S. bombed the plants in June 1967 .
 The annual amount of electricity generated in North Vietnam was equal to a fifth of the electricity generated every year at the Potomac Electric Power Company's plant in Alexandria, Virginia . The destruction of North Vietnamese power plants was meaningless to the outcome of the war as the amount of power generated was
 McNamara's doubts were encouraged by his civilian aides such as Leslie H Gelb and John McNaughton, who complained that their wives and teenage children were chiding them as ""war criminals" when they came home from work .
 McNamara's teenage son, Robert Craig McNamara, was opposed to the war and denounced his father when he came from work every day . McNamara was opposed by his teenage son .
 McNamara was shocked to discover that the American flag was hanging upside down in his son's bedroom . McNamara told his son that he was ashamed of America because of him . The younger McNamara said he felt ashamed of the country because of his actions .
 In a memo of 19 May 1967 to the president, McNamara stated the military side of the war was going well with the Americans killing thousands of the enemy every month . But the political side was not, as South Vietnam remained as dysfunctional as ever . McNamara: "The political side
 McNamara wrote that the idea that the American forces would temporarily stabilize the situation so the South Vietnamese could take over the war was flawed . The dysfunctional South Vietnamese state would never be able to win the war, thus meaning the Americans would have to stay in Vietnam for decades .
 He advised Johnson not to accept Westmoreland's call for an additional 200,000 soldiers . He advised him to call up the Reserves, which would mean calling up the reserves . The wartime economy would require a wartime economy .
 The economic sacrifices that ending the peacetime economy would entail would make it almost politically impossible to negotiate peace, and in effect would mean placing the hawks in charge . Those of a hawkish inclination kept pressing for the Reserves to be called up, which was why those of the haw
 The economic sacrifices could only be justified to the American people by saying the war would be brought to a victorious conclusion . The U.S. could only justify the economic sacrifices by saying it would be a victorious end to the war .
 McNamara rejected the advice of the hawks, warning that steps such as bombing North Vietnam's dikes and locks to flood the farmland with the aim of causing a famine would alienate world opinion and increase domestic opposition .
 McNamara argued that Indonesia was the most important of all the ""dominoes"" in Southeast Asia . He argued that even if South Vietnamese ""dominos"" were to fall, Indonesia would still stand . Even if the South Vietnamese "domino"" were destroyed, the Indonesian ""dom
 He was inspired by the confrontation at Harvard the previous November . He had discovered that students he had been debating knew more about Vietnam's history than he did . The students he was debating had more knowledge about Vietnam than he knew .
 Gelb and six officials were instructed by McNamara to examine just how and why the U.S. became involved in Vietnam . The task was assigned to Gelb, six officials . Gelb was tasked with examining how and where the United States became involved .
 Subsequent efforts by the Nixon administration to prevent such leaks led indirectly to the Watergate scandal . The Nixon administration's efforts to prevent leaks led directly to the scandal .
 In an interview, McNamara said that the Domino Theory was the main reason for entering the Vietnam War . McNamara also said that Vietnam War was the primary reason for the war .
 McNamara issued Directive 5120.36 on July 26, 1963 . It commemorated Truman's signing of an order to end segregation in the military . President Harry S Truman signed the order in 1963 .
 This directive dealt directly with the issue of racial and gender discrimination in areas surrounding military communities . Equal Opportunity in the Armed Forces was issued in 2011 .
 Under the directive, commanding officers were obligated to use the economic power of the military to influence local businesses in their treatment of minorities and women . The directive was issued in 2010 .
 With the approval of the Secretary of Defense, the commanding officer could declare areas off-limits to military personnel for discriminatory practices .
 In July 1961, McNamara was informed by the British Defense Minister, Peter Thorneycroft, that the financial burden of trying to maintain British forces around the world was too much . The British Prime Minister Harold Macmillan was considering a withdrawal of all British forces ""East of Suez
 McNamara was opposed to the contemplated ""East of Suez" withdrawal, but the possibility of such a withdrawal led the U.S. Navy to lobby for Britain to allow an American naval base to be set up some British island in the Indian Ocean .
 A memo by the Joint Chiefs mentioned that a major problem with British colonies was the rise of nationalist movements demanding independence . The memo expressed concern that if the United Kingdom were to grant the United States a base in the Indian Ocean, an independence movement might demand the withdrawal of the Americans .
 Britain granted air and naval bases in the colony of Trinidad and Tobago to the U.S. in 1940 . When the colony became independent in 1962, the new government of Eric Williams asked for Americans to leave .
 The Chagossians were living aside an American naval base . The U.S. Navy was convinced that they would lead to prostitution and venereal diseases . The Navy demanded that they be evicted from the base . In addition to being black, the Navy believed that the Ch
 Thorneycroft visited Washington to meet McNamara and begin talks about which British island in the Indian Ocean was to have the American base . The American anthropologist David Vine was of the opinion that the concerns of the United States Navy represented racism .
 Diego Garcia in the Chagos Archipelago was part of the British Crown colony of Mauritius . Diego Garcia was chosen as the ideal place for maintaining air and naval bases that would allow the U.S. to control the Indian Ocean . The Americans had selected the island of Diego Garcia
 McNamara offered to have the United States pay $15 million U.S. dollars annually in rent to the British government for a base in Diego Garcia . The British government was agreeable to McNamara's proposal .
 In 1965, the Chagos islands were severed from the Mauritius and turned into the British Indian Ocean Territory as the prelude for the projected American base . In 1966, in a meeting with Denis Healey, who was now serving as the Defense Minister, McNamara pressed for the British
 Healey offered evasive answers to McNamara's questions . Healey claimed that his government wanted to maintain the Singapore base, but financial costs of the base was draining the British exchequer .
 To maintain British forces in Malaysia and Singapore was costing the British government £1 million pounds per day . Many in the cabinet of the Prime Minister Harold Wilson wanted to end the British military presence in Southeast Asia .
 In July 1966, McNamara told Johnson that it was ""absolutely essential"" for the British to remain ""East of Suez" The reasons he gave were political rather military, namely that having British forces in Southeast Asia showed the importance of the region, which thus justified the Vietnam war .
 The British were willing to offer a lease on Diego Garcia on almost any terms favorable to the Americans . To placate the Americans, the British offered almost any deal favorable to them .
 The Americans wanted all of the Chagossians expelled from their homes and never to be allowed to returned, a request that the British agreed . The British agreed to the request to prevent an independence movement in the Chagos islands from emerging .
 In January 1968, Wilson announced that with the exception of the garrison in Hong Kong, all British forces would be withdrawn ""East of Suez"" in order to save money . The decision disappointed the Americans, who were disappointed .
 The British government expelled all of the Chagossians from their homes starting in 1968 . The process was completed by 1973 .
 McNamara agreed to a ""light"" system which he believed could protect against the far smaller number of Chinese missiles . Under pressure to proceed with the ABM program after it became clear that the Soviets had begun a similar project .
 He never believed it was wise for the United States to move in that direction because of psychological risks of relying too much on nuclear weaponry . However, he said there would be pressure from many directions to build a larger system .
 McNamara always believed that the best defense strategy for the U.S. was a parity of mutually assured destruction with the Soviet Union .
 An ABM system would be an ineffective weapon as compared to an increase in deployed nuclear missile capacity, experts say . ABM would be ineffective against an increase of deployed nuclear missiles, they say .
 McNamara wrote of his close personal friendship with Jackie Kennedy and how she demanded that he stop the killing in Vietnam . McNamara was a close personal friend of the Kennedy family .
 McNamara grew more and more controversial after 1966 . His differences with the President and the Joint Chiefs of Staff over Vietnam strategy became the subject of public speculation .
 By 1967, McNamara was suffering visibly from the nervous strain as he went days without shaving and he suffered spasms where his jaw would quiver uncontrollably for hours . McNamara suffered from spasms that would cause him to go without shaving .
 Senator John C Stennis was a conservative Southern Democrat . He enjoyed much influence as a senior member of the Senate Armed Forces Committee . Stennis died in 1994 .
 Stennis saw himself more as a champion of the military rather than its overseer . The military often leaked information to him, in the full knowledge that he would take up their cause on Capitol Hill .
 In the spring of 1967 senior generals and admirals let Stennis know of their unhappiness with McNamara's leadership . Stennis was the Defense Secretary of the Vietnam War .
 Stennis scheduled hearings for the Senate Armed Forces Committee in August 1967 to examine the charge that ""unskilled civilian amateurs"" were not letting ""professional military experts"" win the war . This led Stennis to schedule hearings to examine whether unskilled civilians were not letting
 He charged that McNamara had placed too many restrictions on bombing North Vietnam to protect innocent North Vietnamese civilians . He said McNamara's restrictions were too many to protect civilians .
 The hearings opened on 8 August 1967, and Stennis called as his witnesses numerous admirals and Air Force generals who all testified to their belief that the U.S. was fighting with ""one arm tied behind its back" Stennis enjoyed more power than his title of deputy chairman
 They complained of ""overtly restrictive controls"" in bombing North Vietnam that they claimed were preventing them from winning the war . They complained that they were being held back from winning .
 McNamara defended the war in very lukewarm terms that strongly suggested he had lost faith in the war . McNamara testified that the bombing campaign against North Vietnam was ineffective .
 McNamara described all of the 57 restricted targets as either of no importance such as a tire factory in Hanoi that produced only 30 tires per day . The targets carried too much risk of hitting Soviet ships bringing supplies to North Vietnam .
 He warned that the prospect of American bombers damaging or sinking Soviet merchantmen while wounding or killing Soviet sailors carried too much risk of causing World War Three .
 McNamara also stated that North Vietnamese morale was not broken by the bombing offensive as the North Vietnamese people were "accustomed to discipline and are no strangers to deprivation and death" McNamara said the leadership in Hanoi were not affected by the bombings .
 Committee members were hostile to McNamara in questioning of him .
 Privately, McNamara felt that Thurmond was an ""ass"", saying he was a bigoted, ignorant Southern politician whose only values were a mindless militarism, a fervent belief in white supremacy and a fondness for marrying younger women .
 McNamara felt that it was beneath him to be questioned by Thurmond, which explained why he was notably truculent in his answers to him . McNamara said he didn't want to answer Thurmond .
 Stennis damned McNamara for putting in bombing restrictions to protect North Vietnamese civilians . Stennis claimed that the war could be easily won if only McNamara would just obey all the advice he received from the military .
 Stennis was not influenced by the hearings as he had written the committee's report before the hearings had even began . Stennis wrote the report before he had even begun the hearings .
 Johnson saw the hearings as proof that it was time to dismiss McNamara, whom he believed was ""cracking up"" under the strain of the war . Johnson believed the hearings were proof that McNamara was 'cracking up'
 Stennis, an ardent white supremacist who had fiercely opposed Johnson's civil rights legislation, was an old enemy of Johnson's . The president decided not to sack McNamara in August 1967 as that would be seen as a victory by Stennis . Instead to wait a few months to fire him
 Johnson had long resented and hated the Kennedy brothers, whom he thought looked down upon him as "white trash" from Texas . He thought they looked down at him as ""white trash"" from Texas.
 Senator Robert F Kennedy had emerged as a leading critic of the war by 1967 . Johnson stated to Kearns his belief that McNamara had suffered a nervous breakdown, of which Kennedy had taken advantage of .
 World Bank rules prohibit president from involving himself in domestic affairs of member nations . World Bank president would prevent McNamara from criticizing war after he left office .
 Johnson's biggest fear was that if he fired McNamara, then he might join with Kennedy in criticizing him and the war . McNamara was the longest-serving Defense Secretary and was especially vulnerable .
 General Earle ""Bus"" Wheeler, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff had become dissatisfied with McNamara's leadership and was outraged by that remark . Wheeler was angered by the remark .
 McNamara proposed that the Joint Chiefs all resign in protest at McNamara's leadership . McNamara claimed that he was supported by Joint Chiefs . The Joint Chiefs resigned in protest .
 General Harold K Johnson of the Army agreed to Wheeler's plan with his only regret being that he did not resign in 1965 . General Johnson erroneously blamed McNamara for Johnson's decision not to call up the Reserves .
 On 21 October 1967, McNamara saw the March on the Pentagon anti-war protest from his office in the Pentagon . The plan collapsed when General Wallace Greene of the Marine Corps refused to go along with it .
 He witnessed hippie girls placing flowers in the guns of the D.C. National Guardsman standing in front of the Pentagon . The incident occurred at the Pentagon on September 11 .
 McNamara described the scene as ""hellish"" as the hippie girls bared their breasts to tempt the Guardsman to make love, not war . McNamara describes the scene in which the hippies spat in the faces of the Guardsmen .
 He argued that if he had been leading the March on the Pentagon, he would have taken over the Pentagon and shut it down . He said hippies lacked the necessary discipline and intelligence .
 McNamara's recommendation to freeze troop levels, stop bombing North Vietnam and hand over ground fighting to South Vietnam was rejected outright by the President .
 McNamara's recommendations amounted to his saying that the strategy of the U.S. in Vietnam which had been pursued to date had failed . McNamara said the strategy had failed to find a solution .
 McNamara later stated he ""never heard back"" from Johnson regarding the memo . McNamara said he never heard back from Johnson .
 McNamara announced his pending resignation and that he would become President of the World Bank . Largely as a result, on November 29, that year, McNamara resigned as World Bank President .
 McNamara supported construction of a line of fortifications along the 17th parallel separating South and North Vietnam . Other factors were the increasing intensity of the anti-war movement in the U.S. and the approaching presidential campaign in which Johnson was expected to seek re-election .
 A History strongly suggests that McNamara was asked to leave by the President . McNamara left the White House in 1961 .
 Historian Arthur Schlesinger Jr said he was present during a conversation between McNamara and Senator Kennedy during which the former told the latter that he only learned from reading the newspapers of Johnson's announcement that he had just resigned as Defense Secretary .
 On 17 November 1967, a story in the Financial Times of London based on leaked sources in Washington stated McNamara was going to be the next World Bank president, which came as a surprise to McNamara . The story was based on a leaked report from Washington, D.C.
 McNamara met with Kennedy who told him to resign in protest and denounce the war as unwinnable . Afterwards, McNamara rejected the advice, saying that Johnson had been a friend and that he was still loyal to him .
 When McNamara refused to resign, Kennedy told him that he should turn down the World Bank presidency and join him in criticizing the war, which he refused to do . Kennedy told McNamara to resign instead of resigning, McNamara did .
 McNamara left office on February 29, 1968; for his efforts, the President awarded him both the Medal of Freedom and the Distinguished Service Medal .
 The hawkish National Security Adviser, Walt Whitman Rostow, argued at a cabinet meeting that day that the U.S. was on the verge of winning the war . Rostow argued that the United States was on to win the war.
 Rostow urged Johnson to send 206,000 more American troops to South Vietnam to join the half-million already there . Rostow also called for bombing raids on North Vietnam to drastically increase the number of bombing raids .
 McNamara broke down in tears, telling Johnson to accept that the war could not be won and stop listening to Rostow . McNamara then broke down into tears, saying to Johnson to just accept that .
 There were tears on his eyes as he spoke of the futility, the crushing futility of the air war . Then his voice broke, and there were . tears on . his eyes .
 The rest of us sat silently-I for one with my mouth open, listening to the secretary of defense talk that way about a campaign for which he had, ultimately, been responsible .
 Shortly after McNamara left the Pentagon, he published The Essence of Security, discussing various aspects of his tenure and position .
 He did not speak out again on defense issues or Vietnam until after he left the World Bank . He spoke out again about defense issues and Vietnam .
 McNamara visited Jakarta, Indonesia during his tenure as World Bank President in 1968 . McNamara was the first president of the World Bank to visit Indonesia in the country .
 Robert McNamara served as head of the World Bank from April 1968 to June 1981 . McNamara turned 65 when he turned 65 in 1981 .
 In March 1968, McNamara's friend Senator Robert Kennedy entered the Democratic primaries with aim of challenging President Johnson . Robert Kennedy won the Democratic nomination for President in 1968 .
 McNamara felt guilty over refusing Kennedy's requests to resign and decline the World Bank presidency . Though this was a violation of World Bank rules, McNamara said he felt guilty . McNamara refused to resign .
 McNamara feared he would be fired from the World Bank . A safe was installed in McNamara's office to house his papers relating to his time as Defense Secretary . McNamara was a normal courtesy extended to former Defense Secretaries .
 By 1969, McNamara wanted to forget the Vietnam war and did not want any reminders of his former job . McNamara: "I'm not going to work for the government again, but I'm going to do it"
 In his 13 years at the Bank, he introduced key changes, most notably shifting the Bank's economic development policies toward targeted poverty reduction . He introduced key policy shifts, including shifting economic development policy to target poverty .
 Prior to his tenure at the World Bank, poverty did not receive substantial attention as part of international and national economic development . The focus of development had been on industrialization and infrastructure and infrastructure .
 Poverty also came to be redefined as a condition faced by people rather than countries . Poverty was defined as a person rather than a country, rather than an individual .
 McNamara negotiated, with the conflicting countries represented on the Board, a growth in funds to channel credits for development, in the form of health, food and education projects .
 He instituted new methods of evaluating the effectiveness of funded projects . He also instituted new ways of evaluating projects .
 President Salvador Allende met with the Chilean president in 1972 to discuss the country's policy of preventing river blindness .
 McNamara's son, Craig McNamara was living in Chile at the time, but the two did not meet owning to the rift over the Vietnam war . McNamara and his son were estranged from each other .
 The meeting with Allende concluded with McNamara ending all World Bank loans to Chile . McNamara ended the loans to the South American nation .
 On 11 September 1973, Allende was overthrown in a coup d'etat led by General Augusto Pinochet .
 McNamara agreed to the World Bank resuming loans to Chile in 1974 . In 1974, McNamara visited Santiago to meet Pinochet and agreed to resume loans .
 McNamara fils feels that his father's claim that he had to cease loans to Chile because the Allende government's nationalization policy was an economic matter that fell within the purview of the World Bank was disingenuous and dishonest . Human rights abuses under Pinochet were a ""political
 McNamara: "At long last, India is moving to effectively address its population problem" During the emergency in India, McNamara remarked that India is finally addressing its population problems .
 The Tragedy and Lessons of Vietnam, published in 1995, presented an account and analysis of the Vietnam War from his point of view .
 In November 1995, McNamara returned to Vietnam, this time visiting Hanoi, Vietnam . McNamara visited Vietnam in November 1995 .
 Despite his role as one of the architects of Operation Rolling Thunder, McNamara met with a surprisingly warm reception . He was often asked to autograph pirate editions of In Retrospect which had been illegally translated .
 During his visit, McNamara met his opposite number during the war, General Võ Nguyên Giáp who served as North Vietnam's Defense Minister . McNamara's visit was the first time he visited North Vietnam since the war .
 The particular structure of this personal account is accomplished with the characteristics of an intimate dialogue, the author says .
 American anthologist David Vine became interested in the subject of Expulsion of the Chagossians . As McNamara explains, it is a process of examining the experiences of his long and controversial period as the United States Secretary of Defense .
 McNamara maintained his involvement in politics in his later years . He delivered statements critical of the Bush administration's 2003 invasion of Iraq . McNamara was critical of Iraq invasion .
 On January 5, 2006, McNamara and most living former Secretaries of Defense and State met briefly at the White House with President Bush to discuss the war .
 McNamara married Margaret Craig, his teenage sweetheart, on August 13, 1940 . McNamara was married to Margaret Craig in August 1940 .
 Margaret McNamara launched Reading Is Fundamental, which became the largest literacy program in the country . She was an accomplished cook, and Robert's favorite dish was reputed to be beef bourguignon .
 Later that summer, her ashes were scattered by her family on a mountainside meadow at Buckskin Pass, near Snowmass Village, Colorado .
 Robert Craig McNamara is now a walnut and grape farmer in California . McNamara objected to the Vietnam War as a student at the University of Columbia University .
 McNamara had a relatively short stay in the hospital, his wife's case was more serious and it was concern over meeting her medical bills that led to his decision to not return to Harvard but to enter private industry as a consultant at Ford Motor Company .
 McNamara lived in Ann Arbor, Michigan, rather than the usual auto executive domains of Grosse Pointe, Birmingham, and Bloomfield Hills . At Ford, McNamara was a Ford executive at Ford Motor Company .
 He and his wife sought to remain connected with a university town after their hopes of returning to Harvard after the war were put on hold .
 Robert McNamara and Five Lives of a Lost War, October 27, 1996, C-SPAN . McNamara was killed on September 29, 1972, aboard a ferry to Martha's Vineyard . A passenger recognized McNamara on board and attempted to throw him into the ocean .
 McNamara dated Katharine Graham, with whom he had been friends since the early 1960s . After his wife's death, McNamara was friends with Graham . He dated Graham for more than 50 years .
 In September 2004, McNamara wed Diana Masieri Byfield, an Italian-born widow who had lived in the U.S. for more than 40 years . McNamara was married in September 2004 to a widowed widow .
 McNamara died at his home in Washington, D.C., at 5:30 a.m. on July 6, 2009, at the age of 93 .
 He is buried at the Arlington National Cemetery in Arlington, Virginia, with the grave marker also commemorating his wives . His papers are housed in the John F Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum in Boston, Massachusetts .
 New Thinking for American Foreign and Defense Policy in the 21st Century. New thinking for American foreign and defense policy . The U.S. needs to rethink its foreign policy .
 Reducing the Risk of Conflict, Killing, and Catastrophe in the 21st Century . Reducing Risk of conflict, Killing in the Century in the U.S.
 According to a 1961 entry in Contemporary Biography, McNamara was a registered Republican . McNamara died at age 81 .
 McNamara's book is published by the Defense Department . McNamara died at the age of 92 in 1966 .
 United States Gross Domestic Product Deflator figures follow the Measuring Worth series . United States GDP deflator figures are based on data from the World Series .
 In 1970 the requirement that commanding officers first obtain permission from the Secretary of Defense was lifted . In 1970, the requirement for commanding officers to obtain permission was lifted from the secretary of defense . The decision to lift the ban was made in 1970 .
 Heather Antecol and Deborah Cobb-Clark discuss racial and ethnic harassment in local communities . They say racial and Ethnic Harassment in Local Communities is a problem in the community .
 Craig McNamara is owner of Sierra Orchards, a diversified farming operation producing walnuts and grape rootstock . McNamara says he's proud to be able to grow walnuts, grapes and other fruit .
 He is a California Agricultural Leadership Program graduate, American Leadership Forum senior fellow and College of Agricultural and Environmental Sciences Dean's Advisory Council member . He says he is a U.S. Agricultural Leadership program graduate and senior fellow .
 McNamara helped structure a biologically integrated orchard system that became the model for UC/SAREP . McNamara also created the FARMS Leadership Program, introducing rural and urban high school students to sustainable farming, science and technology .
 He was one of 10 U.S. representatives at the 1996 World Food Summit in Rome, Italy .
 Ending 'East of Suez' The British Decision to Withdraw from Malaysia and Singapore 1964-1968 . The British decision was made to withdraw from Malaysia, Singapore and Malaysia .
 The Encyclopedia of the Vietnam War A Political, Social and Military History . A Political and Social History of Vietnam War . The Vietnam War is a political, social and military history of the war .
 The Nearly Impossible Job of Secretary of Defense . ch 3 . Patler, Nicholas. Patler: The nearly impossible job of secretary of defense is to be a top Pentagon official .
 Island of Shame The Secret History of the U.S. Military Base on Diego Garcia . The Secret history of the United States Military Base is revealed .