 Cuba, Castro and Bioterrorism feature in many academic studies and books in public records . Many academic studies show Castro's long-term involvement with bacteriological and chemical weapons .
 The United States media has been invited but they systematically choose to be absent . The U.S. media has not been invited to the U.N. summit .
 This information will clash with the heavily orchestrated campaign to present Castro as non-threatening in order to normalize relations with Cuba . The information will also clash with a heavily orchestrated effort to present the Cuban leader as a non-threat .
 This collaboration of the U.S. media with the Castro regime is reprehensible, says Castro . Castro regime has been accused of collaborating with the United States media . The Castro regime's "collapse" of the media is "reprehensible"
 Fidel Castro first learned about his bacteriological warfare on Capitol Hill in 1997 . Fidel Castro was a dictator of Cuba, Cuba's first dictator . Castro was known for his use of biological warfare .
 Castro's Cuba has developed very ingenious ways to deliver deadly materials to the U.S. As Dr. Martin says, Cuba has been developing ways to get its deadly weapons to the United States .
 Cereijo says, "To conduct a bacteriological attack, a country or a terrorist group does not need to have any sophisticated means of delivery, such as a missile" Cereijos says, Cereijo believes, "to conduct a . bacteriological . attack,
 In a previous article, I mentioned the evidence pointing to Castro's involvement with the introduction of West Nile virus into the U.S. via migratory birds .
 In addition to people affected and some deaths caused by the virus in the U.S., it is affecting endangered animal species . The virus is affecting people in the United States and affecting endangered animals .
 Cereijo's paper, are other ingenious ways researched in Cuba to deliver deadly biological agents including the developing .
 Cereijo's reveals, ""to put notes inside the bottles, asking for replies. Cereije's reveals that he used to put notes in the bottles. "To put notes into bottles, he asked for replies," he says . Cereija's reveals: "to put
 Scientists found where in Cuba was best to release containers with bacteriological material . They found it was best place in Cuba to release container containing bacteriological materials .
 The north coast of Havana province was found to be the best, as well as the town of Sagua La Grande . Havana province's north coast was also the best .
 The U.S. media should inform the American people of these matters, writes CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 People in southern and southeastern coastal areas of the U.S. should not pick up or open any floating objects, officials say .
 Parents should instruct their children of the danger of picking up and opening what they find at the beach . Children are very curious, so parents should tell them of the dangers of opening beach toys .
 Information and precaution is the only way to prevent a major catastrophe caused by bacteriological material sent that way, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 A July 20, 1998, Insight Magazine article appeared in The Washington Times titled ""Fidel Castro's Deadly Secret --Five BioChem Warfare Labs"" by Martin Arostegui .
 The U.S. government is now aware of Castro's chemical and biological warfare capabilities . Castro's capabilities are now known by the United States government, the report says .
 There are about 12 centers producing bacteriological agents strategically located around Havana, Cuba . And that there is about 12 . centers producing . bacteriological agent strategically located in Havana .
 It has a 10,000-RPM centrifuge and other laboratory equipment bought through COMICONDOR, an Italian company in Milan that also supplies technology to Libya for Muammar Qaddafi's biological-weapons experiments .
 This factory in Havana was ""inaugurated in 1993 on Armed Forces Day on December 2, 1993,"" and has been in operation for eight years . This factory was inaugurated in Havana in 1993 .
 In order to enter La Fabriquita you need top-secret credentials . You must pass through a station of the Cuban Armed Forces . The place supposedly produces cattle feed .
 La Fabriquita is located just across the street from the Luis Diaz Soto General Hospital, formerly known as the Naval Hospital . The report gives a lot of specific information about the hospital . The hospital is Cuba's premier medical center .
 "Animal-Feed Plant"" located in Havana ""is well protected by rapid action defense units. Oddly, that . animal-feed plant" located in Cuba is well protected .
 Cereijo says, "These are of a high capacity and they are shielded against lethal agents" Cereijos says, ""These are ... shielded against ... lethal agents. Cereijoo says, Cereijo . Cereijio says, 'These are . of a
 Cuba is involved in the so-called 'binary weapons' where two chemicals are used to form a toxic agent when a weapon is exploded . Cuba is also involved in a 'binary weapon' where the chemicals are combined to create a toxic substance .
 They can be disguised as common agricultural chemicals, which make them more difficult to detect . They are often disguised as agricultural chemicals . They make them harder to detect than common agricultural pesticides .
 New agents are as toxic as VX, a persistent nerve agent, and as resistant to treatment as Soman . These new agents are also resistant to treating Soman, as well as S.I.
 Records and sources say that they are apparently fanatical and prone-to-violence pro-Castro front organization . They are advancing Castro's agenda and misinformation, sources say .
 "They are an important part of his support network inside the U.S. conducting fundraising to advance their radical agenda," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Last July 13, 2001, The Los Angeles Times reported that the pastors, after returning from Cuba, were trying to cross the border with Mexico smuggling 30 pounds of ""rat poison"" made in Cuba . Now we find that last July .
 Lucius Walker is a close friend of Fidel Castro who is constantly traveling to Cuba . He is a friend of the Castro family .
 His group specializes in creating border-crossing incidents with the U.S. border authorities . He says he has been in contact with the United States since 2007 .
 Castro continues to export toxins into the U.S. that can cause harm to the American people while proclaiming friendship for them . Through his agents like Pastors for Peace and other subterfuges, Castro continues his efforts .
 On September 24 and 25, 2001, it was reported on U.S. television news that members of the suspected ring of terrorists that executed the September 11 attack were inquiring about crop-dusting airplanes in Florida .
 Intelligence sources in the United States do not question if there will be an attack, but when will it be? U.S. intelligence sources say they don't question if the attack will be, but what will be?
 The April 1961 invasion of Bay of Pigs to get rid of Castro brought on the October 1962 Missile Crisis that put the world at the brink of nuclear war . John F Kennedy's blunder of betraying the March 1961 invasion led to the 1962 missile crisis .
 This situation led to the Kennedy-Khrushchev deal for which the U.S. became Castro's protector by agreeing to prevent any foreign invasion of Cuba . And this situation was the result of the Kennedy and Khrushchev deal .
 Castro and the former Soviet Union violated their part of the Kennedy-Khrushchev deal by exporting revolutions to Latin America and Africa . Castro and Khrushchev broke the deal by sending revolutions to Africa and Latin America .
 Castro not only destroyed the once prosperous Cuba, but also extended his hands supporting terrorism throughout the American continent and abroad . Castro's Cuba was once prosperous and advanced, but he brought misery to his people .
 Castro continues training, arming and offering sanctuary to international terrorists . Castro continues to place agents and spies in the United States .
 In a 1997 report titled ""The Comandante's Reserves"" some of his money has been traced to 1959 .
 A large part of it was stolen from the Cuban people and more from his profits from drug trafficking . The Cuban people were stolen from their people, more from their profits from their drug trafficking, he says .
 Most of the money resides in Swiss bank accounts from which it is used to pay for international subversion, the purchasing of arms, the purchase of arms and agents . The money is also used to buy arms, purchase agents and spies .
 History one day will reveal how nefarious Castro has been in our hemisphere . History will reveal that Castro was in the U.S. history .
 "These must be jittery times for anyone in the military who uses the Internet," says Declan McCullagh .
 Fidel Castro hacked into Fidel Castro's computers in Cuba . Fidel Castro has been known to hack into computers in the past . Castro is known for hacking into Microsoft Outlook security holes .
 Cereijo's 1997 paper in relation to Castro's regime being actively involved in terrorism directed at U.S. computer systems was published in 1997 . Cereijos' 1997 paper was a paper on the Castro regime's involvement in terrorism .
 Castro's unpublicized-by-the-media war against the U.S. is on all fronts, says Castro . Castro's war on the United States is on every front, including in Cuba, Cuba and Mexico .
 Castro proclaimed in Iran, "There is a king in the world a thousand times stronger than the shah you overthrew, and that is the imperialist king living next to my homeland" Castro said in 2001, "Today, there is a . king in . the world"
 Castro affirmed in Iran on May 10, that Iran and Cuba, in cooperation with each other, can bring America to its knees . According to Agence France Presse, Cuba and Iran can bring the U.S. "to its knees"
 On September 22, 2001, Castro in Havana accused the United States of being ""a world military dictatorship"" attacking President Bush's resolve of defending the United states against terrorism in spite of the overwhelming support of the American people and international community .
 The Cuban president sent a warning to the United States in case the U.S. attacks Cuba in pursuit of terrorists . Apparently, foreseeing the possibility of his . ties to terrorism, his ""secret"" bacteriological and cybernetic war against the . United States was finally exposed .
 After years of appeasement, the U.S. has used this time to develop weapons of mass destruction in our backyard to be used against us . Now, after years of . appeasment, the nonsense about engagement, people-to-people cultural, scientific and sport exchanges
 The blackmail potential that this represents renders the United States and its people in grave danger and in an almost impotent situation . The U.S. is in a "almost impotent" situation, says President Obama .
 Carlos Wotzkow is co-author of the book Covering Cuba 3: Elián . He is also co-founder of Covering and Discovering Cuba . The Next Generation and the upcoming coverings of the Cuban Revolution .