 A common effect of such practices is to marginalize Third World and other subaltern points of view, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 For three decades, analysis of the Cuban missile crisis was dominated by a discursive framing produced in the ExComm, one in which Cuba was invisible . The ExComm's framing of the crisis has been dominated by an image of Cuba .
 The effort to produce a critical oral history enabled Cuban voices to challenge the myth of the crisis as a superpower affair . Cuban voices were long excluded from interpretive debates about the events of October 1962 .
 Decolonizing the crisis, and by extension the discipline itself, is not easy to do . Decolonization of the crisis is difficult to do. Decolonize the crisis and discipline itself is hard to do, experts say .
 For scholars of International Relations, the Cuban missile crisis has canonical status . Its interpretation is central to debates about decision-making, nuclear proliferation, and deterrence, amongst others .
 As commonly understood, the crisis took place between the U.S. and the Soviet Union .
 'The most dangerous crisis the world has ever seen,’’ has only two participants . In this U.S.-centered account, first articulated in the Executive Committee of the National Security Council, ‘‘’t the most dangerous . crisis the . world has
 Analysis of missile crisis has long focused on U.S. and, a lesser extent, Soviet perspectives . Cuban viewpoints have been virtually ignored .
 Cuba’s absence in the literature is not explained by its exclusion from negotiations to ‘end’’ the crisis; this is to accept the U.S. account . This is not to say, but to accept that Cuba is excluded from the negotiations .
 Despite the critical oral history project, Cuba’s marginal status persists . Nor is it explained by a lack of Cuban data, it is not explained by the lack of data . Cuba's marginal status is not a mystery, it's a problem .
 IR, as a predominantly Anglo-American social science, can acknowledge the role of subaltern others like Cuba in the making of our world, and on what terms . Drawing on postcolonial thought, in this article we examine the extent to which IR can acknowledge this .
 The effort to produce a critical oral history constitutes a postcolonial intervention in the literature . Cuban voices will challenge standard views of the crisis, says the author .
 We use Cuba’s initial absence from and subsequent appearance in standard U.S. accounts of the crisis to explore the prospects for producing better, less colonial analyses of world politics .
 Postcolonial scholars show how knowledge practices participate in the production and reproduction of international hierarchy . Postcolonial scholar argues that knowledge practices contribute to the production of hierarchy .
 We treat Cuba’s invisibility as a puzzle to be explained . Cuba's invisibility is not unusual in itself, but it's not unusual to explain, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Through analysis of the standard IR literature on the crisis, we show how scholarly practices and the practices of states together produce a hierarchical international order in which Cuba is not a significant locus of agency or knowledge . We show how scholars and states produce a hierarchy international order .
 Two meetings took place in 1987, at Hawk's Cay, Florida and Cambridge, Massachusetts, but no Cubans were present . A dominant narrative of the events of October 1962 emerged from the ExComm deliberations .
 In that narrative, Cuban actions and interests were irrelevant, making Cuba an omitted variable and generating unreliable analysis of the causes and dynamics of the crisis . The U.S. has been in the throes of a major crisis in the region since 2001 .
 We show how Cuba was excluded from analysis of the Cuban missile crisis . We examine the discursive frames through which plausible narratives about the world are assembled .
 Decolonizing the missile crisis, and by extension, is not easy to do, says David Cameron . Decolonization of missile crisis not easy, says Cameron . "Decolonizing missile crisis and discipline not easy," he says .
 Our analysis does not engage the literature’s dominant decision-making focus directly,5, nor do we seek to explain the crisis . We do not engage with the literature's dominant decision making focus directly .
 We highlight relations between IR and historiographies of world politics . We highlight the relations between the theories and models we build, and the ground those theories take for granted . We also highlight the importance of the ground the theories we build are taken for granted by IR .
 The ground upon which IR and its theories are built is shifting, making it important that we are self-conscious about the ways in which scholarly practices contribute to the invisibility of other experiences and points of view .
 We address this sociology of knowledge issue as an exercise in applied postcolonial theory . We address the issue as a sociological study of knowledge . The sociological of knowledge question is a question of postcolonial theories .
 We discuss relations between power, knowledge, and international hierarchy . We discuss the ways in which the temporal and spatial assumptions structuring conventional analysis of the Cuban missile crisis have served to reproduce relations of international hierarchy. First, we discuss the relationship between power and knowledge .
 We reconstruct the emergence of the dominant U.S. narrative of the crisis . We show how it functioned to marginalize other understandings of the events of October 1962 . We also show how the dominant United States narrative functioned in the 1960s .
 Third, we examine the attempt by Cubans participating in the critical oral history project to articulate an alternative account of the crisis in which Cuba and Cuban actions did matter . We examine the efforts of Cubans in the project to create a critical history of the Cuban crisis .
 Fourth, we consider IR’s response to the subaltern and the consequences for decolonizing the missile crisis . We also consider the consequences of decolonization of the Korean peninsula .
 Our argument concerns the dominant account and the discursive mechanisms through which alternatives have been marginalised . Our argument is that alternatives are being marginalised in the social discourse .
 Hoffmann and Carr each raised serious questions about the ways in which power shapes knowledge of the international .
 The former becomes the space of modernity, agency, knowledge, history, and power . The former is the space for modernity and agency, and the former for power .
 The discursive practices that make such Eurocentric accounts possible and plausible also make ‘other possible readings ⁄ writings of world politics’’ more difficult, hence the near invisibility of Africa in IR theory .
 As active subjects of world politics ‘the rest’s’’ appear in distorted form or simply drop from view . ‘The rest of the world politics’ are often distorted or simply dropped from view.
 Taken together, these assumptions produced an historical geography of the crisis, one in which Cuba didn't count . Cuba didn’t count .
 The Cuban missile crisis wasn’t about Cuba or Cubans; it was about the U.S. and the Soviet Union . The Cuban crisis, and by extension world politics, wasn't about Cuba, but about the United States .
 ‘The Cuban missile crisis’’ is not the only way these events can be understood . Despite this broad consensus, however, ‘‘the Cuban missile . crisis'’ isn’t only way to understand the events .
 These accounts are not easily reconciled with the dominant U.S. narrative . In important respects they are simply incompatible with it, they say .
 The accounts of Soviet and Cuban state actors highlight the contestability and partiality of the U.S. narrative . Available at the time, and since, these other accounts highlight the .
 In the United States relatively little attention has been paid to Soviet and Cuban accounts . But in the U.S. relatively little . attention was paid to the accounts of the two countries .
 Prior to 1990 the Cubans in particular remained marginal to scholarly analysis of the crisis, with serious consequences for explanation and policy prescription .
 Cuba’s marginal status in dominant U.S. narratives of the crisis is an effect of power, author says . Cuba's marginal status reflects the differential ability of social actors to shape the production of knowledge, he says .
 The prestige of U.S. political institutions, lack of documentary evidence, and insider status—as a member of the ExComm, for instance—lent prima facie credibility to accounts produced by former policy-makers .
 The dominant United States narrative has seldom confronted other accounts of the crisis directly . The dominant U.S. narrative has rarely confronted the other accounts directly .
 CNN.com's John Sutter says the White House has been accused of using a narrative to win back control of the world . When forced to do so, the typical response is to deploy a new version of that narrative . The White House responded to that narrative with a new set of
 Dominant accounts of events such as international crises generally exclude a variety of subaltern voices . Dominant account of events like international crises often exclude subaltern views . Dominants accounts of these events are often dominated by dominant accounts, such as that of Vladimir Putin .
 Postcolonial scholars rewrite colonial accounts by attending to the experience of the subaltern . The subaltern is a subaltern to the British colonial experience, postcolonial scholars say .
 Scholars stress the need to seek out new sources, and to read old ones in new ways . This is no easy task (Alcoff 1991; Spivak 1988) Scholars to stress need to find new sources .
 Like the oral history project, these efforts generate new data . The aim is not just more facts but more facts as if some day, having them all, we can write definitive accounts of the past .
 Postcolonial thought seeks new ways to make sense of the facts, so to contest or transform colonial fields of knowledge and the wider relations .
 Postcolonial analysis uses the periphery to throw light on the core, showing how dominant understandings and practices take on different meaning when viewed through subaltern eyes . Engaging subaltern knowledges, postcolonial analysis employs subaltern knowledge .
 Relations are both context and, often, cause of events such as the missile crisis . These relations are often context and cause of crises such as this one .
 Postcolonialism attends to the political economies of value and force through which international hierarchies are produced and maintained . Beyond critique of representational practices and their mystifying and ideological effects .
 Subaltern knowledge provides a vantage point from which to critique both dominant and subordinated understandings (cf. The Subaltern Knowledge of the World) is critical of dominant understandings and subaltern knowledge .
 Postcolonial critique begins with the subaltern voice but it aspires to overturn the coloniality of power . Postcolonial critiques begin with subaltern voices, but it aims to overturn colonial power .
 In allowing Cubans to speak in their own voice and challenge the standard U.S. account of the missile crisis, the oral history project effects a postcolonial intervention, albeit a limited and potentially problematic one . In allowing the Cuban people to speak, the project is a "postcolonial
 Making space for subaltern agency is not inherently postcolonial; it depends on what terms agency is acknowledged . Making space is not necessarily postcolonial, but it's important to make space for agency acknowledged .
 The oral history project risks a neo-colonial relation with the Cubans, turning them into a kind of native informant . Taking for granted the power relations that shape its context means the project risks taking for granted .
 Castro was a nationalist internationalist, for example, Che Guevara a proletarian one, Castro says . Castro was an internationalist and a socialist, he says. Castro was also a Marxist, he adds .
 Decolonizing the crisis is not equivalent to taking Cuban state claims at face value . Decolonization is not the same thing as taking Cuban claims to face value, says Nelson Mandela . Mandela: "Decolonizing is not a solution to the Cuban crisis"
 Crises impact different subjects in different ways, reproducing or transforming hierarchies of diverse kind . Crises reproduce or transform hierarchies in diverse kind. Crises are different subjects of different ways .
 Letting a subaltern speak is only the first step in a postcolonial critique . Letting people speak is not the only step for a post-colonial critique. Letting subalterns speak is a first step to a post colonial critique .
 South Asian peasants under the British are often illiterate, leaving only indirect traces of their practices in the texts of colonial rule .
 Modern institutions like the state are produced through, and in turn generate, numerous texts of diverse kinds . Modern institutions such as the state produce, and turn themselves into texts like that of diverse types .
 Cuba can and does speak, whether in the form of a state actor such as Castro or the bureaucratic practices that give it form, it does . Whether in the state actor or the bureaucracy, Cuba can speak, Cuba does speak .
 In certain respects, the typical referents of subaltern studies are not like the Cuban state . In some respects, then, then-Cuban state is not like that of Cuba .
 Neither an illiterate South Asian peasant nor a famously garrulous Cuban state actor has the power to narrate events in ways that effectively contest dominant accounts . Neither has the . power to effectively challenge dominant accounts.
 Cuba’s relation to the U.S. is that of a subaltern, the country's relationship with the United States is asymmetric . This asymmetry means Cuba's relationship to the United. Cuba's relations to the US are that of an alternative, the Cuban government says
 This question leads to a focus on discursive mechanisms of knowledge production . The ExComm account of the crisis emerges from the ExComm and serves as the basis for subsequent interpretation and analysis .
 The framing of Cuba in the ExComm drew on a set of background assumptions and representations, on a particular historical geography of world politics, through which the U.S. constituted its international relations .
 In this section we trace those practices, showing the consequences for Cuba and U.S.-Cuban relations . In the section of this section, we trace some of those practices .
 Cuba was the place in which missiles were deployed by the Soviet Union and from which they had to be removed by the United States . The drama was thus between the U.S. and the . Soviet Union .
 U.S. actions during the Cuban crisis were directed against a Soviet threat in Cuba . The crisis was centered on a possible invasion of Cuba by the United States .
 Through its practices during the crisis the U.S. re-enacted a particular set of international hierarchies between itself, the Soviet Union, and Cuba .
 The United States had both the right and the responsibility to deploy its power to defend the Free World from its enemies . As such, the U.S. had both a right and responsibility to use its power against its enemies.
 It was represented as both dangerous and powerful, a force to be taken seriously . It was also represented as a force that was taken seriously in the world .
 Under Batista, Cuba was a minor satellite, ally, or client of sorts, but not very important . Cuba was not a major client of the Batista regime, but a major ally .
 After the 1959 revolution a starker U.S.-Cuba hierarchy emerged . Cuba came to be represented as a communist state . Cuba was represented as the communist state of Cuba .
 Under Soviet influence, Cuba supported revolutionary movements elsewhere in Latin America, threatening regional peace and stability . Cuba's support for revolutionary movements threatened regional peace, stability .
 The U.S. resorted to increasingly harsh economic and political pressure as well as force in Cuba . In response to the Bay of Pigs invasion, the United States resorted to covert and overt action .
 Cuba was rendered insignificant and virtually invisible. Simultaneously, however, Cuba was virtually invisible . Cuba was left virtually invisible in the United States .
 The U.S. constructed a Cuba whose concerns could be ignored . The United States thus constructed a Cuban government whose concerns were ignored .
 Cuba’s absence from the missile crisis and the subsequent myth, then, were made possible by and served to re-enact Cuba's subordinate position on the hierarchy of states . The myth, the myth of the Cuban missile crisis, was made possible and made possible .
 These hierarchies were variously enacted by the U.S. during the events of October 1962 . The hierarchies of hierarchies have been enacted in the United States .
 U.S. decision-makers determined they had a right to conduct surveillance over Cuba . Cuba is a key part of the Cuban people's history .
 As it entailed a violation of Cuban airspace, this U.S. ‘right’’ in fact abrogated Cuban sovereignty,’s lawyer says .
 The U.S. dictated to the Soviet Union and Cuba what weapons they could deploy, and where . The United States further enacted this hierarchy by dictating to the Soviets and Cuba .
 In 1962, the U.S. had significant extra-territorial military deployments, including nuclear weapons in Italy and Turkey . In 1962 the United States had significant . military deployments . The United States might have taken to justify reciprocal measures .
 The United States succeeded in determining that the Soviet Union could not station nuclear weapons in Cuba . The U.S. also ruled that Cuba could not have nuclear or indeed any ‘offensive’’ weapons at all .
 For Cuban views of these relations, see Castro in Blight, Allyn, and Welch , 120 . For Cuban view of these ties, see Cuban views, or read Castro's book "Castro"
 Most U.S. treatments of the missile crisis in the U.K. show how firmly entrenched this hierarchy is in foreign policy and scholarly discourse . That this has seemed unexceptional, exciting virtually no comment by United States decision-makers .
 Classic early accounts offered by participants such as Arthur Schlesinger , Theodore Sorenson and Robert Kennedy closely follow the ExComm narrative .
 Schlesinger’s chapters on the crisis ignore Cuba, treating it merely as the site of the conflict . For example, except for a brief discussion of whether the decision to deploy the missiles was Soviet or Cuban, there is no discussion .
 In 1971, Graham Allison’s influential Essence of Decision began the preoccupation with the missile crisis as a canonical instance of crisis decision-making .
 Despite being logically and empirically necessary to his analysis—how else can the quality of U.S. choices be judged?—Cuban decision-making is ignored .
 A similar lack in the United States and the Soviet Union did not slow growth of secondary crisis literature . Although justified by lack of access to Cuban data, the U.S. and Soviet Union didn't slow growth .
 The most striking omission is Allison’s failure to consider how or why the Cubans were defined out of the crisis, the authors say . Allison and others have failed to look at how the Cuban crisis was defined .
 Early writings on an event like the missile crisis are highly politicized and constitute part of the event itself . Early writings about the event are very politicized, as are early writings .
 Standard United States analyses of the missile crisis before the 1990s remain ensconced in this heroic moment . Standard U.S. analyses of missile crisis in the 1980s remain in doubt .
 Such analyses continue to take part in the politics of the events themselves . Intentionally or not, such analyses still play a role in politics of events themselves, such as terrorism .
 U.S. state officials constructed narratives during and after the crisis by state officials, and members of the ExComm, in particular . They do so, first, by adopting the categories and tropes put into place by United States decision makers in descriptions and policy practices at the time, and
 Scholarly practices participate in Cuba’s continuing unequal encounter with the U.S. The United States is Cuba's most powerful ally in the world .
 The Cuban missile crisis and relations of hierarchy enacted in it continue well beyond the formal resolution of the crisis in 1962 .
 In striking parallels to the heroic myth of the missile crisis, Guha’s case, the assumptions of policy are built into the historical record and become the taken-for-granted empirical data on which scholarly accounts are produced . Guha's case is a striking parallel to the
 Power is both external to historical narrative and constitutive of it, says historian . Power is inscribed in the narrative and in the sources on which it draws, he says .
 Historians participate in struggles it claims only to describe or explain . The resulting historiography thus participates in struggles that it claims to describe, explain .
 Castro and Cuba are present in the heroic myth but always on someone else’s terms, largely those of U.S. policy-makers in 1962 . Castro is present in Castro's heroic myth, but never on the terms of the Cuban government . Castro was present in Cuba but
 Cuba’s marginalization in the myth obscures the pre-October 1962 origins of the crisis in a persistent pattern of U.S. aggression and subversion of the Cuban revolution . The United States has been involved in a pattern of United States aggression, subversion .
 When Cuban state actors like Castro try to raise issues like U.S. aggression, Cuban sovereignty, or Soviet irresolution, they are regularly ignored, mocked, or misinterpreted . The Cuban state actor is regularly ignored or mocked by the United States .
 The subaltern are spoken for in ways that deny their historical agency and the legitimacy of their concerns, the author says . They are valorizing conceptions of the world in which a benevolent U.S. seeks to liberate the Cuban people from the malign influence of an alien Moscow-
 Such representations participate, more or less directly, in projects of colonial and neo-colonial ordering . Such representations, such representations, participate in colonial projects such as colonial orders .
 In 1989, 1991, and 1992 the heroic missile crisis myth was challenged . U.S. and Soviet scholars and decision-makers sat down with their Cuban counterparts to produce an oral history .
 In postcolonial terms, this was a moment when the subaltern spoke, when the Cubans could interrogate the crisis myth . This was the moment for Cubans to interrogate their crisis myth, says CNN's John Sutter .
 As we argue below, despite generating new insights into the missile crisis, as a result of micro-practices that continue to marginalize the subaltern voice or explain it away, the oral history project largely fails of its postcolonial promise .
 In this and the next section we examine how IR reacted to Cuban challenges to the missile crisis myth . The next section will examine the IR reaction to the Cuban missile crisis .
 Cuba was absent from the first two meetings in 1987, replicating the heroic myth by ignoring Cuba and its concerns . Unsurprisingly, Cuba was not in attendance at the 1987 meetings .
 In the October crisis narrative, responsibility rests squarely with the U.S. responsibility for the crisis rests with the United States .
 The crisis follows concerted U.S. hostility towards the Cuban revolution . It is a result of Cuban efforts, with Soviet help, to protect Cuba against an expected United States invasion, a larger Bay of Pigs .
 In meetings, these points were central to Cuban accounts of the crisis . In the meetings, the Cuban government said: "These points are central to our accounts of this crisis"
 The subaltern rejected Cold War articulations of Cuba that marginalized Cuban agency . Subaltern rejects Cold War policies that marginalized agency .
 In orthodox U.S. accounts, Soviet First Deputy Premier Anastas Mikoyan’s visit to Cuba in March 1960 signals the subordination of the Cuban revolution to Moscow and prompts Eisenhower to allow the CIA to commence covert operations . In orthodox United States accounts, Mikoy
 The subaltern challenged the missile crisis myth by rejecting the spatial and temporal framing that made Cuba and U.S. imperialism invisible . Consistent with a postcolonial analysis, the subaltern challenges the myth .
 In Antigua, Risquet framed the crisis similarly, noting how Cuba was excluded from the peace conference that ended the Spanish-American War . In Cuban accounts, the war was the Spanish Cuban War, in Cuban accounts .
 This is a very different view of the missile crisis . The spatial and temporal framing is shifted from the 13 days of heroic myth to a century of U.S.-Cuban interaction, punctuated by repeated United States interventions .
 This history is not heroic, stressing instead imperial power and its meaning for the subaltern . This history stresses imperial power, stressing imperial power .
 For the Cubans, the missile crisis was about the sovereign rights of small states in a world dominated by great powers . For the Cuban people, it was about their sovereign rights . The missile crisis is about the sovereignty of a small state .
 It was about imperial power and competition, and the corresponding need to build laws and institutions that defend the independence of small states . It was also about the need to defend small states from imperial power, writes David Cameron .
 This is perhaps clearest in Cuban accounts of the ‘lessons’’ of the crisis . The Cuban government has been accused of failing to act in the past .
 This interest leads to the usual focus on crisis decision-making and deterrence, for example . This interest is often focused on crisis decisions and deterrence . But this interest has led to an interest in crisis decision making .
 Getting into the room was not the end of Cuban problems in making themselves heard . Responding to the Subaltern was the Cuban government's response to the subaltern .
 Cuban contributions had to be read in light of contemporary politics, editors say . Cuban contributions, they say, must be taken into account today's political climate .
 U.S. participants in the meetings responded to Cuban articulations of an alternative historical geography of the crisis as political as political . The United States responded in two ways, including discounting Cuban articulation of a new historical geography .
 First, they translated the subaltern voice into the social scientific language of misperception . Second, they offered their own account of the history of U.S.-Cuban relations .
 These responses, we show, effectively muffle or distort what the subaltern was saying, while reproducing key elements of the conventional crisis narrative . We show that these responses effectively muffled or distort . These responses effectively distort or distort subalterns' views, we say .
 Translating the subaltern voice into the language of misperception produced a causal and moral equivalence between the U.S. and Cuba . The United States and Cuba have been at odds for decades .
 Had U.S. policy makers been Cuban policy makers, they too would have expected an invasion, Cuban officials say .
 Determining the threat to Cuba is thus reduced to a simple binary—intent to invade or not . Determinating the threat is therefore reduced to an easy binary: intent to invade . The threat is a binary, whether the U.S. will invade or whether it will invade
 Cuban and Soviet fears of an invasion were based on misperceptions . In the absence of such intentions, the fears of invasion were not based on real intentions . The Soviet-Cuban fears of a Soviet invasion were unfounded .
 Translating the subaltern voice in these terms mutes claims that the United States was responsible for the crisis, making it an unintended consequence of U.S., Soviet, and Cuban actions . The language is used to make it clear that the crisis was not caused by the U.
 As in a postcolonial analysis, the easy slide into relativism is rejected by locating these competing accounts in the context of a particular configuration of power . As in the postcolonial . analysis, this is rejected as a result of the . challenge to relativism .
 Framing the crisis in terms of misperception, mutual or otherwise, elides U.S. imperialism and the systematic character of post-1959 efforts to change the Cuban government . The role of United States aggression is reduced while the failure to launch an invasion is exaggerated .
 Over the course of the project its organizers grew more receptive to subaltern claims . The project's organizers were more receptive than initially expected .
 Blight, Allyn, Welch included a history of U.S.-Cuban relations, before and after 1898, in the transcripts of the meeting .
 Allyn, Allyn and Welch accept a key subaltern claim and their history pushes in post-colonial directions .
 They trace patterns of racism, paternalism, and imperial desire that shaped U.S. policy towards Cuba . These policies produced resentment these policies produced on the island, they say .
 Making sense of the U.S. role in the world requires seeing it as others do . The United States has a unique relationship with the world, and it's important to make sense of it .
 Blight, Allyn, Welch reject the Cuban view of the crisis . In other ways, however, they reject the view of Cuba .
 In Moscow, Antigua, and Havana the Cubans stressed the continuities in U.S. relations with Cuba .
 Blight, Allyn, and Welch offer a history of discontinuity . In contrast, Blight and Allyn offer a long history of continuity .
 Classical realist analysis works similarly while differing sharply in other ways . Classical realists differ sharply from realists in their analysis of the world .
 Imperialism only exists if consciously present in the minds of U.S. policy makers . Imperialism is only if there is awareness that it exists in the United States policy makers' minds .
 Taking U.S. foreign policy makers at their word, United States Cold War policy is presented as discontinuous with what had gone before .
 Rejecting that history requires more than simply believing what U.S. policy makers say . Rejects that history must be re-learned from history .
 It requires a comparative analysis of U.S.-Cuban relations before, during, and after the Cold War . Minimally, it requires an analysis of the relationship between the two countries .
 Such an analysis undermines claims of discontinuity in U.S. policy towards Cuba . Consistent with the subaltern view, such an analysis could undermine claims that such a change in policy is not necessary .
 The United States intervened militarily in Cuba in 1906, 1909, 1912, 1912 and 1917–1921 . It supported or welcomed military coups in 1934 and 1952 . The U.S. intervened in Cuba four times in the last century .
 Comparative analysis of U.S. reactions to social revolution in Mexico, Cuba, Bolivia, and Guatemala, as well as in Chile and Nicaragua, highlights the consistency of United States policy towards Latin America .
 From each of these otherwise very different theoretical perspectives, then, continuity not discontinuity defines the longer history of U.S.-Cuban and .U.S. and . Latin American policy .
 Justifications for intervention shift across the Cold War divide but relations of hierarchy persist . The U.S. has been involved in the Middle East for decades, but it's not clear why .
 A Cold War narrative of world politics obscures such patterns and provides the framework within which subaltern claims are interpreted and dismissed, says John Defterios .
 Blight, Allyn, and Welch explain the crisis in the same Cold War terms as the Eisenhower and Kennedy administrations . Their history thus provides a ‘proper education’’ in which the subaltern and its account of the crisis are explained away .
 In this section we examine how IR has responded to the critical oral history project’s postcolonial intervention . The Discipline and the Subaltern Voice is discussed in this section . IR has published a series of critical oral histories in response to the project .
 The subaltern voice was loud and clear in Moscow, Antigua and Havana . Despite efforts to speak for the Cubans in the meetings and in editorial commentary, Cubans were not speaking for them .
 Recovery of Cuban agency—in practice quite rare, is reproduced a conventional Cold War historical geography in which the global south is marginalised . Recovery of Cuba agency has reproduced a Cold War history of marginalising the south .
 The subaltern account of the crisis linked it to U.S. interventions in Latin America and elsewhere before, during and after the Cold War . Subaltern account: The crisis was linked to United States interventions .
 A clear indicator of whether or not the subaltern voice has been heard then is the treatment of U.S. imperialism . The treatment of the United States imperialism is a clear indicator, he says .
 Most IR scholars define imperialism narrowly in geopolitical terms, as deliberate policies of foreign conquest and rule . Most IR scholar defines imperialism narrowly as a deliberate policy to conquer and rule the world .
 In Lebow and Stein’s analysis of the crisis, imperialism is not mentioned . Cuba is compared with the U.S.-Soviet crisis over the Israel-Egypt war of 1973, they say .
 The updated edition of Essence of Decision cites imperialism only in reference to bureaucratic expansion . The updated version of this edition of the magazine cites only the fact that imperialism is not imperialism .
 When invoked, imperialism as political strategy is usually confined to an historical past with little significance for the crisis . When invoked it is often confined to the historical past, it is usually limited to a historical past . This is not the case of imperialism as a political strategy .
 Conceiving of the crisis in these terms limits the oral history project’s postcolonial potential . Conceiving the crisis of postcolonial crisis in terms of the project's potential .
 Both North American and Cuban scholars drew lessons from both sides of the world . This is evident, for example, in the lessons drawn by both North and Cuba scholars .
 The problem is that the North Americans and the Cubans simply do not understand each other . The Cuban government has been criticized for its lack of transparency in Cuba .
 As British colonial officials also learned, it is important to know what the peasants are thinking, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The key lesson of the crisis is the need for better international laws and institutions to defend small-state sovereignty . For the Cubans, the key lesson is to better international law and institutions, writes CNN's John Sutter .
 Cuba only reinforces dominant realist and state-centric views of the international . After Moscow, Antigua, and Havana, great powers and small states can draw new, different lessons from the crisis .
 When read through this literature the novelty of the oral history project’s findings is reduced . The novelty of this literature is reduced by reading through the literature .
 The origins of the crisis, argues Thomas Paterson, ‘derived largely from the U.S. campaign to quash the Cuban Revolution.’
 This prompts questions about relations between the Cuban revolution and the Cold War assumed away in the heroic myth . It helps make sense of Soviet-Cuban conflict both during and after the crisis, writes David Perry .
 The Cold War raises questions about how the Cold War relates to U.S. imperial history . It also raises questions on how it relates to other imperial histories .
 Cold War’s east-west logic is not dismissed but de-centered , initially in favour of colonial and imperial relations . The Cold War's east-east logic was not dismissed . It is not the same as that of the Cold War .
 The global south becomes integral to how we conceive of the international . The 'global south' is an integral part of the global world's identity .
 Attention shifts from the policies of great powers to social relations through which they and other subjects of global life are connected, constituted, and produced . Attention shifts to the social relations of the world's great powers .
 Like postcolonial scholars, revisionists show how ‘the different meanings, social myths, and cultural self-understandings constitutive of state and national identities’ are shaped by colonial and imperial relations . This is contentious, in 1962 and since .
 Greg Grandin argues the Cold War in Latin America was not just a great power conflict or a contest between political liberalism and Soviet communism . Grandin: The Cold War wasn't just a political conflict, it was a political struggle .
 The missile crisis is a moment in this struggle, conducted within and across state boundaries . Located in structures of imperialism centered on the United States, the missile crisis was a moment of this struggle .
 The parallels between Cuban and revisionist accounts of the crisis are striking and, to our knowledge, unremarked . The parallels are striking, and, we know, are not surprising .
 Lebow and Stein note Paterson’s ‘neo-revisionist’’ argument, which makes U.S.-Cuban relations central to the crisis, without engaging it . In a conventional Cold War framing, for example, the authors say Paterson
 For three decades Castro and Cuba were practically invisible in a vast body of research on the Cuban missile crisis . For decades, the Cuban crisis was virtually invisible in the research on Cuban missile crises .
 Analysis of critical oral history project as a postcolonial intervention in the literature shows IR has responded to the subaltern voice . Analysis of the project shows IR responded to subaltern voices in literature, says author .
 It is no longer plausible to discuss the crisis without taking Cuban agency into account . Cuban agency is key to the solution to the Cuban crisis, Cuban president says .
 IR’s too frequent failure to take the subaltern seriously produces blind spots in analysis of world politics . IR has a blind spot in its approach to world politics, as postcolonial scholars show, .
 Faced with nuclear proliferation and a war on terror fought mostly outside IR’s North Atlantic homelands, the wider relevance of our argument is obvious . It is not only the subaltern who has an interest— albeit rather different—in decolonizing the crisis, says the
 It's sobering to reflect on how much remains to be done to decolonize the Cuban missile crisis . More than a decade after the meeting in Havana at which the subaltern spoke so clearly, however, it is sobering .
 If our goal is to decolonize the discipline, so to produce better accounts of the world, we still have a long way to go . We still have to decourage the discipline of producing a better account of events in the world .
 On the Ground with the American Military, from Mongolia to the Philippines to Iraq and Beyond. On the ground with the U.S. military, from the Philippines .
 Latin American program, Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars, is based in Washington, DC . Latin American Program is based at the Wilson Center .
 Timothy J. White, Timothy J., Gregory P Nowell, Robert Hager, and Ronald W Cox. White. Nowell. Cox. Cox . Cox: White, White, Cox, Nowell . Cox, Hager and Hager. White . Cox .