 President Kennedy was locked in a test of wills with Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev over missiles in Cuba . Forty years ago, President John F Kennedy was . locked in test of . wills with . Soviet premier Khrushchevitch over missiles .
 The Cuban missile crisis has come to be the ultimate symbol of presidential resolve and courage . Memorialized in both film and print, the crisis has become a symbol of American resolve .
 JFK portrayed as a resolute and unflinching commander in chief . In the 1974 movie ""The Missiles of October"" and the more recent movie ""Thirteen Days,"" starring Kevin Costner, JFK is portrayed as the commander in charge . JFK was portrayed as an unflinch
 Kennedy's handling of the crisis has captured the popular imagination, making him perhaps the most potent symbol of Cold War courage and resolve . In short, Kennedy's handled the crisis captured the public imagination . He is perhaps the best symbol of the Cold War of courage .
 Now that the Soviet archives have been opened, it's time to retire JFK as Cold War hero . JFK was a hero of the Cold War for the U.S. during his administration .
 The mantle should be passed to Ronald Reagan who, according to those archives, was the president they most respected and feared . Instead of Reagan, Reagan should be remembered as the president of the people they most feared .
 Most portrayals of the Cuban missile crisis begin with the secret placement of Soviet missiles in Cuba . Kennedy's insistence that they be removed from Cuba led to the crisis . Kennedy insisted that the missiles be removed .
 JFK first stepped into the Oval Office in 1961 . JFK was the first President of the White House to hold office . JFK's White House was inaugurated in 1963 .
 The Kremlin regarded Kennedy as a ""typical pragmatist,"" who would change his position and accommodate adversaries if it served his interests . Kennedy was considered a "typical pragmatist"
 Khrushchev went so far as to delay the release of American U-2 pilot Gary Francis Powers, who was being held in prison after being shot down on a spy mission over the Soviet Union, until after the election .
 In March 1961, Communist guerrillas armed with new shipments of Soviet weapons advanced deep into the eastern reaches of Laos, which borders Vietnam . The Laos-Vietnam border crossed into Vietnam in 1961 .
 The peaceful country's neutrality was supposedly guaranteed by the 1954 Geneva Accords . The North Vietnamese wanted to use the country as a supply line for their forces fighting in the south . The peace treaty was supposed to guarantee neutrality .
 In short order they occupied Eastern Laos and began developing what came to be called the Ho Chi Minh Trail to arm their forces fighting in South Vietnam . The trail was developed in order to arm the Vietnamese army fighting in Vietnam .
 In Washington, Kennedy was apprised of the situation and elected to do nothing . Kennedy was in Washington, D.C., when he was in power .
 A large force of Cuban exiles began landing on the beaches of Cuba, near the so-called Bay of Pigs . One month later, a large force began landing in Cuba . The Bay of the Pigs was the site of the Cuban invasion of Cuba in 1961 .
 They were trained and equipped by the CIA with the intent of liberating the country from Fidel Castro . They had been trained and . equipped by . the CIA .
 When the exiles hit the beaches they did so without American air or naval support . The exiles had to do so without U.S. air or navy support .
 A few months later, Soviet bloc leaders decided to begin construction on the Berlin Wall to stem the flow of refugees into West Berlin . The Wall was built to stem migration of refugees to West Berlin from the Soviet bloc .
 He called up the reserves, sent troops to Europe, and proposed a substantial increase in the military budget . President Obama has called up reserves and sent troops into Europe .
 In the Kremlin, the combination of Kennedy's tough words and lack of action was seen as weakness and fear . Kennedy's words were seen as weak and fear, according to the Kremlin .
 For Nikita Khrushchev, failure at the Bay of Pigs was proof that he could have things his way with the young president . Kennedy's failure was proof of the Communist successes in Laos and Berlin, he says .
 In short, Kennedy was encouraging Khrushchev to pursue what would become his most dangerous gambit . Kennedy was encouraged to pursue the gambit, and it would be a dangerous move .
 In May 1962, Khrushchev announced to the Politburo his secret plan to put Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba . The plan was a secret Soviet plan .
 Fidel Castro was eager for the missiles because they would deter another Bay of Pigs-type invasion . Fidel Castro wanted the missiles to deter a similar invasion of Cuba .
 Khrushchev figured if he could pull off, it would shift the balance in the arms competition . His shorter-range ballistic missiles would now be capable of reaching the U.S. He wanted to shift balance in arms competition with the United States .
 The Soviet premier, seemingly always the gambler, was hoping to build the missile sites before the U.S. even detected them . The sites would be built before the United States even detected .
 On the chance that they were discovered, he believed that Kennedy might fear a confrontation and not take any substantial action . He believed that he feared a confrontation .
 Soviet transport ships brought material and specialists to Cuba where construction crews busily worked on the missile batteries . The missile batteries were built in Cuba .
 The plan seemed to be going as Khrushchev hoped, until an American U-2 spy plane flying over the island uncovered the scheme . The plan was uncovered by the U.S. Air Force in the 1960s .
 The president ordered an immediate naval blockade of Cuba and regular U-2 flights to monitor the situation . The president also ordered the president to impose a U.2-flagged U.S. flight to Cuba .
 Remove the missiles and the personnel to man them or military action is imminent . Remove the missile and personnel from the U.S. arsenal or face a military response .
 Khrushchev knew the strategic situation favored the U.S. He was mulling over the situation in his Kremlin office . The situation in the 1960s was considered a favorable one for Russia .
 Cuba was just off the American coastline while the Soviet Union was halfway around the world . Not only did America have nuclear superiority, Cuba was off the U.S. coastline .
 Kennedy, contrary to the steely determination portrayed in the movies, was all too willing to deal . Kennedy was not a steely fighter, but he was willing to take on the challenge .
 Fidel Castro was angered by any suggestion that the missiles be pulled out . Castro demanded a pledge that the U.S. would never invade Cuba again .
 U.S. nuclear missiles in Turkey, which were pointed at Soviet forces, were removed as well . And for good measure, he wanted to remove the missiles from Turkey, also removed .
 Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin met with Attorney General Robert F Kennedy, who was serving as a confidant for his brother . The meeting took place at the Justice Department on October 27, 1962, in Washington .
 Moscow might have been negotiating from a weak position, but Bobby Kennedy didn't press the matter . Bobby Kennedy did not press the issue, but he didn't want to .
 His brother was prepared to make a no invasion pledge, Dobrynin said . He would pull the Jupiter missiles out of Turkey, he said .
 The missiles would need to be withdrawn under some pretext and without consulting NATO allies . NATO allies would have to decide if they want to pull missiles .
 Dobrynin agreed to the secret bargain and it was never mentioned in public . The secret deal was never discussed in public and never mentioned publicly .
 Bobby Kennedy was so sensitive about the secret deal involving missiles in Turkey that when his diary of the crisis was later published as ""Thirteen Days," the editor of the book, Ted Sorensen, purposely deleted any mention of the deal .
 Ronald Reagan spent much of October 1962 watching closely the duel between Kennedy and Khrushchev . Reagan spent the day in Washington, DC, watching the events .
 Reagan had always had his doubts about Kennedy, fearing that he was not up to meeting the Soviet challenge . Reagan feared that he would not be able to deal with the Soviet Union .
 He was surrounded by ""well-meaning and misguided people" who failed to understand the threat, he said . He said: "Well-meaning people" failed to see the threat .
 Reagan also astutely noted that by not challenging the Communist move into Laos, Kennedy was signaling his willingness to "drink the bitter cup of capitulation" in Southeast Asia . Reagan: "By not challenging his . challenge in Laos, he signaled his willingness . to drink the bitter
 Reagan made some pointed suggestions about what U.S. should do next after the Cuban missile crisis .
 Reagan wrote that the goal should be not to coexist with communism but to defeat it . The Kennedy administration began pursuing arms control agreements, Reagan wrote .
 Crank up the arms race, he advised in early 1963; there was no way Moscow could keep up . Crank it up, he said, in 1963, and there was 'no way' Moscow could be kept up .
 When Reagan announced for the presidency years later, in 1979, the KGB wrote a secret analysis of Reagan the man . The KGB wrote the analysis when Reagan announced that he would run for president .
 Reagan outlined ambitious plans to undermine and defeat the Soviet Union in a series of secret directives . Reagan was elected president of the United States in 1986 .
 Nothing quite like it had ever been undertaken in the history of the Cold War . "Nothing quite like a project like this was ever undertaken," says the author .
 Using economic, military, and psychological pressure, he developed a plan to defeat the Soviet empire . The plan was designed to use economic and military pressure to defeat Russia .
 He enacted the largest peacetime military build-up in American history, even though the plan was opposed by the majority of his cabinet .
 Early in his administration, William P Clark and Tom Reed came to him to explain the super-secret Continuity of Government program .
 COG was a plan to evacuate the president from the White House in the event of a nuclear war . In place since the Eisenhower administration, COG plans have been in place since then .
 Both Clark and Reed could sense Reagan's discomfort as they described the program, particularly the part about being hustled away on a helicopter to a safe location . Reagan was rushed away from the scene in a helicopter .
 Two men left and were forced to revise America's nuclear war-fighting plans . The two men left the U.S. to revise its nuclear war plans .
 Even during the heights of Gorbymania, there was very little change in the substance of his policies . Even during Gorbymania, there were very little changes in his policies, says Simon Cowan .
 President Reagan was quite simply immovable, much to the frustration of the Kremlin . Reagan was simply unstoppable, and the Kremlin was frustrated .
 How we choose to look at the Cold War will determine how we face the strategic challenges of the war on terrorism, says Peter Bergen . Bergen: The Cold War was a Cold War of Cold War .
 By studying Reagan, we can learn how to forge a strategy of victory and to defeat our enemies . Reagan's strategy can be learned from Reagan's book, "The Reagan Doctrine"
 40th anniversary reruns of 'Thirteen Days' with images of a resolute JFK . Don't imagine that you are watching the apotheosis of Cold War toughness, says JFK .
 Think back instead of Gdansk, Poland, on a rainy day in September 1990 . Think back to Gdans, Poland: "Think back to September 1990"
 This article was first published by the Weekly Standard and is reprinted with permission from the publisher of this article .
 Kennedy made mistakes and clearly was challenged in dealing with Khrushev . Kennedy's handling of the Soviet Union in the 1960s was a mistake .
 We should remember that Kennedy was dealing with the Soviet Union near the zenith of it's power . We should also remember that JFK faced a Soviet Union during the height of its power .
 Reagan lucked out in having to deal with a weakened Soviet Union on the verge of collapsing under it's own weight . Reagan was a tired old man who lucked .