 Kennedy was committed to the rapid economic development of the newly organized nations in Africa and Asia . However, his policies also led to implementing the Bay of Pigs invasion and escalation of the Vietnam War .
 From election day until late December 1960, John F Kennedy, aided especially by his brother Robert F. Kennedy, selected his foreign policy leaders . The Kennedys selected their foreign policy team from election day to December 1960 .
 Kennedy shifted away from Eisenhower's concern for budget deficits caused by military spending . At the same time, he ordered a massive build-up of the nuclear arsenal to establish superiority over Soviet Union .
 In January 1961, Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev declared his support for wars of national liberation . Adzhubey promised to publish the full text in Izvestiya and Kennedy publicly expressed his appreciation .
 Khrushchev tended to attribute the responsibility for the invasion not to Kennedy, but to his subordinates . Kennedy's main goal was to suggest a retraction from the Cold War .
 The United States State Department prepared several papers for Kennedy on how to approach Khrushchev . Since he was already thinking about putting up a wall in Berlin, he was encouraged to continue down this path . The U.S. State Department was prepared to talk to the Soviet leader .
 Diplomatic recognition of China remained out of the question as a crucial veto power on the UN Security Council was held by America's ally on Taiwan . Mao Zedong castigated Khrushchev's ""capitulation"" in the Cuban crisis .
 On October 22, 1962, a Soviet missile unauthorizedly downed a United States Lockheed U-2 reconnaissance aircraft over Cuba, killing the pilot Rudolf Anderson . Kennedy managed to preserve restraint when he announced the quarantine and demanded removal of Soviet missiles .
 The crisis was defused largely through a backchannel communication the Kennedy administration had set up with Soviet spy Georgi Bolshakov . As a result of the crisis, Kennedy's government faced a dramatic increase in the defense budget .
 On June 26, 1963, the President arrived in West Berlin and visited Checkpoint Charlie . However, this only partially alleviated the payments issue . The payments were only partially successful .
 Kennedy was the first to introduce the concept of a 'special relationship' between the U.S. and Israel in 1962 . Describing the protection of Israel as a moral and national commitment, he was also the first president to extend the first informal security guarantees .
 Kennedy allowed the sale to Israel of advanced U.S. weaponry in 1963 . Kennedy also provided diplomatic support for Israeli policies which were opposed by Arab neighbours .
 David Ben-Gurion had publicly assured the U.S. that Israel did not plan to develop nuclear weapons . Kennedy tried unsuccessfully to persuade Israel to permit some qualified expert to visit Dimona .
 The reason was the threat to Iraqi oil installations, not fear of a communist takeover . The overthrow of the Iraqi monarchy on July 14, 1958, resulted in the declaration of a republican government .
 The Kennedy administration's initial response to the stand-off was motivated by the desire to project an image of the U.S. as a progressive anti-colonial power trying to work productively with Arab nationalism .
 In December 1961, Qasim's government passed Public Law 80, which restricted the British-owned Iraq Petroleum Company 's concessionary holding to those areas in which oil was actually being produced, effectively expropriating 99.5% of the IPC concession . The United States repeatedly
 The new U.S. ambassador to Iraq, Robert C Strong, informed al-Bakr of a Barzani peace proposal delivered to the United States consul in Tabriz on August 25 . In response to the proposal, al-bakr asked why the message had
 President McNamara appointed Defense Secretary McNamara and General Taylor to a Vietnam mission in another effort to synchronize information and formulation of policy . The president was unaware that the two men were at such odds that they had not spoken to each other on return flight .
 In meetings with McNamara, Taylor, and Lodge, Diem again refused to agree to governing measures . The vice president, Nguyen Ngoc Tho, obliterated Taylor's information that the military was succeeding in the countryside .
 In late October, intelligence wires again reported that a coup against the Diem government was afoot . The final report declared that the military was making progress, that the government was not vulnerable to a coup .
 Kennedy instructed Lodge to offer covert assistance to the coup, excluding assassination, and to ensure deniability by the U.S. Later that month, as the coup became imminent, Kennedy ordered all cables to be routed through him .
 On November 1, 1963, South Vietnamese generals, led by ""Big Minh"", overthrew the Diem government, arresting and then killing Diem and Nhu . A policy of ""control and cut out" was initiated to ensure presidential control of U.S. responses,
 News of the coup led to renewed confidence initially that the war might be won . Minh responded that he could not hold them that long . Bundy drafted a National Security Action Memo to present to Kennedy .
 At the time of Kennedy's death, no final policy decision had been made as to Vietnam . According to historian Dallek, Kennedy used this TV interview and a second one on NBC to pressure Diem on government reforms .
 Official motion picture on Kennedy's tour of Latin America in December 1961 . Operation Mongoose, Kennedy Doctrine, and Brazil–United States relations during the João Goulart administration .
 The Kennedy administration came to power in wake of the radicalization of Fidel Castro's Cuba . There was a fear that if the U.S. neglected the region, Cuba would introduce anti-American political and economic changes .
 Kennedy considered the Congo Crisis to be one of the most important foreign policy issues facing his presidency . Kennedy sought closer relations with Indian Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru through increased economic and a tilt away from Pakistan .
 In Southeast Asia, Kennedy helped mediate the West New Guinea dispute . His administration established the Food for Peace program and the Peace Corps to provide aid to developing countries .
 Kennedy named young appointees to several embassies, such as William Attwood to Guinea and William P Mahoney to Ghana . He directed G Mennen Williams to tell African leaders that we wanted friendship with them and we wanted to recognize their independence .
 According to Nigerian diplomat Samuel Ibe, ""with Kennedy there were sparks""; the Prime Minister of Sudan Ibrahim Abboud, cherishing a hunting rifle Kennedy gave him, expressed the wish to go on safari with Kennedy .
 Kennedy and his incoming advisers were apparently unaware of the CIA's involvement in Lumumba's death . Once there, he was brutally tortured at the hands of Tshombe and executed via firing squad .
 Deputy Assistant Secretary of State J Wayne Fredericks of the Bureau of African Affairs played a major role in constructing American policy for the suppression of Katanga . On October 2, 1962 Kennedy signed United Nations bond issue bill to ensure American assistance in financing United Nations peacekeeping operations .
 Kennedy and his top advisers were working from implicit ideological assumptions regarding modernization . The goals proved much too ambitious, and the economists in a few years abandoned the European-based modernization model .
 Vietnam and Cold War were the two major issues that faced the Kennedy presidency . They included David Halberstam, Louise Fitzsimons and Richard Walton .
 Kennedy's willingness to negotiate with Khrushchev smoothed the Berlin crisis . Kennedy's personal diplomacy earned him the respect of Third World leaders . On the two major issues, no consensus has been reached.