 The American Legal Case for the Blockade of Cuba during the Missile Crisis, October-November 1962 . Prepublication version of this article has been published in the past .
 The Cuban missile crisis began in October 1962 with President Kennedy’s dramatic broadcast announcing ‘a strict quarantine on all offensive military equipment under shipment to Cuba’ to bring about the removal from the island of newly-discovered Soviet mediumand intermediate-range nuclear missiles .
 ‘quarantine’ or naval blockade remained in place until 20 November . Although Nikita Khrushchev agreed by 28 October to remove the missiles, wrangling over Soviet bombers in Cuba meant that the blockade continued .
 Historians have praised the decision to establish a blockade for striking a balance between belligerence and passivity . Historians say the blockade was a good balance between military action and diplomacy .
 The author would like to thank Barton Bernstein, Antonio Cerella, Philip Constable, Robert Poole, Laura Stanley for their valuable help with this article . One of the disadvantages of the blockade, though, from the perspective of the U.S. government, was that it might precipitate
 The New Frontier Revisited ,75.75. controversy, which would undermine sympathy for U.S. policy . controversy, would turn sympathy into sympathy for United States policy .
 Washington strove to win ‘world support’ and ‘the ultimate judgment of history’ by developing and promoting a legal case for the blockade . State Department legal adviser Abram Chayes said: ‘World support and 'ultimate judgement of history'
 The 'quarantine' fell short of a traditional belligerent blockade and so avoided the implications of a state of war . It was asserted, in an effort to establish law by precedent as well as to garner political backing, that the ‘quarantine’ fell short .
 Organization of the American States instead of the United Nations to authorise the blockade . This proved hard to accept for some observers, though, as did the reliance on the OAS instead of U.N. for authorising it .
 Allies backed American policy out of political self-interest rather than out of legal considerations . Evidence from British files shows that the legal position still mattered because of the need to preserve domestic backing for supporting the U.S.
 Even some U.S. officials doubted the lawfulness of the blockade . This indicates that the legal campaign met with limited success, according to CNN.com .
 Over the longer term the legal status of the blockade of Cuba has generated mixed feelings . Although within the next year or two most American jurists who expressed a view agreed that their government had acted within the law .
 International law specialists have explored the blockade’s legal propriety . They have explored how far legal considerations influenced American and Soviet behaviour during the missile crisis .
 Historians have tended to overlook the legal side of the confrontation, perhaps out of a reluctance to engage with the perceived complexities of international law, and because of the influential realist conception that international law counts for little when vital national interests are at stake . For the influence of law on the
 This article explores the U.S. government’s making and presentation of the legal case for the blockade . It addresses how the British, Canadian and Australian governments responded to the blockade.
 The research draws on declassified documents – some rarely used before – from American and British archives . It also draws on analyses of jurists and historians .
 The work provides a fresh angle on the legality of the blockade and on how the U.S. administration tried to ‘sell’ its policy during the most dangerous confrontation of the Cold War .
 The law of naval blockades was an aspect of customary international law . It reflects legal customs or habits, and imposes obligations on governments . The law was part of customary law .
 First used in the 16th century, the blockade was a form of siege warfare that involved isolating enemy ports or coastline from the high seas to prevent sea-borne commerce with other countries .
 ‘pacific’ blockades emerged as a supposedly legal means of coercion short of war . A blockade was seen as a definitive act of war, but in the 19th and early 20th century, 'pacific' blockades were seen as legal coercion .
 These were considered to be ‘pacific’ because they were confined only to the vessels of the blockaded country . They were associated with relatively minor disputes such as the non-payment of debts . The 'pacific' period was associated with minor disputes .
 Jurist Lassa Oppenheim noted in 1952 that while there was an ambiguity about the admissibility of blockades confined only to the vessels of the blockaded state, there was a consensus that the peacetime seizure and sequestration of the vessel of third party states was illegal
 International law embodies law-making treaties as well as customary law . International law is based on treaties and customary law, according to lawmaking treaties .
 These treaties include the UN Charter , the Geneva Conventions and Law of the Sea . The UN Charter and the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Privileges and Immunities are among them .
 The U.S. government had since 1960 tried to depose the regime of Fidel Castro in Havana through a variety of measures, including the supposedly-covert orchestration of the Bay of Pigs in 1961 .
 Delegates in the UN and jurists criticised the action as violating the general principles of international law . The action contravenes various inter-American conventions opposing interventions .
 There were voices in Congress advocating a naval blockade of Cuba in 1962 . In the late summer of that year, there was a growing Soviet military build-up in Cuba .
 Abram Chayes, Head of the State Department’s Legal Office, questioned the lawfulness of this option . The State Department's Legal Office says the option is not legal .
 He noted that this, however, would be impossible given the Soviet right of veto in the Security Council . He said this would not be possible given the veto of veto .
 Chayes suggested that it might be possible to avoid the designation of belligerent blockade by stretching the definition of a pacific one 'to cover shipping of nations aligned with the blockaded one’ But, even so, the ‘legal and political problems’ would be formidable
 These were disinterested reflections prior to the discovery of the Soviet nuclear missiles . The Soviet nuclear missile was discovered in 1968 .
 There was speculation in Congress that the Soviets had turned Cuba into a nuclear missile base . Around this time, there was a further analysis .
 Norbert Schlei concluded that ‘international law would permit use by the United States of relatively extreme measures, including various forms and degrees of force, for the purpose of terminating such a threat to the peace and security of the Western Hemisphere’
 The American government did not invoke self-defense in the legal case, but this justification for the blockade did feature heavily in the narrative of American policy . As will be seen, the U.S. government didn't invoke self defense .
 Chayes’ idea of using the OAS as a UN substitute would be a pillar of the legal case – minus his reservations . The OAS is a non-member of the U.N. Security Council .
 The analyses from Chayes and Schlei meant officials had already explored the lawfulness of the blockade by the time the Soviet missiles were discovered . It meant that there was an off-the-peg legal case available to use .
 ExComm explored whether to attack the missile bases, or blockade Cuba as a means of inhibiting the development of the bases and pressuring the Soviet Union into withdrawing the missiles .
 Officials considered whether there should be a declaration of war against Cuba to legalise the stop and search of third-party vessels . ExComm moved towards implementing a blockade of Cuba .
 Assistant Attorney General Nicholas Katzenbach and former Secretary of State Dean Acheson believed that self-defense provided a sufficient justification for any military action . By contrast, Assistant . Attorney General .
 Robert F Kennedy believed that OAS support was decisive, and so rendered a declaration of war superfluous . Robert F. Kennedy believed the OAS was decisive .
 Some Republican senators asserted that the Soviet Union had stationed strategic nuclear missiles in Cuba . But he recognised the potential for a trade involving American 'Jupiter' missiles stationed in Turkey .
 The U.S. government refrained from declaring war against Cuba .
 The inspiration for the choice of the word has been attributed to Leonard Meeker, Dean Acheson and others . Richard Nixon, who had used the term earlier, also used it .
 The term was an attempt to convey restraint in a volatile situation as well as to obviate legal difficulties . The term "restraint" was used in the aftermath of a violent incident .
 A blockade was ‘an operational part of the conduct of war, designed to force a state to comply with the wishes of the blockading country by crushing the economy of the state’ Therefore, according to the American government, the ‘quarantine’ was an instrument of
 Although obsolescent, the Jupiter missiles were a sensitive issue in relations with Turkey and other NATO states . The Jupiter missiles are obsolescent and are now obsolete .
 The position that only military cargo rather than the necessities of life was designated contraband represented the more pacific aspects of the blockade . Vessels carrying military cargo would be diverted rather than seized or destroyed .
 Blockading third-party vessels presented a belligerent aspect that sat ill with existing international law . At the same time, blockading third party vessels was an act of belligerentity .
 Of course, the Soviet Union and Cuba were always going to criticise the U.S. legal position .
 A Soviet legal specialist had argued in Pravda in September that blockading Cuba would represent the ‘same sort of international crime as an armed invasion’ during the missile crisis . Nikita Khrushchev complained that the blockade violated ‘international norms of freedom of navigation on the
 A recent analysis has noted that while Soviet officials did not take the initiative in respect of making a case in law, there were still worries in the U.S. administration that Soviet and Cuban legal arguments could gain momentum .
 Mission to the UN, RG 84, NARA II; and Morabito, ‘Maritime Interdiction’,1.1.2. The U.N. mission to the United States.
 UN would not have been able to authorise the use of force because of the Soviet veto in the Security Council . Even if it was accepted that the missiles represented an act of aggression, the organisation would not be able to use force . Two, there was not likely to be great alarm
 President had warned the Soviet Union in September about the danger of stationing ‘offensive’ weapons in Cuba . It would be difficult to compromise on the issue .
 In respect of the politics of the Security Council, Meeker had anticipated that members Romania, the United Arab Republic, and Ghana would oppose the blockade .
 The seven votes required to authorise the measure would be available only if the other states – Britain, France, the Republic of China, Chile, Venezuela, and Ireland – voted affirmatively . The other states would have to vote affirmatively if they backed the measure .
 Soviet Union would use its veto to prevent matters from going further . However, there were doubts about the Irish position, and even if there were enough votes available to endorse U.S. policy .
 The proposed resolution required the prompt dismantling and withdrawal of all ‘offensive’ weapons in Cuba, under UN supervision . Under UN supervision, the resolution would require the removal of 'offensive' weapons .
 The initiative was purely symbolic, with Chayes noting that it ‘stood no chance of being adopted and was not introduced with an expectation that it would be’ There was the possibility of General Assembly authorisation of the blockade using the ‘Uniting for Peace’ procedure
 This resulted in UN condemnation of the People’s Republic of China as the aggressor in Korea . However, the increase in Assembly members in subsequent years through decolonisation did not bring a corresponding boost in support for the United States .
 U.S. officials doubted their ability during the missile crisis ‘to muster a sufficiently impressive majority’ in the General Assembly, a British analysis noted . The result was that the United States .
 Acting Secretary General U Thant strove to mediate . The Council and the Assembly were at the center of the dispute .
 He proposed suspension of the U.S. blockade and of Soviet arms shipments to Cuba . The superpowers would negotiate during negotiations, he said .
 By 28 October Washington and Moscow had reached an agreement between themselves featuring an American pledge not to invade Cuba and an unofficial commitment to remove the Jupiter missiles in Turkey within six months .
 This enabled the U.S. government to use the UN for its own purpose . The American government used the UN to help its own purposes, writes Peter Bergen .
 The difficulties in the UN obliged the United States government to look to the OAS to authorise the blockade of Cuba . The U.S. government had to look for the approval of the blockade in order to get the blockade approved .
 Dean Rusk persuaded the OAS’s Organ of Consultation to provide post facto support for his proposal . Rusk says he hopes to see the decision made by the end of October .
 The vigorous response to the discovery of Soviet nuclear missile bases in Cuba was consistent with the Monroe Doctrine . The Monroe Doctrine was a warning from President James Monroe in 1823 to deter European states .
 Roosevelt ‘Corollary’ used the Doctrine to legitimise U.S. military intervention in Latin America . Eighty years later, the Doctrine legitimised US military intervention into Latin America. The Doctrine was used by Theodore Roosevelt in the 1930s .
 The favourable OAS verdict was achieved with some ‘deft coercion’ involving the United States provision of economic aid . Note that, as Barton Bernstein has suggested, it was achieved by some 'deft coerced' involving the U.S.
 The United States argued that the naval embargo or ‘quarantine’ fell short of a belligerent blockade . OAS could properly be used as a regional agency of the UN even without Security Council authorisation .
 The legal attempt to justify the blockade was silent about the right of self-defense . It was silent on the right to respond with force to an actual or imminent armed attack, the author says . The blockade is silent on self-defence, he says .
 The U.S. government took the view that ‘the situation was to be governed by national discretion not international law’ Self-defense did feature in the general narrative of American policy .
 U.S. officials thought Moscow’s goal behind establishing the bases in Cuba was strategic, to remedy the inferior status of the Soviet Union in the nuclear balance of power . American officials tended to think that Moscow's chief objective behind establishing bases was strategic . The bases were established in
 The doctrine of Mutual Assured Destruction would become prominent in the wake of the Cuban missile crisis . Soviet representatives maintained that it was now reasonable to remove the missiles from Cuba because the Cuban revolution was now safe .
 New evidence since the end of the Cold War has brought greater acceptance of the defending-Cuba argument . Western officials tended to see this argument as a post facto rationalization of the climb-down under pressure .
 Securing an ally in the Western Hemisphere was a tremendous political advance for Moscow, and was to be guarded carefully . After reviewing Soviet sources, historian Sergey Radchenko concluded that ‘it is no longer safe to claim that Khrushchev was motivated strictly by strategic considerations’
 Despite taking the legal initiative, U.S. officials never gainsaid Cuba’s right to accept the missiles . Cuba never accepted the missiles from the United States . The missiles were launched by Cuba in 1961 .
 A sovereign state is legally free to take, within its own territory and in the absence of treaty obligations to the contrary, measures which it considers necessary for its defense . There was simply no basis for making that argument – Cuba had consented to the placement of the missiles, and as jur
 The Soviets raised the issue of Cuban sovereignty successfully in the UN Security Council on 24 October . The issue was raised in the United Nations Security Council .
 Vladimir Zorin, according to the British representative in the UN, ‘contrived to bring home effectively’ the point that ‘every country has a right to choose what weapons of defense should be stationed on its own sovereign soil'
 Fuller conceded that ‘the argument that Soviet missiles in Cuba are offensive while ours in Turkey are defensive is a plain, subjective rationalisation’ The American government had in recent years established nuclear missile bases in Britain, Italy and Turkey .
 Castro said the missiles would ‘strengthen the entire socialist camp’ while contributing to Cuba’s defense . Castro stated that they would 'strengnow the entire Socialist camp' and contribute to the Cuban defense .
 In September the President had warned Moscow that grave issues would arise if Cuba was turned into a nuclear missile base . The Kennedy administration did make the issue more inflammatory .
 Allies in Europe would ‘fret about irresolute American leadership’ – perhaps perhaps Berlin . Third World countries would perceive the USSR as a more assiduous protector of its allies, says historian .
 Designating the Soviet missiles in Cuba as offensive enabled the U.S. government to present an international political matter as a security threat . There would be the boost to the President’s ‘domestic Republican opponents’
 The law of self-defense is not pertinent to politics and prestige, says Peter Bergen . He says the U.S. response to the discovery of the missiles in Cuba could have reflected, without contradiction, worries about politics .
 Any attempt to convey the impression that the Soviets were poised to launch a nuclear first strike from Cuba was mere hyperbole, which means that the invocation of selfdefense in U.S. rhetoric must be taken with a substantial pinch of salt . Furthermore, any . attempt to . convey the
 This was evident in the attitudes of the United States’ ‘special ally, Britain,’ according to the U.S. President Barack Obama .
 Historian Peter Catterall maintains that this view derived from doubts about the blockade’s ability to . facilitate the removal of the nuclear missiles, and about its legality . Historian says this view was based on doubts over the legality of the blockade, and that it was illegal .
 Kennedy instructed his ‘experts’ to ‘confer’ with British ones ‘to provide the best possible legal case’ for the blockade .
 Letters to Foreign Secretary Alec Douglas-Home are also revealing . He gave a televised pro-American speech to the International Chamber of Commerce in London .
 Correspondents have urged British mediation . Many of the correspondents raised legal objections to American policies .
 The hazy legal status of the blockade provided the amateur lawyers with ammunition . However, it has been unclear whether the blockade is illegal .
 It should be acknowledged that there was some sympathy in Whitehall with the American legal case . Whitehall should be sympathetic to the American case .
 Leader of the House of Lords, Lord Hailsham said nuclear weapons were ‘ready to go off at a moment’s notice’ There were questions about the relevance of classical law reflecting the technology of the ‘sailing ship and the cannon’
 Lord Chancellor Dilhorne summarised the consensus of government lawyers as holding that ‘the “quarantine” could not be justified as ‘pacific blockade’’ given that it extended to third party vessels without a declaration of war .
 It was feared that the term could generate ‘criticism and ridicule’ Yet American officials felt that they had selected the best description of the naval embargo so felt no reason to change .
 Alec Douglas-Home thought that Cuba had been ‘entitled to call for military aid from another government if necessary’ just as NATO countries had consented to American nuclear missile bases on their territory .
 It was ‘in the absence of United Nations authority ... very difficult to justify action’ against the ships of other countries, he said . He also considered that ‘while it might be possible for the U.S. administration to . justify action against Cuban ships and possibly Soviet
 Freedom of the seas was a sensitive issue for the country with a proud naval heritage . The issue was a matter of concern for the British Navy .
 Royal Navy frigates in the West Indies avoided the blockade to allow the U.S. navy to focus on Soviet vessels . The fact that Britain had maintained trade links with Cuba meant that British civilian ships could be affected .
 There were British vessels in the Caribbean not destined for Cuba, and others that loaded in communist ports were bound for the island . Some of the ships were actually British .
 The United States Navy was instructed to make only spot checks on friendly shipping . Ultimately no British vessels were detained by the U.S.
 The London government reserved its legal rights in relation to shipping . It could take a legalistic stance when national interests were under threat, historian argues .
 Harold Macmillan ‘subordinated international law to the exigencies of the crisis’ The Prime Minister’s pragmatism was evident in how he attempted to silence the legal critics .
 The priority was to ‘prevent consolidation of the offensive potential for the Soviet Union in Cuba’.79 Promptings such as these may have had some effect .
 The Canadian Department of External Affairs noted the ‘sui generis’ nature of the quarantine . The Chief of the Naval Staff concluded that because the lawfulness of the action was ill-defined, Canada could accept it without condoning an illegal act .
 Undersecretary of External Affairs Norman Robertson advised his colleagues to avoid public discussion of the quarantine’s legality, given the ambiguity of the issue . Robertson: ‘It was wise to avoid discussing the quarantine's legality .’
 The DEA Secretary to the DEA Arthur Tange maintained that pacific blockades were serious, but justified, measures when enacted under the UN Charter to prevent the outbreak of war . Outside the parameters of the UN, many jurists considered it illegal .
 Tange and Minister of External Affairs Garfield Barwick acknowledged the inconsistency of this position given the placement of Soviet strategic weapons in Cuba . Tange said the position was inconsistent .
 Only the Marucla, a Panamanian-owned, Lebanon-registered, Soviet-chartered ship, was ever detained and inspected . The ship was only the Panama-owned vessel ever inspected .
 This reasoning implied that the Soviet bases in Cuba and the American base in Turkey were analogous . This reasoning implies that the American bases in Turkey and Cuba were analogous to each other .
 The U.S. government’s construction of a case in law recognised the fact that the legal propriety of the blockade was very much open to question . All the same, the U.K. government's construction of the case was built in law .
 Few of the foreign officials or politicians who expressed a view had confidence in the case . But acknowledgements that the existing legal framework was outdated were consistent with Washington's arguments .
 Moscow’s agreement to remove IL-28 nuclear capable bombers as well as the nuclear missiles from Cuba, Washington ended the blockade on 20 November . The blockade was lifted after Moscow agreed to remove the bombers and missiles .
 Abram Chayes wanted to neutralise legal criticisms of the blockade . He outlined the legal case in the journal Foreign Affairs . The legal case was published in Foreign Affairs magazine .
 The U.S. government’s promotion of the legal case for blockade of Cuba during the missile crisis represented part of a broader effort to win support . This included briefings to leaders of NATO states and to 95 foreign ambassadors .
 There was little genuine consultation with allies about how to respond to the discovery of the Soviet missiles . The allied backing was vital to the moral standing of American policy .
 Withana has maintained that the American government’s ‘skilful use of the ideology of international law’ was ‘an important factor’ behind the United States victory . Khrushchev relented because the Soviet Union was in a position of military weakness in the
 The Soviet Union occupied the legal high ground during the missile crisis, but was forced to retreat . As has been seen, the Soviet Union had to retreat after the crisis .
 The reservations of U.S. allies about the legal status of the blockade suggest that Moscow was more adept at making a case than might be recognised . Moscow is making a strong case for the blockade .
 Some Washington officials were sincerely confident that the blockade was legally sound . Leonard Meeker told United States representative to the UN Adlai Stevenson that with the ‘quarantine’ the United States had ‘made some unexpected new law’ suited to contemporary conditions .
 Others had doubts about the legal position, as has been noted . Yet others, such as Richard N Gardner, had doubts .
 The missile crisis demonstrated the scope for inconsistency among government legal specialists . Legal specialists may be required to provide an objective judgment in law of a particular policy, and then, regardless of the merits of the case, be obliged to advocate publicly the same .
 There is a tension in vesting both the judge and advocate functions in the same officials . Judge and advocate roles are important roles for the judge, advocate .
 Many jurists in the U.S. published articles in scholarly journals in which they endorsed the blockade . Soon after the missile crisis, many jurists endorsed the legality of the blockade.
 Since then, jurists have been ambivalent about the legal merit of the blockade against Cuba in 1962 . Some argue that it represented a ‘peaceful blockade’, and others maintain that in the absence of an armed attack it contravened the UN Charter .
 The ‘ultimate judgment of history’ has not been as favourable as Chayes and his colleagues had hoped . The 'ultimate judgement of history' has not gone well, says the judge .
 The blockade had both pacific and hostile characteristics . Von Glahn, Law Among Nations,658, notes that the blockade had a pacific, hostile nature .