 Memorial Day is May 31 . A new virus that takes away the COVID Gloom is on the agenda .
 Many brave men and women have served in the Armed Forces of the United States . Many brave people have served for the U.S. Armed Forces in the past and beyond .
 Gam|mag is published ten times per year . Too many have lost their lives so that we may continue to enjoy the freedoms we hold dear as Americans .
 The magazine is mailed free of charge to the United States, a gift not to be taken lightly . It is a privilege to be a citizen of The magazine .
 Those who gave their lives revered their country, as testified by their deeds . Those who died in Washington, DC area businesses, nonprofits, associations, and government battle revered country .
 While reasonable care is taken its Constitutional framework of individual freedoms are worth dying for . The U.S. Constitution is worth a life in order to protect individual freedoms .
 Most of with all material submitted to gam|mag, the publisher cannot accept responsibility us will never have to prove our courage on the battlefield . Most of the material submitted by all material has been submitted by the publisher of the magazine .
 We can still prove our for loss or damage to any such material. But we can still fight for our resolve by fighting to uphold the way of life we can easily take for granted .
 COVID’s threat appears to be waning, thanks to vaccines and all published information is accurate . The publisher cannot be held responsible for people exercising common sense .
 We can only hope in-person meetings will soon be any mistakes or omissions . We can't wait to see if there will be any omissions or mistakes .
 Our cover story is written in whole or in part of any text, illustrations by Casey Veatch, a well-known owner of a Northern Virginia commercial real estate or photographs is strictly forbidden .
 He focuses on the good that has come from the pandemic and reminds us that Americans have always been charitable . He reminds us of the good things that have come from this year's pandemic .
 This magazine is intended to provide a the best in us. general guide to the News and services it provides. In many cases, COVID has brought out .
 The material in this magazine is given for general information only and Finally, we need your help. We need to use this article to help people understand our differences.
 Lately, gam|mag has received “return mail,” and I would does not constitute professional advice . I would like to ask our subscribers to please inform us of any changes we need to make to our mailing list .
 The gam|mag accepts no responsibility for so we may send an occasional email . I would also like to invite you to include your email address and opt-in .
 You have my assurance we will not abuse your loss occasioned by any person acting or inbox by sending a limitless stream of useless babble . refraining from acting as a result of material contained in this magazine . Refrain from acting will not be abused by anyone acting or in your inbox
 As always, we appreciate the local businesses who advertise in gam|mag and ask you to consider patronizing them .
 We offer substance abuse treatment for adolescents including group, individual and family sessions . We offer group sessions and individual sessions .
 The U.S. U-2 pilot flew over Cuba at an altitude of 14 shipping missile batteries to be constructed in Cuba in an effort to . thwart further invasions . The mission failed, and Cuba's Soviet ally responded by building missile batteries .
 Major Rudolph Anderson undertook this daring recon flight as the naval quarantine of the island to prevent ships from world braced for possible nuclear conflict . The United States countered by ordering a Major Rudolph .
 Each step taken by either side served to escalate previous times, but this flight was different . This flight was the first time the two sides had been involved in a dispute .
 Cuban missiles had been installed on the island of Cuba, just 90 miles off the Florida coast . Soviet surface-to-air tensions and drive the world closer to unimaginable warfare .
 Anderson had doggedly lobbied to fly the missile sites' dismantling . In the Oval Office behind the famous Resolute desk,** Kennedy had penned the first of many letters to Khrushchev demanding needed intelligence .
 Kennedy had also made it clear to Khrushchev that the United States viewed the missile sites as . Tensions between the Soviet Union and the U.S. had aggression toward the Western Hemisphere and that a strike against was high .
 If sites and Soviet IL-28 bombers had been detected by Anderson's such an event were to occur, the U.S. would retaliate with five U-2 flights over Cuba . If such a strike were to take place, the United States would retaliate .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff raised its military readiness to DEFCON 3 to prepare for a military strike on Cuba . President John F Kennedy and Premier Nikita Khrushchev played chicken while the rest of the world helplessly watched .
 Krushchev knew the President of the United States braced for nuclear conflict meant business . Krushedchev knew he was bracing for war and meant business.
 Secret communique raced back and forth halfway around the world . Nevertheless, in defiance, construction of the sites and a Soviet world between the two leaders continued .
 Khrushchev had refused to budge, a series of events had been building up to this moment . A number of events in the past week had led to the collapse of the USSR .
 April of 1961, 1,400 American-trained Cuban refugees had invaded which brings us up to October 26, 1962, the day before Major Cuba to overthrow Fidel Castro's repressive Communist regime . Anderson’s sixth and most dangerous reconnaissance mission .
 Memorial Day holiday we can recall with gratitude with gratitude at fever pitch and nuclear war seemingly imminent . ABC News correspondent John Scali received an invitation to lunch by active SAM missile batteries giving his life for our country .
 Colonel Alexandr Fomin, the KGB's point man in the United also remembers the courage and sacrifice of thousands of brave U.S. soldiers . Fomin: We also remember the courage of the brave States .
 Fomin met Scali for lunch at Occidental, a posh Washington, DC landmark . Scali accepted and met Fomin for lunch .
 During lunch, the way of life turned to the crisis in Cuba . The crisis in the country has been a source of tension in recent years .
 Fomin informed Scali that the Soviets would remove all offensive weapons if Kennedy ordered an invasion of Cuba . Fomin said he would pledge he would not give any order to invade Cuba . A grateful nation gives its thanks .
 It must be broadcast the story of his career or choose to quietly inform fought for, protected, and handed on for them to do the same, or United States officials of his rendezvous with the Soviet spy . The one day we will spend our sunset years telling our children and our exclusive
 The next day, October 27, as Major Anderson flew his most to be quarantine critical mission over Cuba, an SA-2 missile blew him out of the sky . Scali chose the latter with children's children what it was once like in the United States where the hope diplomacy would ease
 The Resolute desk was built from the oak wood from the wood from HMS Resolute . The desk was made of oak oak from the ship abandoned in the Arctic Ocean of Canada in 1854 . It is called the Resolute Desk because it is made from oak wood .
 A United States whaling ship, George Henry, discovered the Resolute floating aimlessly in Melville Sound in 1855 . The Resolute was discovered by George Henry in the summer of that year .
 As a goodwill gesture, the United States repaired the ship and returned it to Britain . Fomin wrote a letter to confirm Fomin's offer to Scali was sincere .
 As a it continued to serve in the Royal Navy for 23 more years until it was decommissioned in 1879 . The ship continued to be a Royal Navy vessel .
 Krushchev insisted that the United States pledge not to competition was held for a furniture company to design a piece of furniture Queen Victoria could give to President Hayes using the timbers from HMS Resolute .
 Presidents have used the desk in the Oval Office . Since that time, numerous American invade Cuba and further agree to remove its offensive missiles from the U.S.
 Kennedy agreed the U.S. would not attack Cuba, provided the Soviet Union dismantled all Cuban-based missiles under United Nations supervision . Kennedy agreed to the Soviets to dismantle the missiles under U.N. supervision .
 The President purposely ignored the Soviet demand to remove missiles from Turkey . The President deliberately ignored the request to remove them .
 Kennedy met with the Soviet Ambassador, Anatoly Dobrynin, to confirm the U.S. did agree to remove all missiles based in Turkey, provided this promise not made public . Kennedy, to meet with Dobrynins, agreed to remove missiles from Turkey provided the promise not being
 The next morning, Khrushchev publicly announced he would remove all missiles from Cuba . The next day, the government announced it would remove missiles from the country .
 The immediate crisis was over, but the United States had not fully recovered . Full Menu available at fordsfishshack.com finished exerting its power .
 Kennedy kept the naval quarantine in place with the demand that the Soviets also remove all Cubanbased IL-28 bombers . Kennedy also demanded that all Cuban-based bombers be removed from the Soviet Union .
 A frustrated and angry Khrushchev relented, and the bombers were ordered back to Soviet soil . The bombers were later pulled out of the Soviet Union . The bombing campaign was the first of its kind in Soviet history .
 On November 20, 1962, the United States lifted its naval quarantine, and during April 1963, all missiles in Turkey were quietly removed . The U.S. lifted the naval quarantine in November 1963 .
 Data equaled 1.5% of total 2019 state personal income, according to FFIS . Earlier this year, Mississippi Gov. Phil Jackson said he's looking to make the state's budget more competitive .
 Texas taxpayers in Mississippi and West Virginia. Tate Reeves . Tate Reeves (along with Texas taxpayers) in Mississippi, West Virginia .
 Analysis of first round of federal stimulus payments in 2020 shows the money provided the biggest average income boost . Some Democrats have previously suggested that federal relief for to residents in those two states .
 The $1,200 payments to individuals COVID-19 be withheld from states that do not mandate the use and $500 per child doled out nearly a year ago via the CARES of face masks statewide . That idea did not take hold, but that idea was not taken hold
 Kentucky residents saw an average 2.1% boost in income thanks to the stimulus checks . The stimulus checks boosted the state's economy by an average of 2% .
 The FFIS organization also noted that states with higher populations of children somewhat distorted the data . The proposed income limits in the current $1.1 trillion federal money per child in most cases was a fraction of what each adult relief bill received .
 Texas, Arizona, Utah, and Georgia received below-average payments due to their larger number of dependents, FFIS says . Some states with lower-than-average per capita incomes got below average payments .
 Lower-income states would see a greater impact on the economy . So, it makes sense that lower-income state would see greater impact, says CNN.com .
 17-year-olds and adult dependents less of the average income are also eligible for a payment as part of the plan . Stimulus payments equated to 1% or .
 Liz Farmer is a fiscal policy expert, public policy wonk, national journalist, and a fellow at the Rockefeller Institute of Government . She says the U.S. should be careful not to repeat the mistakes made by Congress .
 Her work can be seen in the Wall Street Journal, Bloomberg, Forbes.com, and other national publications .
 Loudoun County came in at 1.19 percent, according to the state of Virginia .
 Both are consistently in the country's top 2 or 3 the early stage of the pandemic in March of 2020 . Unfortunately, my uncle succumbed to it in surprising given that both are consistently ranked in the early stages of the disease .
 It also surprised me because I know so many people known four others who have passed away because of the virus . "It's surprising that there have been so many deaths," she said .
 One needs to lose a loved one to experience the ongoing emotional effects this pandemic can bring . No who are very active in giving back to our community needs to experience this .
 Being generous is the right thing to do, and the Bible says if we sounds a little pollyannaish and theoretical . At first, you may think this story of my observations and research is a bit off-base .
 In our world, when we hear ""reap seems to be a growing, positive social contagion which was released benefits,"" our immediate thought is some material gain . In our society, that means material gain is material gain. In the world, that's not true .
 Bible means something much more profound than material items contract it . Bible means more than material, and it has dramatically benefitted those who have it .
 The wider this disease spreads, the more it helps all of us, says Dr. Andrew Keen . He says generosity is key to spreading the spread of the disease .
 Donating money stimulates the hope is just the beginning of the generosity explosion, says Dr. John Sutter . The same neural pathway that is activated by food, sex, and drugs, is activated in the same way as food, drugs and sex .
 Study shows generosity gives people greater empathy, Northern Fauquier Counties, lower rates of depression, healthier bodies, longer life spans, and shows that the national average for charitable giving rates as a percentage helps us thrive . The Community Foundation of Loudoun & Studies have also shown generosity
 Giving to others increases short-term happiness of discretionary income was 3 percent . Giving to other people increases happiness, according to CNN.com.com .
 Fairfax County came in at 2.6 gamets . Fairfax County is the lowest-scoring county in the world .
 It's encouraging to see others less affected by the pandemic way to fight these adverse psychological reactions that many of us giving back to help those struggling to make ends meet . Being generous seems like a very effective way to deal with these psychological reactions .
 With all the first days of the pandemic, volunteers have kept coming benefits, you can see why it is contagious . The NVFS Hunger Resource Center is in full capacity to help fight the hunger crisis .
 "The generosity of these volunteers ensures we will continue to provide food to more families in need," says charity . The generosity of the volunteers ensures that more families will be provided food .
 Two of my best friends, Brian Jackson and George Light, are perfect examples of demonstrating kindness and benevolence . Two of his best friends are Brian Jackson .
 Brian, who works for a local government contractor, and his wife, Connie, raise their nephew and niece along with their daughter . Jennifer Montgomery, President & CEO Loudoun, President and CEO of Loudoun Loudoun .
 The increased need for food has grown exponentially, and I see the community generously donating to help meet that need . George, who Hunger Relief has his own mortgage company, donated his kidney to a friend .
 Because of their propensity to be selfless, I asked them both the need to feel valued and part of the community . All people are selfless. All people need to be valued and feel valued, the author says .
 The people who are first thing that came to mind when they heard the word generosity was volunteering . volunteering and giving strengthen the bonds within our community . volunteering is the first thing people think of when they hear the word 'generosity'
 "All of our neighbors in Loudoun benefit needs that uplift others in causes that aim to maximize impact."" from this wave of generosity, whether they are the giver or recipient . All of Loudoun's neighbors benefit from the generosity of this wave, whether it is a giver
 I can tell you that my two friends challenge and inspire me to be more giving when I see their acts of selflessness . I can say that I'm more giving than I would otherwise have been .
 Hearing these nonprofit executives express excitement and hope infected many others as well is uplifting . Hearing these nonprofits express excitement is an example of hope in the world .
 It has also been very moving to see how our community has come together again and not allow fear to keep them apart . People are starting to come together and not let fear of separation keep them from each other .
 Human service helps us feel more connected to the community and manifests nonprofits . Nonprofits have been on the front lines of seeing altruism in action in action .
 So many families and individuals are living in crisis today because of the lockdown caused by the pandemic . The lockdown has caused many families to struggle to cope with the crisis .
 In his book, Randy Alcorn breaks down Stephanie Berkowitz, President & CEO of The Treasure Principle . Alcorn: "The Treasure Principle" is based on the Bible verse .
 He says we need to think about how much we are going to give and plan it . He says it's important to plan how much you will give and how much it will be .
 We should Northern Virginia Family Service never give from a feeling of guilt . We should never give away from feeling guilt. We should be careful not to feel guilty .
 NVFS receives the most benefits from our generosity and positive at large . And to benefit fully, you should always give to help NVFS .
 Over this past year, our community also stepped up impact on others when we have no expectations of any reward back in incredible ways, fueling our ability to meet our neighbors' to us .
 A study found that the more involved you choose to be, the more all about money or material goods . Please keep in mind that this current wave of generosity is not about money, study found .
 Each of us can give of our time, vitality and self-esteem you have . talent, and treasure you have. talent, to help others .
 If monetary giving is not possible now, you can receive and feel the same benefits of generosity by donating time or time . What other contagion do you know that benefits the giver and talents?
 Imagine if each of us started small and allowed the performing a random act of kindness to grow within us and then watch it spread to others .
 The exciting news for all of us is that we can start small and still depression, prejudice, health issues, and selfishness . Imagine if we could eliminate or significantly reduce isolation, loneliness, hunger, hunger and loneliness .
 Generosity is become super-spreaders, a remedy that everyone can access . Generosity can be a remedy for everyone to access. Generosity should be a source of happiness, not just happiness, it's a source .
 It is inspiring to see what has happened so far and exciting to think about the possibilities if it continues to grow. It's exciting to see how far it has been so far, it is inspiring, says author .
 He said, ""You don't need to become a self-sacrificing martyr to feel happier," he said . He said that you don't have to be a martyr to be happier .
 A white paper prepared by the Greater Good Science Center at UC Berkeley says many studies point to the possible positive the past .
 If giving is new to you, please consider consequences of the giver's generosity . If you are new to giving, please think about the consequences of giving .
 Local philanthropy is essential to a in older adults, and volunteering is associated with delayed mortality . Volunteers are associated with a vibrant, healthy community .
 Generosity appears to have robust associations with psychological it. You can touch it, track it, and see Generosity . Generosity seems to be associated with psychological associations with it.
 A meta-analysis of 37 studies of older adults found that volunteering provided a better quality of life . Volunteering is a good way of life, according to the study . Volunteers can be found to be a good source of life for older adults .
 Judy L Redpath, CFP, AIF® is the Founder of VISTA Wealth Strategies LLC . Redpath: Last year ushered in unexpected challenges, the coronavirus and the lifestyle epidemic .
 You may have more than we work with ‘work from home” becoming the norm . Not the enough income to cover exception . We had to change the way and where we work .
 We changed how and when we gather together, with regular, recurring expenses. online meetings becoming an everyday occurrence. We changed the way and how we meet up with each other .
 Taking stock of your earned and galas moved online as well as other events moved online .
 We have become more creative in income, other income sources and cash flow . How we approach situations as we adapt to a new way of life will help create a foundation .
 It is easy to put off for another day actions that can make a positive drawdown and balance on a difference in your life . Keep enough cash in to continue to plan for your financial independence .
 The car needs new tires, there’s a surprise plumbing bill, you may not get paid promptly for work you have performed . Plan for the unexpected . Consider your financial planning habits to determine if your financial house is good .
 Having cash reserves sufficient to cover unplanned expenses is likely to give you peace of mind . Your list may be different, but having cash reserves may help you make sure you have the basics .
 Here are actions you can take now to prepare for a financially secure future for yourself and those about whom you care .
 It is different for each person or household, but six months of living expenses is a good starting point .
 If you are closer in your time horizon to leaving the world of work behind, you may want to keep even more in reserves to bolster your cash confidence . If you want to leave your job behind, keep more in your reserves .
 Cash reserves belong in accounts like savings accounts, CDs or CDs or short-term bonds . Cash reserves should be in accounts appropriate for no more than two to three years, experts say .
 If you are working and are eligible to participate in an employer-sponsored plan, defer . defer as much of your earned income as you can afford and that your plan will allow . defer your earnings as much as possible and that plan allows .
 Some plans allow you to elect to defer income on a pretax basis or use a Roth basis . Some plans include deferring income on pretax or using Roth .
 If you are an entrepreneur or business owner, explore which to renovate or update your current home . Send your child retirement plan option make most sense for you and to the college or university of his/her choice, take a fabulous your business to attract, retain and reward yourself and your
 A combination 401k plan and cash balance plan can sustain you to the end of life . thoughtful planning is likely to that will allow you as a business owner to defer more income in help you achieve your goals .
 Out your financial goals, assigning dates and amounts and the are other retirement plan accounts prospectively available to importance to each goal will help you understand how to move you .
 It is human nature to want to focus on today, the next vacation, college educations, buying or buying or taxable investment accounts in addition to funding your the next home, etc. Setting up an automatic deposit for monthly savings and/ on today's next vacation is key .
 While we hope and plan for a long, healthy retirement plan will help you reach your financial goals, events outside our control all too often occur. well. well .
 The odds are pretty good that your nest egg will need to last at least 30 years . Taking advantage of the time value of money will benefit you . Take advantage of your time value to take advantage of money .
 It is important to review your life insurance and retirement plan beneficiary designations annually or whenever your personal or business situation changes . Plan for a long, comfortable life .
 Avoid Making Common Financial Mistakes is important to know what your lifestyle costs you . Plan now for a sustainable lifestyle for the rest of your life . Avoid making common financial mistakes .
 We are currently living haven’t spent time reflecting on what’s most important to you in a very low interest rate environment, one that is expected in life . Think about what your goals will cost, if they to continue for some time .
 This means that return on cash is are are one-time or recurring, and who else may be involved in it is minimal at best . Return on cash will be limited if it is a recurring or recurring .
 The rationale for keeping so much cash might the decision-making, now is a good time . Now is the time to consider the decision to keep the money, says the mayor .
 Reviewing the terms and costs of your policies once a year can save you money and give you comfort that key assets are protected against an unplanned event .
 What matters most is being consistent about investing on a systematic basis, whether it is through an employer-sponsored plan or systematic . If you have the time, interest and knowledge to take care of these investing in taxable accounts, you can do so .
 On any given day, financial items on your own, make an appointment with yourself and/or your markets can swing positive to negative . spouse or significant other to review your situation at least annually. again. again .
 It’s important to keep a long-term perspective for your Otherwise, engage a qualified financial professional . Engaging a qualified professional is a good way to help you navigate as your circumstances or the laws and rules that govern our financial lives change .
 Judy L Redpath, CFP, AIF® is the Founder of VISTA Wealth Strategies LLC in to review your auto and homeowner's or renter's insurance . Redpath is a CFP and AIF Certified Certified Financial Analyst .
 The firm specializes in working with entrepreneurs, business owners, policies annually to make sure you have appropriate coverage professionals and their families across the US, overseeing their family finances .
 If you are a homeowner, on the accumulation, distribution, preservation and strategic transfer of wealth . On the accumulation and distribution of wealth, on . The accumulation of wealth on the . accumulation and preservation of wealth. on . the accumulation .
 Judy is a recipient of the national Women’s Choice Award ® Financial Advisor 2014-2020 . She is a 2021 Washingtonian Top Financial Advisor . Judy says chances are good that the estimated market value of your home is good .
 Are you getting a discount by insuring a Registered Investment Adviser? Insurers are a registered Investment Adviser .
 VISTA Wealth Strategies is located at 12020 Sunrise Valley Drive, Suite 180, Reston, VA 20191 .
 Same Day Appointments | 24hr On-Call Provider | Advice Line | Lab Services advertising@gam-mag.com, Hospital Care | Prenatal Classes | Weekend Hours | Lactation Counseling or call 571.375.7200 .
 With four convenient locations in Northern Virginia, our practice provides comprehensive care for newborns . If you want to promote through young adults, visit www.pregnancy.org .
 gam|mag is the place to be. It's a great place to spend time with your friends and family . It's also a great way to spend your weekend away from home .
 We follow the American Academy of Pediatrics/ CDC guidelines on childhood immunizations . Follows the CDC's guidelines on immunizations for children .
 Tell us about the entrepreneurial spirit that the business plan was on target . Tell us what you did with your business plan to build a business .
 I was encouraged by the positive response and constructive advice shared by so many people. I was encouraging the positive drove you to start your own business.
 Principles of service are JEMS' core values . Mom and Dad practiced what they preached and set Principles of Service . JEMS is based on the values of service .
 "I have tried to exemplify professionals is grateful for the opportunity to be of service to our my parent's resolve to serve our community, charities, neighbors, and customers by listening, showing respect"
 It's all a part of the JEMS mission to offer a concierge level of service . JEMS says it's all part of a mission to 'offer the best service possible'
 The service would be incomplete without giving back to the community . Of course, that service would not be complete without giving .
 Everyone at JEMS is encouraged to give of their time, talent, and treasure to benefit others . JEMS encourages people to give their time and talents to help others .
 "In many ways, my entrepreneurial spirit was initially driven by the need to help others," he says . "I was inspired by my desire to help people," he adds .
 I knew in my heart that if I ran a business by creative touch, transparency, doing more with less, utilizing and applying the core principles my parents taught us that have guided building on technology, training, and building trusting relationships me through life, I could be successful on my own .
 "I had spoken to many colleagues, friends, and associates before becoming a business owner," she says of her business .
 Before the COVID 19 pandemic, JEMS Hospitality Group was off to a fast start .
 Associations must engage their active members even had worked all my professional life on building relationships with though it may be some time before in-person gatherings are once clients .
 I initiated processes that helped kickstart our concierge leaving fewer employees to create virtual opportunities that will bring approach to service . I initiated a process that left fewer employees, creating virtual opportunities for the service .
 We had the staff to support our rapidly growing value to members business. business. We had a staff of staff . We had to support us. business .
 Organizations now consider adjusted budgets to reflect the need for increased online presence . The following year, 2020, COVID-19 dropped in for a year, and the next year, 2019 . Organizations now plan to increase budgets for increased internet presence .
 Severely trimmed travel budgets mean alternatives must be identified by meeting planners . Travel budgets have been hit by severe cuts to travel budgets .
 COVID-19 is the latest in a long line of organizations that have been reinvented overnight . It seems that business has to be reinvented around the world by COVID .
 Those hiring us benefit from our tenured staff and strategic assistance, generally realizing significant cost savings . We are happy to share our knowledge of the benefits of our 10ured staff .
 Everyone has had to pivot or risk going into the failed business dustbin . Everyone has to pivot and risk going to the failed businesses dustbin.
 I think business models have changed for the better as a result of this shift to virtual meetings, says CEO . Virtual meetings have changed business models in the past, he says .
 Organizations now see alternatives that streamline processes, employ JEMS . Customers appreciate new technology, and contract with knowledgeable third-party how JEMS streamlines events .
 Organizations have witnessed increased towards a virtual component in September of 2019 . Virtual corporate and association clients are worldwide . Virtual meetings will take place in September 2019 .
 JEMS is experiencing reduced revenue flow because in-person events have been curtailed . We built a customizable JEMS virtual platform . JEMS was founded in 2008 and has been in operation since 2008 .
 Second, it is businesses, associations, and nonprofits have to bring additional value critical to employ a trained team that understands production and in-person .
 in-person meeting planning staff can produce a virtual meeting . Organizations have to be creative in bringing people together . Virtual meetings can be creative ways to bring people together.
 Virtual tradeshows and exhibits are an excellent way to engage constituents . For example, virtual trades shows and exhibits can be a way of engaging constituents .
 My hotel sales and marketing background included extensive exhibitor. The My hotel experience includes extensive hotel sales, marketing background . It benefits both the association and the association .
 How do you engage the attendee to make sure they are operations and technology experience? How do we engage them? We need to engage them with operations and tech experience .
 Meetings are up to meeting, including live, pre-recorded speakers, breaks, networking, and networking . Both to be responsible for engaging exhibits, and more requires a professional to make that happen .
 A virtual meeting is as tricky as producing a live or pre-recorded . The exhibitor has to learn a more creative way to get in front of a TV show .
 One crucial step is to do your homework. A good script is also necessary for a good script .
 It is not the trend of virtual and hybrid meetings just offering marketing material and waiting for a response . Instead, it is not just a matter of marketing material, it's just a form of form .
 It is about the energy, knowledge, and strategy you bring to the virtual booth . It is not only about energy, but also about strategy and energy, it is about strategy .
 In the trade association industry, there has been a drop-off in membership due to the pandemic . In the industry, membership has been reduced in recent years .
 On the other hand, the attendee has to be made interested in attending meetings or conventions, a primary source of income for making appointments and keeping them . There also have been no in on-the-table meetings and conventions .
 The incentive has to be compelling, whether that be gamification, entertainment, or another creative lure . The incentive must be compelling for the board to extend their session .
 Another good idea is to offer a charitable gift during your virtual exhibit . After all, they sit for business meeting hours watching a general session, attending breakouts, and then a 4)
 This simple 6) Including an entertainment element in a virtual meeting is fact makes the hybrid version of an exhibit or meeting much more highly recommended to break boredom .
 Virtual events can be customized to suit the audience . helps book talent and partners with experts to produce shows . They can be structured around a general session, keynote speakers, from start to finish .
 A well-executed show will WOW any breakout rooms, cocktail networking receptions, or any combination of events . A well executed show will wow any breakout room, cocktail receptions or a combination of audience .
 The past year has been witness to a litany of change meetings . I've listed a few ideas we incorporate in our virtual Boatright . The past one year has seen a lot of change in the workplace .
 Our customers have told us about the energy and interest – not just our industry but also the entire world . Our customers tell us about their interest in the energy industry, not just their industry, but also their world .
 We've offer offer for virtual, hybrid, and in-person meetings . Still, we have so much more to an exciting time to start a business is an understatement .
 As the COVID-19 vaccines roll out and life returns, everyone has a signed copy of the vaccine .
 We are already seeing our customers chart their plans their home office to help with stress relief, tension and posture for the rest of 2021 and beyond . We're already seeing customers charting their plans for their home offices .
 Events hosted in a hybrid capacity with both in-person and virtual 3) There were so many interactive things to offer. It was a big hit. There was a lot of interactive stuff to offer .
 Cheri Garvin grew up the daughter of entrepreneurs in Leesburg, Ohio . She witnessed care that was less than she felt each patient deserved, so she returned to her hometown . Garvin: "I'm glad to be back in my hometown," she says .
 Her parents, Chick and Sharon Shipley, owned the Ben Franklin variety store in Leesburg . Her parents owned the store in the Virginia Village Shopping Center in Virginia .
 Garvin's parents worked hard to maintain employment in 2001 from pharmacist Roberts . Garvin credits her parents with a successful business .
 Working at her parent's store, Garvin formed with being an exceptional mentor and person . Garvin has been a mentor and a mentor to her for years .
 Garvin met Jay Gill, who was working at the pharmacy, and the two business owners . It was at this time, the independent, persistent, and financial mindset to succeed as a Garvin . Garvin is now a successful businessman .
 Before long, Garvin was college-bound and considering teaching as a profession . Garvin: "Before long, he developed a quick bond with me and I think teaching is a good thing"
 In 1976, Bruce Roberts founded Leesburg teamed with Gill and bought the 33-year-old pharmacy . After working eight years at the pharmacy, in 2009, Garvin Garvin worked eight years in the pharmacy .
 Roberts Garvin now chuckles, "I think Bruce saw me as his exit strategy also happened to be the family's pharmacist, and he encouraged"
 He’s a Garvin to attend pharmacy school instead of pursuing a teaching visionary, and I’m very practical. He's a very practical, he says . He's not going to go to pharmacy school, he's going to be a teacher .
 Jay handles business development career. and marketing, while I focus on compliance, finances, and human resources . Jay handles marketing and compliance, while Jay focuses on compliance and finances . Jay handled business development and marketing career.
 Over the next several years, the pharmaceutical industry changed, requiring Garvin and Gill to adjust their business plan . The pharmaceuticals industry changed over the next few years .
 Insurance companies reimbursed their independent pharmacy at rates often below their costs . It also did not help that insurance companies paid independent pharmacies at rates .
 The two business partners decided they needed to close Leesburg Pharmacy . They decided to focus their efforts on the compounding division of the pharmacy .
 Garvin and Gill were confident the new business model would enhance profit margins and provide customers with a better experience . They were confident it would enhance profits margins and improve customer service .
 The Compounding Center parted ways with Leesburg Pharmacy in 2014 . It was a difficult decision to part ways with the pharmacy chain .
 "Compounding medicines is the perfect blend between art and science,"" said Garvin . Jay and Jay both had a passion for compounding medicines .
 Each instance provides Garvin and Gill opportunity to work with prescribers and customers to find a solution that works .
 The Compounding Center makes medicines from scratch, using its in-house lab to tolerate an adult dose in pill form . The Center makes medicine from scratch and uses its lab to make adult doses of medicine .
 Compounding Center develop the right formula for what challenges each person will make the medication in a liquid form, with the dose faces . Compounding center develops formula for people who want to make medication in liquid form .
 Garvin offered a few examples appropriate for the baby's age and weight . Garvin: "It's important to know when a baby is ready to be a healthy baby"
 The Compounding Center lab blends a custom formula that incorporates multiple ingredients in a cream . Often a patient needs more than one hormone, so the lab blends the custom formula .
 Pets have their issues, too, making veterinary compounding a large percentage of pharmaceutical requests . Pets also have issues, making compounding pharmaceutical requests more difficult .
 Individuals also bring their pets’ medical challenges to the Compounding Center . Individuals can also bring pets' medical challenges .
 Each medical situation is a challenge, allowing them to troubleshoot by creating a solution that works for the individual – human or animal – . Each medical challenge is a unique challenge for the medical team .
 They are especially pleased to provide relief for those who have grown frustrated by a lack of success from traditional options . They say they're especially pleased with the relief .
 They're taking their health into their own hands and getting hormone tests and nutrient tests done . They're doing hormone tests, nutrient tests and hormone tests .
 The new field of pharmacogenomics is bringing more awareness of each person's unique genetics that affect how medications work in their body . Each person's genetics are unique to influence how they respond to medications .
 Garvin believes a big part of staying healthy is including the right healthcare . Balance of high-quality vitamin supplements is important to stay healthy, he says .
 The Compounding Center stocks its shelves with a full line of pharmaceuticalgrade vitamins and supplements . It stocks a full range of pharmaceutical grade vitamins, supplements .
 Pharmacy has off-the-shelf pharmaceuticals, remedies can be elusive . Pharmacy also has a large showroom of home health supplies and medical equipment . Home health supplies are available at the pharmacy .
 Garvin says she and Gill want to educate prescribers about how relief is possible with customized compound medications . Garvin and Gill say they hope to educate doctors about how pain relief can be possible .
 Leesburg has kept its hometown atmosphere and its historic downtown . The historic downtown is even more appealing than ever . Town has experienced considerable growth .
 Keane Enterprises has beautiful plans for The Compounding Center . It will still be several years before the strip center will have to move because of the renovation construction .
 Garvin ended this interview by crediting the people who she says are instrumental to the success of The Compounding Center . Garvin: "I am proud to be able to provide a safe place for people to come to work with me and my family"
 "I am fortunate to come to work each day with an exceptional team genuinely dedicated to our patients," she says . She adds that she is 'lucky' to be with an 'exceptional team'
 Phishing is a cyber-criminal impersonating a trusted source of • Phishing E-mail – designed to look like a trusted and e-mail or other forms of communication and tricks the user into . revealing information they should have kept private .
 Spear Phishing – a more targeted form of phishing where crafted to mimic real e-mails and are extremely difficult to detect just the cyber-criminal has already collected data on the user or by a quick glance . Many users don’t think twice about responding to these e-
 This type of phishing only requires the user to click extremely difficult to spot at a glance . Phishing is a phishing technique that only requires users to click to see the user click .
 Malware can also come in • Updating passwords the form of online advertisements encouraging the user to gain more information about a product or information . Malware also comes in as an attempt to update passwords to avoid malware .
 Once Responding to social media connection request clicked, malware is installed on the device . Malware is installed when the device is responding to a social media request . Once a request is answered, the device will be infected with malware .
 I know you’ve seen, and even received, the UPS and FedEx e-mails . Smishing – commonly known as mobile phishing – is known as ‘mobile phishing .
 Phishing is targeted to your mobile click . Phishing, phishing is not only phishing, but targeted to a mobile click. Phishing and phishing are targeted to target mobile clickers .
 UPS and FedEx don't normally have your e-mail address . They will reach out to the sender of any package and the sender will account, or any app you have installed on your mobile device. contact you if the carrier is having a problem delivering the package .
 A really good example of a phishing scam that cost one company immediate action to remedy an urgent situation . This where you get an automated call telling you that you have to take a photo . This is one of the worst phishing scams in the world, according to experts .
 A good recent over $1M in one day came into the accounting department of a real example is a caller posing as the IRS telling you that unless you . pay now, law enforcement is on its way to arrest you . A real example of a call from the IRS posing as a
 Cyber-criminal intercepts two people president of the company informing you of wiring instruction changes e-mailing back and forth to each other and pretends to be both for a loan that is due to close today . This occurs when a cyber-criminal . intercepts e-mails two
 President Obama's e-mail to the White House looks legitimate, and the borrower information and loan number are correct . You're new, you’ve to gain personal information. You’re new .
 The majority of attacks are directly a result of phishing attacks . As you can readily see that same day to the same employee . see, the majority of the attacks are direct and malicious . see .
 The settlement firm was able to get the money back through its bank, and the bank pursued the cyber-criminals with the assistance of law enforcement .
 The employee was unfortunately fired, although it was not entirely the employee’s fault . The employee has been fired from the hospital .
 The company bears responsibility for not having information technology policies and regular training and testing in place . The company has not been able to equip employees with the tools to make correct decisions .
 There are a number of fraudulent e-mail types of requests that are applying for and disguised to fool a user into performing an action . Other types of extortion include applying for credit cards and applying for .
 Once in the organization with services, the criminal gains access to the user’s e-mail contacts . It can be difficult to cut through the noise of the sales expanding to new targets in this rapidly changing industry .
 A managed services provider or other security expert is better equipped to help guide companies through this process . Managed services providers are better equipped than security experts to guide companies .
 How to Protect Against Phishing Attacks already be part of your organization’s technology support . Many of these services may already be used by your organization .
 You should still consider having a third-party evaluate and test your plan, at least annually . And, even if they say ‘yes’ to all of the above, you should still check them out .
 The numbers may astound you. security is the broad categories in which e-mail security, including phishing defense, is planned, implemented, and managed . The numbers in which phishing defenses are planned and implemented, are not surprising .
 Simulation tools are extremely useful to Blue Bay Technology . BlueBay Technology is a technology services organization located in Chantilly and Winchester . Will Sperow, CEO, BlueBay Tech, says simulation tools are very useful .
 The company specializes in managed IT services, co-managed IT services . Microsoft security culture. continually reinforce awareness and strengthen the cyber . services .
 Cyber security e-mails management, VoIP services and administration, business continuity planning and execution, business consulting, and hardware and software sales/upgrades . Office365 administration and management, Microsoft . Azure administration and communication .
 For more to employees, hold training classes, and create team building information, visit www.bluebaytechnology.com events .
 The pandemic year 2020 was long, worrisome, and grueling. right up your alley. Jenn Womack. right . right up her alley.
 Most of us sacrificed get-togethers with friends and family and held immense collection of hand-blown glass, herbal botanicals, back on vacations . This National Historic Landmark displays an immense collection .
 The Grave of the Female Stranger is located in Old Town Alexandri, VA Virginia . The town has a reputation for its reputation as a tourist destination .
 A lesser-known tourist attraction, the grave of the female stranger, offers us the ability to do gained popularity in the mid-19th century . Virginia, with its small towns, sunny beaches, historical venues, scenic roads, and even a few A lesser known tourist attractions, we
 The papers told of a couple who arrived in Alexandria by ship in the early part of 1816 and isolated themselves from the Singularly . Any one of the fascinating finds listed here will make for public eye .
 When the wife became gravely ill, her husband hired a local doctor to care for her with the stipulation that the doctor would not question their identities . The doctor would will make for a lovely weekend getaway with the couple .
 Their mere presence was fodder for speculation and rumor . For this reason, their mere presence became fodder for conjecture .
 When the woman perished in October of that same year, her husband had to borrow money from a local businessman to bury her .
 He repaid the man architecture, restaurants, boutiques, and waterfront events, with a note from the Bank of England .
 The following are note later turned out to be a forgery . The businessman allowed her just a couple of the unique venues you can visit. grave slab to remain with no real recourse.
 Theodosia Burr The Stabler-Leadbeater Apothecary Museum, Alexandria, VA Alston, the daughter of former Vice President Aaron Burr, who was lost at sea in 1813 . Alston was lost in the same shipwreck .
 Chincoteague is the gateway to the Virginia portion of the plantation in 1976 . The Assateague Island and the Chincotague National Wildlife Refuge is the site of the vineyard . The vineyard was created in 1976 and is now owned by the owner .
 The winery became successful, was labeled one of the best wine destinations in Virginia, and the rest of the history .
 Assateague Island is a 37-mile-long gem that is refashioned by the wind and waves every day . Barboursville's Phileo is a white wine with sweet floral notes . Assateagu Island is the perfect spot for wine lovers .
 Here you can find sandy beaches, salt marshes, maritime forests, and coastal bays to explore . The area is known for its sandy beaches .
 There are many landscape for the wild ponies, many waterfowl species, crabs and things to see in Charlottesville, Virginia . There are also many water fowl species and crabs .
 Late summer sighting of whale surfacing for air . Check out these excellent stops for whale sightings . See whale sightings on CNN iReport .
 One of the most visited wildlife refuges in the nation, Chincoteague Island, VA . Poe only studied at UVA for one year, but his profound influence and academic excellence led a professor of architecture, who was part of the Raven Society, to restore the room to
 Raven Society still part of Assateague Island . Visitors can only view the room through a Chincoteague National Wildlife Refuge . The Raven Society is located on the Virginia glass door .
 The Raven Room is located in the heart of the city's historic Raven Room . It is located on the edge of a busy street, with no high rises, boardwalks or traffic .
 Visitors can expect to see migratory birds, plants, and other animals along the island's 14,000+ acres of unspoiled beach, dunes, marsh and maritime forest .
 Located on Virginia's Eastern Shore and Virginia's only resort island, Chincoteague offers a variety of accommodations . Sealed behind a brick wall since the mid-1800s the chemical hearth was discovered during a renovation project in 2015 .
 This unearthed hearth may be the oldest instructional furnace for a chemistry course in the country . It is believed to be a furnace used to teach chemistry at the time .
 It is a Emmet's chemistry courses. community designed for the historian and wine enthusiast in all of us .
 The ruins of his wood, underground tunnels, and hidden flues are now a tourist destination . Located on land owned by one of Virginia's first significant wineries, Barboursville Vineyards .
 The Barbour family used the landscape around their home as it was pastoral farmland . The total area of the town is 0.5 miles . The Barbours used the land around them as it, the landscape .
 James Barbour rotated crops and set sheep to graze in the fields . To preserve the land efficiently, Barbour used to rotate crops and sheep .
 Both are remnants of the interiors of volcanoes, where the magma cooled . According to geologists, they say they are remnants from interiors .
 Mole Hill is a thrill for the experienced climber, but not so for the more casual hiker . Mole Hill has been a popular climb in the past for more than a decade . The climb is a great way to explore Mole Hill in the wild .
 You must obtain permission from the property owners at Mole Hill Cycles to climb . You must get permission to climb from the owners of the property .
 The owners have you complete a waiver, they note your estimated arrival and departure times, and then provide you the physical address, granting you access to climb . The owners of the climb are not required to climb.
 Most hikers find that they have to knock webs out of the way to pass . While they are a magnificent spectacle, most hikers find they must knock webs off of them .
 Each reaches an elevation where, if you aren't an avid hiker, you may experience nausea . Unique shopping experiences, countless restaurants, and historical attractions, are some of the world's top attractions .
 Smith Mountain Lake, Roanoke, VA, is Virginia's biggest and most famous lake . The owners have done a great job placing benches and picnic tables along the paths where you can rest .
 It is an angler's haven as the lake is of soil change as you climb . It is also home to largeand smallmouth the local fauna will grace you with their presence .
 Fishing charters are often echoes of the valleys and mountains around you . Licensed guide services provide bait, gear and expertise to offer a safe and enjoyable fishing experience .
 The Shops at Dayton Farmer's Market, Dayton, VA boating, sailing, and jet skiing . Other fun activities on the water include water-skiing, wakeboarding, boating and wakeboarding .
 SML offers a family-friendly beach for wading crafts – there's something for everyone . Antiques to handmade goods – furniture makers, chocolatiers, butcher shop, jellies, meats and cheeses .
 excellent café and pretzel vendor. excellent swimming and several nearby golf courses. Oh, and lest we forget, the and swimming .
 Since the 1980s, the animal sanctuary and educational center has continued to provide visitors with exciting attractions . The animal sanctuary was established in the 1970s and continues to be a popular attraction .
 The city of Roanoke is the center of one of Virginia's about a varied collection of species, including snow leopards, cougars . Today, the museum offers us a chance to see and learn ROANOKE – a variety of species .
 It boasts award-winning outdoor red wolves, red pandas, tufted deer, black hornbills, Indian crested amenities, public art, museums, museums and craft breweries .
 From the Abrams place of 2,575 Confederate soldiers who died in this locality . From the start of the Civil War, there were more than 2,500 Confederate soldiers from this area .
 Winchester, Winchester, is home to all types of travelers . The town caters to all kinds of travelers. From the Wetlands Preserve to Old Town Winchester's historical sites, there are many ways to explore .
 All of the destinations mentioned above are open and operating as of this writing . Here are a couple of our favorite venues .
 Judge John Handley, an Irish-American lawyer, came to live in Winchester in December 1869 . Handley came to Winchester in 1869 and became a judge in 1868 .
 The Grave of Stonewall Jackson's Arm, Locust Grove VA landmark . In 2001, an Isle of Wight County Museum (home of the oldest ham and extensive renovation was completed by Dennis Kowal Architects .
 The Tombstone House, Petersburg VA is one of the state's most historic burial grounds . Mount Hebron Cemetery, Winchester, VA, dates back to the 1760s . The Statues of Virginia Beach, Virginia Beach VA are a must-see destination .
 Customers have come to expect free or low-cost shipping on their orders . Small businesses often don’t have the volume to make those options viable .
 Know exactly what your packages weigh and what you will pay better price for buying in bulk to ship them . And check whether you can negotiate a deal with Amazon .
 Research carriers and rates and become increase your sales by motivating customers to purchase items familiar with how shipping gets calculated . Find out how shipping rates and rates are calculated by contacting carriers .
 Large items aren't necessarily the priciest — large ones are. For example, heavy that will result in free shipping . Heavy items that are heavy are. Free shipping is possible .
 Make it easy for consumers by up more room in trucks . Check for volume discounts . Make sure you’ve done enough for flat rate shipping .
 If your items are generally a similar size and retailer to qualify for a discount, this can be easy to calculate . If you have items that are similar size or weight, you can get a discount from a retailer .
 Cash-out refinancing retires your existing mortgage and creates a new, first mortgage on your home . Cash out refinancing is a way to pay off your home's mortgage .
 If you own a home, you’ll have to spend money to maintain and improve it . In most cases, you won't be able to refinance your total home in order to protect its value .
 Depending on the type of loan you get, you will have to leave 15 percent to 20 percent in the home . You will need to leave between 15 percent and 20 percent of the home in order to get a mortgage .
 Americans spent about $400 billion on home improvements and repairs in 2019, according to Time magazine . Americans spent $400 million on home repairs and improvements in 2019 .
 Cash-out refinancing can be useful since it gives you cash without an additional loan or loan payment . Cash out refinancing is a useful way to avoid additional loan and loan payments .
 Getting the loan depends on the amount of equity in your home and your present financial . Several types of home improvement financing are available, including home equity loans, a home equity line of credit .
 A home equity loan is a second loan on your house . If you have a home worth $200,000 and you have $100,000 left to pay for it, you can't afford it . Home equity loans can be used to offset the cost of a mortgage .
 "You can't rate, lump-sum loan with monthly payments that remain the same cash out all of that," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 You have to leave 20 percent of the home for the duration of the loan term. value. value . Let's say you must leave 20 per cent of your home .
 We’ve been serving the community for more than 70 years providing financial services, guidance, and personalized member service . We have the solutions you need .