 Google says the EU requires a notice of cookie use and says they have posted a notice . Midge Decter: Google says it has posted the EU notice .
 We need to get behind assertions and look at the numbers, or what they mean, or don't mean, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Washington Post Columnist David Ignatius calls for release of a timeline on the events of 11 September in Benghazi .
 Intervention For John, BLUF: A means of connection; tie; link; link . Intervention for John was intervention for John .
 Nice use of the term ""nexus"" by City Solicitor Christine O'Conner at tonight's City Council Meeting, at about 9:20 .
 Back to City Life this AM, we spent the first hour looking at foreign policy . It centered around the Mediterranean Sea, specifically Armenia, Syria, Turkey and Libya, with excursions to the former Yugoslavia .
 This is an effort to create an international norm that says other nations should step in and put an end to such activities . Given the propensity of governments to allow ethnic cleansing and genocide, this is an attempt to create a norm .
 Former Secretary of State Madeline Albright and current U.S. UN Ambassador Susan Rice are among those connected to this approach . Albright: "It's a good idea to use diplomacy in the United States"
 Thought For John, BLUF: Be careful of what you wish for . Thought for John: "Be careful of your wish for"
 The Weimar Republic was replaced by Adolph Hitler's Third Reich . The Third Reich was the German Weimar republic .
 The Mainstream Media, like the rest of the media, is not fair and balanced . John Sutter says he is proud of his work at Pulitzer's School For John .
 Some guy in a ""Right Wing"" newspaper says Obama, not Romney, is out of the mainstream on abortion .
 Mostly Kad, Renee and Renee have been tossing back and forth over the issue of abortion .
 "There are serious issues involved and serious people can take opposing positions," says CNN.com's John Defterios.com.com .
 I think I may have been unkind in comparing Kad to Princeton's Professor Peter Singer, both because Prof Singer teaches at an Ivy League School . Prof Singer is an extremist, and Prof Singer taught at Princeton .
 Timothy Carney explains why it’s the Obama, not Romney, campaign that is extreme on the issue of abortion . Carney: Obama, Romney are extreme on abortion, but not Romney .
 It would only make abortion something that would be decided state-by-state rather than imposed from the Supreme Court down, in a one-size-fits-all solution for the country .
 If Roe is overruled, state legislatures should then make abortion unavailable, they say . But they don't necessarily, as a political matter, think that if Roe is over-ruled, they should make it unavailable . They say they don’t necessarily think that .
 The constitutional right ssue and the “legal availability” issue are apples and oranges, the author says . "Legal availability’s issue is an issue that is not a constitutional right to sue," he says .
 Allan Poe Votes For John: Voter fraud has a long history in these United States . Allan Poe votes for John in the 2012 election .
 The Economic Debate For John, BLUF: The costumes change, but the economic questions stay the same . Sunday, October 28, 2012, is the date of the 2012 presidential election .
 The Smithsonian will hold a debate between Alexander Hamilton and Thomas Jefferson on how to fix the economy in 1790 . The debate will take place in Washington, DC .
 If you are down in the DC area around that time it might be an interesting event . The event will take place in the Washington, DC, area .
 The challenges facing America after independence resonate with those facing many governments today . America's challenges facing the challenges after independence resonates with many today's challenges .
 The Articles of Confederation had proven inadequate to chart a road to recovery . Beset by unpaid debt, a crippled economy, and growing popular discontent, the national government under the articles of Confederation failed to chart an economic recovery .
 The new federal Constitution was adopted in 1787 . It brought fresh hope as well as bitter disagreement among political leaders . The Constitution was the first of its kind .
 Alexander Hamilton and Thomas Jefferson clashed on the role of the federal government in the fledgling nation’s economy . No issue proved more divisive than the issue of the economy . Washington's first-term cabinet members came to vigorously dislike each other .
 A Smithsonian Debate brings these men and their conflicting political philosophies to life in a lively, interactive event . The audience plays a key role in the debate .
 Secretary of the Treasury Hamilton proposed innovative programs to stimulate economic recovery and create an “energetic’ national government . Embracing an expansive view of the powers of the new Constitution, Hamilton proposed programs .
 Secretary of State Jefferson pushed for a balance of power between the central government and the states . Jefferson pushed in a different direction, searching for a sustainable balance between the states and the federal government . Jefferson was the first secretary of state to push for a compromise .
 Their debates highlight differences over policy, the meaning of the Constitution, and the nature of federalism itself . Their debates and disputes highlight differences .
 Enjoy a glass of wine while developing questions to pose to the debaters . 8:15 to 9m. Deliberation .
 Decision Debaters respond to audience questions . Show-of-hands vote selects the winner of the debate .
 Princeton Professor Paul Krugman says President Obama showed 'true grit' re the auto bailout and the bin Laden takedown and thus will win .
 Earlier today I was trying to recall the name Paul Krugman as I made a comment about Keynesian Economics, but I couldn't . I was also trying to remember Paul Krugman .
 I could visualize him, beard and all, and I knew his name began with a K, but it was escaping me and I didn't have time to track it down . "I could . visualize him," he says .
 Professor Krugman is the nobel laureate of the Nobel Peace Prize . Althouse blog posts on Professor Krugman appear to be a response to a blog post .
 President Obama's decisions on the auto industry and Osama bin Laden will help propel the President to reelection . Under the title ""Fortune Favors the Brave"" he predicts that Obama's ""gutsy"" decisions will help him win reelection .
 For John, BLUF: Another successful Homelessness Conference in Lowell . For John: "Another successful homelessness conference"
 Conference, our 7th in a series on ""Keys to Ending Homelessness"", was a success . Conference was held in New York City, New Jersey .
 As I left a number of people were remaining behind to network and talk about the issues brought to the surface during the conference .
 Two women wished for more time between breakout sessions . Two women said they wished for time between the breakout sessions.
 Lowell's Department of Planning and Development did an excellent job setting up the event .
 She hung around early on to make sure they stayed on track at the start of the day .
 I am a dogsbody on the Homelessness Conference and Education Committee . I am also a dogbody on a homelessness conference and education committee .
 This is just one blogger's opinions and does not represent the official position of the City of Lowell, UMass Lowell, the Commonwealth or the Nation . This is the opinion of the blogger .
 For John, BLUF: There is no national concensus on how to fix a recession, and no concensus amongst economists to help us . John says there is no consensus on how the economy is supposed to fix it .
 The very notion of a ‘fiscal cliff’ suggests that the country is approaching a calamitous drop-off at the end of the year . It would be tantamount to suicide to jump off the cliff, the author says .
 A contingent of policy wonks and Democrats insist that letting the Dec. 31 deadline come to an end could produce the best outcome for the country . The deadline is set to trigger automatic tax increases and spending cuts .
 Once the tax hikes have kicked in, the reasoning goes, Republicans would be hard-pressed to roll them back . They would have to accept a deal on taming the deficit that contains more new tax revenue than they want .
 Later in the story is the acronym CBPP, Center on Budget and Policy Priorities . CBPP is an acronym for the center on budget and policy priorities .
 Race relations are not getting better, as one might have hoped after nearly four years of the Obama Administration .
 Associated Press poll: A slight majority of Americans express prejudice toward blacks whether they recognize it or not . The poll finds that racial attitudes have not improved in the four years since Barack Obama was elected president .
 This strikes me as an incomplete survey in that it doesn't talk about the attitudes of minorities, only Caucasians . The survey doesn't mention attitudes of minority people, but Caucasians, as well as Caucasians.
 U.S. News and World Report poll says that over the last four years Blacks have come to feel less empowered . Blacks are less empowered, according to the poll .
 While the economy is Job 1 for a victorious Romney or Obama, working the empowerment of minorities is pretty close as Job 2 . The empowerment of minority minority voters is Job 2 for a victor .
 Coupled with that should be improving the way various Americans feel about other Americans, other Americans . Americans who don't look like them or have the same background and attitudes should be able to relate to others .
 You know how people from Harvard feel about people from some Cow College in Idaho . You know that Harvard grads feel differently about people coming from Cow College .
 The Administration made some possibly wrong decisions on 11 September, that got four of our people killed, BLUF says . The administration made some potentially wrong decisions, he says .
 The big problem is that they missed the causes because they focused on some dumb video . The big issue is that the video is not just a dumb video, but it's a real problem .
 SecDef Leon Panetta and Chairmen of the Joint Chiefs of Staff General Martin Dempsey testify in testimony . Panetta testified on testimony by Secretary of Defense and Secretary of State Martin Dempsey . Dempsey and Panetta testify in a joint defense hearing .
 While forces in the Med were ready, ""it was 9/11 everywhere in the world"" and the military had to be on the alert for a potential crisis in other areas, said Gen. General .
 We understood there was a danger of riots or worse on the eleventh anniversary of the attack on the Twin Towers and the Pentagon . We understood the danger of rioting on the anniversary of 9/11 .
 Someone in the know said that an Embassy in Khartoum, Sudan, was burned, possibly the German . The embassy was burned in Sudan .
 The Administration has not yet walked the cat back on the video, but it's not clear whether it's a mistake .
 President Barack Obama's administration is going down wrong paths in relations with Arab nations, says Obama . The Arab Spring has been a major factor in the U.S. relationship with the Arab world .
 Obama administration did the best they could, given the circumstances, but the outcomes were bad, he says . "I give the Administration that they had decisions to make"
 The Administration will not give the Administration a pass on blaming it on ""the video"" and then instigating the arrest of the producer, who would otherwise have not come to the attention of the local Dog Catcher .
 The Army doesn't knowingly deploy pregnant soldiers . The Army has no obligation to do so .
 This Spring the 12th Combat Aviation Brigade, a helicopter unit based near Ansbach, Germany, deployed subordinate units to Afghanistan . There were female soldiers .
 She delivered herself of a baby boy some time over the Summer . Her chain of command was shocked by the surprise .
 The question on some minds was why she was in Afghanstan in the first place . The question is whether she was ever in the country again?
 Army regulations require all female soldiers to undergo a urine pregnancy test 30 days before deployment . Those who test positive are to be referred for further evaluation .
 The Army doesn't deploy pregnant soldiers, or at least works to avoid it . The Army has a policy against deploying pregnant soldiers .
 For John, BLUF: "We have a big murky area that is our consensus as to when life begins" John: We have a murky area of life that is when it begins .
 Columnist Sally Quinn takes on the brouhaha over Indiana Republican Senate candidate Richard Mourdock . She says all life begins at conception and all life comes from God .
 Massachusetts will vote on when life becomes no longer supportable as life . The Commonwealth of Massachusetts will get to vote on what life becomes supportable .
 I write this with a level of trepidation for what my future might hold. I write that with a fear of what I might hold for the future .
 There Goes The First Amendment for John, BLUF: Tufts, down the street, has banned a Christian group for wanting to be Christian . Tufts has banned the group from using the First Amendment .
 Tufts Christian Fellowship has lost its official recognition as a Tufts Community Union student group . The group's constitutional requirements for its leaders are alleged to be discriminatory .
 TCU's Vision and Planning Team failed to make revisions to its governing document . TCU Constitution’s non-discriminatory clause prohibits discrimination . The group failed to change the document to comply with the Constitution, a senior says .
 Ripped Off For John, BLUF: Not everything Amazon sells is good value .
 About a year ago my wife decided we would take a Fiction Writing Course at UMass Lowell Continuing Ed. She and her husband are taking a fiction writing course .
 I wrote a short story on Exercise ABLE ARCHER 83, which you can look up on Wikipedia . Among other items, I wrote short story about exercise ABLEARER 83 .
 A classmate from a course recently mentioned that there was a book out on ABLE ARCHER, I went to Amazon and ordered it . So, when a classmate from the course mentioned that a book was out there, I ordered it.
 The authors, Messrs Jesse Russell and Ronald Cohn, copied the above mentioned Wikipedia article, plus Wikipedia articles on NATO, the Soviet RYAN missile warning system and the United States . The authors of the article, including Ronald Cohn and Jesse Russell, used the above article to make their
 So, I basically spent a Double Sawbuck for a nicely printed trade sized version of a couple of Wikipedia articles . So, it was a nice printed trade-sized version of the articles .
 Greater Lowell Technical High School lost a Lowell School Committee member, Michael Lenzi, to resignation . The school lost a member of the school committee to resign .
 Mr Lenzi has moved to his new home, in Dracut, and his former seat is in play . The former seat in the city of Dracut is now in play for the next election .
 "I handed my application to be considered for the seat and my one page resume to Ms Jenn Myers, the Mayor's aide," she said .
 Other active applicants include former GLTHS School Committee Member and Chair, David Lefarriere, and Property Appraiser and Pawtucketville activist for youth, Ray Boutin .
 One in six Americans are in poverty today, the highest rate in a generation . The rate of poverty in the United States is now the highest in the country's history . The country's poverty rate is the highest since the 1970s .
 Taking a new approach is not only risky, but it means choosing between alternatives . Taking new approach to the world is risky, and it's risky, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Government collected statistics say things are not getting better . On the other hand, government data show things are getting worse .
 Ryan St Crispin Day For John is Ryan's Day for John . Ryan is better, stronger, for being a band of diverse brothers .
 Thanks to InstaPundit for reminding us that this is St Crispin Day . This is the day of St Crispins Day .
 Shakespeare had a way with words, and Shakespeare had way with them . From this day to the ending of the world, But we in it shall be remembered, Shakespeare said .
 Democratic intellectuals want you to think that Government is inherently good . They say it's good for the country, but it's bad for the people who want it to have it .
 We already know how most of the electoral map will be colored, which will be close to the way it has been colored for decades . Regardless of who wins the presidential election, we already know now how to color the map . The electoral map is likely to be similar to how it has
 Southern and Western desert and mountain states will vote for the candidate who endorses an aggressive military, a role for religion in public life, laissez-faire economic policies, private ownership of guns .
 Northeastern and most coastal states will vote for candidate who is more closely aligned with international cooperation and engagement, secularism and science, gun control .
 I was OK at the beginning, well, except for the idea that people in so-called red states don't believe in science, or that Republicans don't . "I was OK until the beginning of this week, well ... except for this idea," she says .
 I have seen some progressive arguments that make me think they deny Darwin . I'm not sure if Darwin is the real reason for Darwin's existence .
 After I got further into the article I thought it started to contradict itself. But, after I got . further into it I thought . it started . It was a good article, but it was a bit of a mistake, I thought.
 The Government has been criticised for its lack of faith in the faith of the public . It has been described as 'a belief in the inherent goodness of the Government'
 The author seems to reject the idea that the People are sovereign, and I rejected it . So, at the end of the book, the author seemed to reject that idea . "I rejected it," he said .
 I am from Western Pennsylvania and am a ""bitter clinger"" and left high school and California when it was still the Old California, before Orange County went Democrat . I am a "bitter clinger" who left high school and California when it was still
 For John, BLUF: You can pick your friends, but you can't pick your relatives . John says, "Can't We All Just Get Along?"
 Actress Halle Berry has a small failure on the part of the actress to get her values right . Berry has been criticised for her actions in the past .
 On the Jay Leno show she was asked about a genealogist telling her she was related to former Alaska Gov. Sarah Palin . Palin was asked if she is related to the former Alaska Governor .
 In Palinesque sort of way, she adds a superfluous ""I mean"" at the beginning of the sentence .
 If you look at the side-by-side photos in this article they do have that ""separated at birth"" look .
 Turns out Sarah Louise is two and a half years older than her sister Marie Halle . She is two-and-a-half years older .
 "The war on terror has been going on since you were a young man," says John Sutter .
 Next year will be the Thirtieth Anniversary of the bombing of the Marine Barracks in Beirut . Barracks used by the French 1st Parachute Regiment, also part of the International Peacekeeping Force .
 Elena Kagan interviewed for John, BLUF: Political opposites can get along in private, but you knew that . Kagan will be a Supreme Court Justice for the first time .
 She will be hunting antelope this coming weekend with fellow Associate Justice Antonin Scalia . Scalia will hunt antelope with Justice Scalia this weekend .
 For John, BLUF: Regarding the Benghazi Attack , forget the video . Chris Matthews: "Forget the video. Forget the video"
 Even the President and his supporters are saying it was a planned terrorist attack . The problem is, Chris Matthews has it wrong, as even his supporters say it was planned .
 The compounding problem is that the video meme leads to bad judgements and bad decisions . The video meme is not the only example of a meme that leads to a bad decision .
 "I put aside the Constitutional issues to focus on the focus of the video early on. I put aside Constitutional issues," he said . The video will be shown on CNN.com .
 Too early obvious cause can prevent us from looking deeper, says CNN.com . Like in an accident investigation, a too early cause is prevent us looking deeper .
 With the video in hand, we didn't need to consider the Eleventh Anniversary aspect, or the demands for release of the Blind Sheik or the Egyptian internal political issues, which can be more safely played out at the United States Embassy than the Presidential Palace .
 The video meme was so powerful it still shows up from time to time, e.g., the above Chris Matthews item from yesterday—40 some days after the event .
 If that video meme sits in the back of peoples' minds it could well distort future U.S. Foreign Policy, to our detriment . The video meme could distort future United States Foreign Policy .
 The importance of keeping an open mind during the first 24 hours of a crisis is important, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Former Assistant Secretary of Defense and Writer Bing West points out the problem . Bing West says the problem is that the Pentagon is not ready to make the changes .
 Our Ambassador, Chris Stevens, took a calculated risk and almost pulled it off . Chris Stevens' actions were calculated riskous, he says . Stevens was a hero for his country .
 He understood that peace and stability wasn't going to come with him isolated in his Embassy in Tripoli . "Peace and stability won't come with that," he said . He said .
 He was gutsy and that is the kind of men and women we need as out Ambassadors. That's what we need to do as Ambassadors . He said: 'That is the type of man and woman we need'
 Martin Burke, the Republican in the race for the 17th Middlesex Rep District, has a web site up . Burke is running for the Republican seat in the Middlesex district .
 Only four of 32 presidential candidates will be on the ballots across the country . Only four have attainted ballot access in a sufficient number of states .
 The Sun Recommends for John Romney . BLUF: The Sun goes for Romney .
 Today's edition of The Sun has an editorial endorsing Mitt Romney for President . The Sun endorsed Mitt Romney's candidacy .
 Editor Jim Campanini says editorial was good editorial, but it wouldn't change his vote . He says it's a good editorial but it won't change my vote. He says he'll vote again for President Obama .
 A true WWII hero, George McGvern, has passed away . RIP For John, BLUF: "George McGvern was a true WWI hero, a hero, has died."
 He had lived a full life—combat bomber pilot, PhD college professor, legislator and Presdental Candidate . He was also a college professor and a politician .
 Law Professor Ann Athouse notes that Senator McGovern was her first vote for president . Law Professor Athouse also notes that she voted for McGovern .
 Today I am not sure how a McGovern election would have made a difference, except maybe for the outcome of the 73 War . Today I don't think McGovern would have been able to win a presidential election .
 We still would have had the Khmer Rouge and still had 20,000 Cambodia-Americans in Lowell, Lowell, California, where I voted for Dick Nixon over George McGovern . We would still have had a like number in Long Beach, California .
 Republicans portrayed Mr McGovern as a cowardly left-winger . McGovern was a threat to the military and the free-market economy and outside the mainstream .
 Many Democrats have long accused him of leading the party astray . Fair or not, he never lived down the image of a liberal loser .
 For John, BLUF: Non-Ivy Leaguers do better as President than Ivy leaguers . John's Alma Mater grades the presidents by Alma Matter . For John: "For John, for John, not for John's alma mater"
 Fred Schwartz talks about the impact of the Ivy League Universities on the presidency and presidential performance . He says Ivy League universities have a big impact on presidential success .
 The Ivy League has been a symbol of everything Middle America hates: rich, snobbish, exclusive, Eastern, and too smart for its own good . Unofficially, of course, the Ivy League, even avant la lettre, has for centuries been an icon of everything
 I don't think I can rightly judge this, in that I am from a small trade school in the foothills of the Rockies . I'm not sure how much I can judge this in my own life, but I'm proud of it, and it's a very small town .
 Saturday, October 20, 2012 Republican Rally Sunday—UMass Lowell For John, BLUF: Republican rally Sunday near Marty's Office .
 Tomorrow, October 21st is the largest rally of the year with Senator Scott Brown, Senator Kelly Ayotte and Congressional Candidate Jon Golnik . The rally will be held in New Hampshire and Maine .
 Doors open at 10:30 am and the rally will begin shortly after at 11:00 am . The rally will be held at the same time as the rally at 11 a.m.
 Volunteers standing outside the rally with signs at 10:00 am. If you would like to join us earlier we will have volunteers standing outside with signs . Volunteers will be standing outside at 10 a.m.
 Republican Veep Nominee Paul Ryan is also running for his seat in the United States House . John McCain is running for the Kennedy seat .
 Congressman Paul Ryan is still running for his seat in the United States Congress . Ryan is running for the U.S. House of Representatives . Ryan has been a congressman since 2010 .
 At least according to U.S. News and World Report, the online version of this article says .
 The new Congress will convene in January, when the new Congress convenes . President Obama is expected to be inaugurated in January .
 On Inauguration Day he will just move from the House of Representatives to the United States Senate . If he wins both races, he will be moved to the Senate .
 Looks like it will be observed on Monday, the 21st, which is also the Observation of Martin Luther King's Birthday . It will also be observed as part of the observation of the birthday of the Reverend King .
 There is no in-lieu-of holiday for employees who are not regularly scheduled to work on Inauguration Day . The inauguration is the first time the president has been inaugurated .
 Employees for whom January 21, 2013, is the legal public holiday for the Birthday of Martin Luther King, Jr., are not entitled to an in-lieu-of holiday for Inauguration Day if the day selected for the public .
 The Fort Hood shooting, from November 2009, is considered, by the Federal Government, an act of workplace violence, rather than the act of terrorism . For John, BLUF: "Fort Hood shooting" is considered by the U.S. government to be a workplace violence .
 Mr Morrissey references an item in The Stars and Stripes, linked to here . The Stars & Stripes is a collection of American artifacts .
 Hasan had been in contact with al-Qaeda leader Anwar al-Awlaki to discuss the legitimacy of conducting jihad within the U.S. military . Hasan was the suspect in the massacre, which prompted questions about why the military hadn’t intervened .
 Most people assumed that was enough was enough to consider the massacre a terrorist attack, including me . Most people thought it was enough, including myself, to believe it was an act of terrorism .
 The victims do not get combat-related special compensation that provides disability pay for medically retired servicemembers . Because the incident is not considered an act of terrorism, the victims don't get special compensation .
 This coming Friday Lowell is hosting another Conference on the problem of Homelessness, this time on food security . The conference will be held on Friday .
 I only saw the reruns and I know that the President didn't give a straight answer and that Moderator Candy Crowley's intervention was a mistake and she got her facts wrong—and she basically admitted that, after the fact . I'm not sure what happened, but I'm sure
 The Administration has not repented of claiming it is the fault of the video, Innocence of Muslims . No one is standing up for the First Amendment in this case, including the Mainstream Media, which depends on the First .
 The number of people actually holding a job in our Commnwealth is again going down, says John Avlon .
 He gets beyond the unemployment number to talk about changes in the workforce . Both those entering and leaving the workforce are discouraged, he says .
 The unemployment rate may go up as the economy turns around, as previously discouraged workers re-enter the work force . He makes the good point that the unemployment rate will go up .
 Jobless rate continues to rise in the U.S. economy . The jobless rate has also increased in recent years . The unemployment rate has increased in the past year .
 For John, BLUF: We are still losing jobs here in the Commonwealth—fewer people working . John says the economy is still in the process of losing jobs .
 Today's Boston Herald has an article on rising Massachusetts unemployment rate . The state's unemployment rate has risen in recent years .
 The Massachusetts unemployment rate rose to 6. percent for September . The Bay State added 5,100 jobs for the month . A separate survey from the Bureau of Labor Statistics estimated that the Bay State had 5,000 jobs .
 "Yes, maybe that is the situation, but my concern is overall employment numbers," he said . "I'm not sure if that's the case, but I'm concerned about the employment numbers."
 The Bureau of Labor Statistics charted the last few years of the Labor Department's joblesslesslessness .
 The numbers are squished together, month to month, but it's clear that today's employment is not as high as it was in December 2006 or January 2008 . The numbers of people in the U.S. are squashed together month to monthly .
 AL GORE’s NEWSPAPER ENDORSES ROMNEY: “To say this endorsement by The Tennessean is an eyebrow raiser is an understatement.” “The Tennesseans is an ... eyebrow-raising,” he says .
 This is the same newspaper where former Vice President Al Gore got his start in journalism, that endorsed Obama in 2008 . Former Vice President Gore started in journalism with the paper .
 A long time ago the term Weapon of Mass Destruction meant a nuclear device, an A-Bomb or H-Bomb . The term 'WMD' was used to refer to a weapon of mass destruction .
 The Soviets talked us into including Chemical and Biological weapons . Then the Soviets talked them into including chemical and biological weapons. Then the U.S. decided to include such weapons .
 The accused, Quazi Mohammad Rezwanul Ahsan Nafis, came to our shores in January, on a student visa . The accused is accused of being in possession of a Chinese passport .
 Complaint: If one thousand pounds of explosives is a WMD, what is a small nuclear device at 10 kt of explosive force? But, to the complaint, the complaint says, "what is a nuclear device?"
 Police and prosecutors use the terminology used by police and prosecutors to refer to crimes . The terminology comes to us thanks to the carelessness of the U.S. Congress, says CNN's John Sutter .
 "I'm sure our delegation strongly opposed it, but somebody voted for it," says lawmaker . "It's not surprising that somebody voted to support it," she says .
 The definition includes “any destructive device” and that phrase in turn is defined in a related statute to include just about any explosive device or propellant-based projective weapon .
 The FBI and DOJ put emphasis on the WMD phrase in discussing the incident, no matter how accurate it is as a description of the charge itself . None of that, of course, is a complete justification for the FBI to emphasize the phrase .
 New NYT CEO For John, BLUF: "Once you start a witch hunt you never know where it will end up"
 We should, of course, assume that Mr Thompson was clean on this and not involved in a cover-up . But still, it is a bit awkward. We should assume he was clean .
 For John, BLUF: Opinions are like noses and they have to be counted until one has a majority . John says he has a lot of opinions, but that's not enough to count .
 As I mentioned in a previous post, I didn't watch the Presidential Debate last evening . As I said, I did not watch the presidential debate last night .
 I was doing homework for my Saturday morning class at UMass Lowell, Sociology of Genocide . I'm doing homework in a Sociology Sociology class .
 The skinny bookworm who sits in the front row can duke it out after all . Here is the lede: "The skinny book worm"
 Then, he comes out like Jake LaMotta, eyes flashing, gloves up, his malicious intent plain for all to see . Then he comes back like he did in the fight: "I'm not afraid to fight," he says .
 Muhammad Ali put in the hours skipping rope, and rehearsed his combinations until he could unleash them at will, from all angles . Like Muhammad Ali, after being embarrassed in his first bout with Leon Spinks, he had put in hours skipping . Muhammad Ali had been embarrassed in first bout
 Mr Cassidy did think that Candy Crowley had the right when she cut off Governor Romney over Libya . Mr Cassidy says he thinks that she was right .
 Ace of Spades posted a video in which Ms Crowley seems to suggest that Governor Romney was, in fact, correct . Ace posted the video on his website .
 Case overthrown for John, BLUF: The Congress shall not criminalize past actions—for our protection from the Government .
 InstaPundit has a comment on the overturn of the conviction of Mr Salim Hamdan, Osama bin Laden's driver . Mr Hamdan's conviction was overturned in the case of bin Laden .
 The United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia overturned Salim Hamdan’s conviction for providing “material support” to terrorists, including Osama bin Laden . Hamdan served as a driver for bin Laden, for whom he served as an aide .
 The court reasoned that providing “material support’ to terrorists was not a recognized crime under the Law of War . Hamdan was the driver of the OBL .
 Congress passed a law in 2006 that made material support to terrorism a war crime, but it could not have retroactive application . The law was passed in 2006 but it was not retroactive .
 The court made it clear, however, that under existing Supreme Court precedent, Mr Hamdan and other enemy combatants can be detained indefinitely, until such time as U.S. hostilities with al Qaeda end .
 Interagency Crisis Process Reviewed For John, BLUF: When it is a crisis, everyone gets involved .
 When Kim Jung-il got a cold, military staff in Korea reported to the Command Post . Someone once told me that when . Kim Jung .il got . a cold all the military . staff in . Korea reported . to the command post .
 "No one wants to miss a crisis and a chance to earn a medal or avoid condemnation for not being responsive," says CNN.com's John Sutter . "I'm not going to miss it. No one wants a medal," he says .
 Readers need reassurance that the U.S. uses an inter-agency approach to crisis management all the time every time .
 All relevant resources are applied to evaluate the situation, limit damage, establish control and stability and restore normality . The situation is described as an attempt to limit damage and restore stability .
 National security crises always are managed in Washington. That is the way national security crises are managed. That's how Washington manages crises .
 In the 4 decades between 1970 and 2010, there never was a time when an American diplomat was injured by hostile action, an embassy or consulate attacked, an aircraft shot down, a ship attacked or an official attacked or kidnapped .
 Similar teams or cells would be created in the responsible military commands and every agency involved in national security affairs . Similar teams would be set up in the military commands, every agency .
 During a crisis, crisis action teams issue situation updates to the national command authority and to each other, often hourly at first . Crisis action teams often issue updates hourly at the beginning of a crisis .
 The White House Situation Room is always in the loop, if not the real time crisis management clearing house, for all reporting on the crisis .
 "An attack on an ambassador is an attack on the United States," the ambassador says . "The United States national security enterprise always takes that as its starting point for crisis management," he says .
 Every agency is involved, including the military commands, not just State Department, for example . Every agency involved in the process includes the State Department .
 News coverage of the Benghazi attack does not reflect the basics of U.S. national security crisis management practice, nor the diligence and competence of the people who make it work and would have been on duty .
 The system fell apart after Mr John McCreary retired from DoD or we aren't getting the full story about Benghazi last month . So, either the system fell together after Mr. John McCareary retired .
 It is an interesting read and suggests that at some levels we were closer to the use of nuclear weapons that we supposed . It is interesting to see how close we were to nuclear weapons .
 There is a link to a three page Top Secret memo from Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, General Maxwell D Taylor, to the President, dated 2 November 1962 . The memo was a Top Secret document .
 One gets the impression of people groping for a good answer, on both sides, except maybe for Cuban President Fidel Castro . One of the reasons for Cuba's isolation is that it's not clear what will happen next?
 Baron Dobbs asserts that we learned the wrong lessons and those wrong lessons have misinformed us ever since . Dobbs says the lessons have been misinformed by the wrong people in the U.S. and beyond .
 Robert A Caro repeats a long-standing but erroneous myth about the Cuban missile crisis . Caro's latest volume of his acclaimed biography of Lyndon B Johnson .
 American destroyers and Soviet ships carrying nuclear missiles to Cuba . U.S. destroyers confronted Soviet ships with nuclear missiles in Oct. 1962 .
 The Soviet vessels were “within a few miles” of the blockade line, but turned away at the last moment . According to Mr Caro, the Soviet vessels turned away from the blockade .
 The “eyeball to eyeball” imagery has contributed to some of our most disastrous foreign policy decisions . The escalation of the Vietnam War under Johnson and the invasion of Iraq under George W Bush have been some of the world's worst decisions .
 Leaders on both sides were looking for a way to back away from nuclear confrontation . But, the rest of us were learning that hanging tough was the answer .
 Kennedy was certainly bracing for an “eyeball to eyeball” moment, but it never happened . Kennedy was braced for an eyeball-to-eye moment . Kennedy: "I'm sure it's a good thing for me, but I'm not sure
 There is now plenty of evidence that Kennedy — like Khrushchev — was a lot less steely-eyed . Initial accounts of the crisis were virtually dictated by the White House, which was virtually dictated .
 Tape-recorded transcripts show that Kennedy was prepared to make significant concessions . Kennedy was willing to make a public trade of Soviet missiles in Cuba for American missiles in Turkey .
 President has recently read The Guns of August, one account of the run-up to World War One, by Barbara W Tuchman .
 The key lesson to be learned is that mistakes will be made by statesmen and others . But, the key lesson should be learned, is that statesmen will make mistakes, says CNN.com .
 Hillary Takes the Fall for John, BLUF: Hillary taking the fall doesn't answer the deeper questions about where we need to go from here .
 Hillary Clinton said she was responsible for the attack on our Consulate in Benghazi, which resulted in the death of four Americans, including our Ambassador, Chris Stevens . I admit to being a bit confused by Hillary Clinton saying she was the one responsible .
 This doesn't get to the most fundamental question, which is how we should view the demonstrations on 11 September, says Peter Bergen . Bergen: Where they about that video?—not likely .Where they about who will run Egypt and other MENA nations?—I think we
 There are serious issues in the Middle East and North Africa and blaming some 13 minute amateur video isn't going to solve them . The video was released in the wake of a terrorist attack in Cairo .
 The unrest in the MENA area could boil over into scapegoating, ethnic cleansing and worse . Further, the unrest could be scapegoating and ethnic cleansing . The unrest could also boil over to scapegoating or ethnic cleansing in the region .
 Althouse on Warhol For John, BLUF: Life is complicated, complex and confusing .
 At the Althouse blog is a short post on Andy Warhol and his sexuality and spirituality . Warhol's sexuality and his spirituality was a big part of his life .
 It is about Free Speech, the First Amendment, the ability to tell your neighbor he or she is ugly . It is not only about Free speech, it is about telling your neighbor that he is ugly. It is also about telling the neighbor he's ugly.
 Sen. Buba opened the door to the issue during a Sun-sponsored debate last week . Buba is seeking re-election against Democratic incumbent Sen. Dianne Feinstein .
 He brought a Chick-fil-A drink cup to the debate, and placed it on the table in front of him .
 He said he's more concerned with the 1st Amendment right to free speech . But he said he was more concerned about free speech than free speech rights .
 This summer, crowds converged upon Chick-fil-A's 1,600-plus locations, including Burlington, in a show of solidarity . Crowds converged in support of Chick-Fil-A in Burlington, Burlington .
 Boston Mayor Thomas Menino condemned Cathy's position against same-sex marriage . Boston Mayor Menino said adding Chick-fil-A restaurants wouldn't be welcome .
 "I said that we were talking about contracts and that as contracts, everyone should have to go to City Hall or the Town Clerk to execute the contract, in public," Mayor says .
 The Chick-fil-A brouhaha got out of control when public officials started talking about banning the Restaurants . The restaurant chain has been accused of being racist and homophobic .
 While that might be the Chicago Way, it is not what our Constitution and the better angels of our nature call for . It's not the Chicago way, it's not what the Constitution and our better angels call for.
 The Constitution for public officials who try to repress a person's right to free speech and the ""better angels"" for those not in public office . For those who do not want to suppress that person's operations, the Constitution is for those who want to stop their operations .
 Government Officials should not be trying to suppress it. If you don't like it, don't watch it . Government officials should not try to suppress the issue. It's not a problem, it's a problem .
 Usually these Sun links die within a fortnight, forcing readers to go to some pay for view sites . The Sun links are a paid subscription to the Sun newspaper .
 The video was like a brick laying in the street, picked up to throw through a plate glass window . Frustration over local problems were the basis for protests .
 For John, BLUF: North Korea's rigid ideology means limited development and increased hunger . John says the North Korean government has a right to freedom of speech .
 We skip over to the Korean Peninsula to look at contrasting systems, North and South Korea . We skip to the South Korean Peninsula and look at the North's contrasting systems .
 At the end of WWII North Korea had virtually all of the industry on the Korean Peninsula, including all of its electric power generation .
 Syngman Rhee implemented a set of strongly collectivist policies while the South put in a bit more balanced system . The South implemented a more balanced set of policies .
 Hunger situation in North Korea this year worsened from the 1990s despite considerable international aid . Washington-based food institute: Hunger situation worsened despite considerable amount of international aid to communist nation .
 The 2012 Global Hunger Index published by the International Food Policy Research Institute said hunger remains a serious problem worldwide . The index shows alarming levels of hunger in some countries .
 North Korea's hunger situation was at the ""serious level" with its GHI standing at 19 points, higher than that of 15 in 1997 . North Korea is now at a "serious level," the report said .
 It is North Korean Communism that helps create the problem, but also the ideology of Juche . North Korea Communism is a problem, says South Korean President Kim Jong-ho .
 The people must have independence in thought and politics, economic self-sufficiency, and self-reliance in defense, says President Obama . "The people must be independent in thought, politics, and in defense," he says .
 Policy must reflect the will and aspirations of the masses and employ them fully in revolution and construction . Policy must include the will of the people and their aspirations, says Maoist leader .
 Methods of revolution and construction must be suitable to the situation of the country, says President Vladimir Putin . Methods must be suited to the country's situation, says Putin .
 The most important work of revolution and construction is molding people ideologically as communists and mobilizing them to constructive action . Lenin says the most important task of revolution is to mold people as communists .
 The Juche outlook requires absolute loyalty to the revolutionary party and leader . The party is based on loyalty to its revolutionary leader and party members .
 Kim Jong-eun is the grandson of North Korea's dictator Kim, who has ruled the country since 1989 . The North Korean leader has been in power since then, but little has changed .
 Norodom Sihanouk For John, BLUF: Former King of Cambodia dead at 89 at 89 . The former king of Cambodia died at age 89 .
 Second tour in Southeast Asia was mostly spent fighting the Khmer Rouge . Here is the period that interests me, as my second tour was spent in Cambodia .
 Dictator Pol Pot waged a campaign against those who might provide leadership for a counter-revolution . The result was a victory for the Khmer Rouge and ""Year Zero"" in Cambodia .
 King Sihanouk allied himself with the Khmer Rouge at the urging of his Chinese patrons, giving the Communists his prestige .
 King Sihanouk served as the figurehead president until he was placed under house arrest and fell into a deep depression . Pol Pot took power in 1975, with the ruthless Pol Pot taking over the country .
 Over the next four years, the Khmer Rouge regime led to the death of 1.1 million people and nearly destroyed the country . Over the same period, 1.2 million people were killed .
 Many Cambodians live in Lowell, and Long Beach, California, where I graduated from High School some 42 years ago . Today many Cambodians are living in Lowell .
 The earth hasn't been warming for 16 years and who knows where it will go from here . It's been 16 years since the Earth began to warm .
 Judith Curry, head of the climate science department at Georgia Tech makes the point . Professor Judith Curry says climate scientists need to be careful of the impact of climate change .
 Climate models and economic models are unreliable, CNN's David Rose says . He asks if they are not also unreliable .
 Are we going down some expensive path without any real basis in solid knowledge about climate system and the economic system? So, he asks, are we going to go down some costly path without real basis?
 Every quarter, statistics on the economy’s output and models of future performance have a huge impact on our lives . Every quarter of the world's economic output has a big impact on how it affects our lives.
 Bank of England and the Treasury are responding to a range of policy responses . They trigger a range from policy responses from the bank and Treasury, and myriad private businesses .
 Both the statistics and the modelling are extremely unreliable, say experts . Yet it has steadily become apparent since the 2008 crash that the statistics are unreliable, they say .
 To plan the future around them makes about as much sense as choosing a wedding date three months’ hence on the basis of a long-term weather forecast .
 The most depressing feature of this debate is that anyone who questions the alarmist, doomsday scenario will automatically be labelled a climate change ‘denier’ and accused of jeopardising the future of humanity . Anyone who questions climate change 'deniers' is automatically labelled a 'den
 Evidence is beginning to suggest that it may be happening much slower than the catastrophists have claimed – a conclusion with enormous policy implications . But the evidence is starting to suggest it may not be happening very slowly than the catastrophic predictions have claimed .
 To add to your interest in reading, here is a post that looks at the 40 year old solution to the then coming ice age . And, to add to the interest in this week's post, look at a 40-year-old version of the solution .
 "I'm sure they have new computers, but their main frame in 1974 was most helpful," says author . "I was sure they had new computers. But I'm not sure they've new ones."
 "Not a very nice person and he doesn't know how to play well with others," says Mark Hughes . "He's not very nice people," says Hughes .
 The Norman Conquest of England, 14 October 1066, changed our language, for the better . The Battle Hastings For John was the first Norman conquest of England in 1066 . The battle was fought in Hastings for John .
 William the Bastard became William the Conqueror at the Battle of Hastings . The Battle took place at Hastings, when William became the Bastard and changed world history . The battle took place in the middle of the year .
 A Retired Diplomat Comments for John, BLUF: It appears the White House doesn't trust the American People enough to update the Benghazi Story as facts emerge .
 Right Side has taken a jaundiced view of the meme that a 13 minute video out of LA County sparked all the demonstrations in the MENA area . Right Side is skeptical of the idea the video had anything to do with the Benghazi Incident .
 Retired Foreign Service Officer has blog post questioning Administration's viewpoint . Retired foreign service officer questions Administration's view of foreign policy .
 President Obama "threw the entire intel community and the State Department to the wolves," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 The White House was told the attack resulted from an anti-video demonstration gone awry, not from a terrorist action . The Embassy in Libya did not ask for extra security, White House says .
 The leaks will come fast and furious to show how the White House was informed and did nothing . The White House did nothing, and the president is expected to be in the middle of the leaks .
 There are now press reports that a U.S. done was overhead for at least part of the attack . The State Department's Charlene Lamb already has testified that she was monitoring the attack in ""near real time"
 Nobody has been able to explain the lack of White House response to the attack that went on for at least six hours . White House has been tight-lipped about the attack .
 Gov. Romney understands the need to make this part of the government apparatus work . Given his experience out in the economy, competing for profits, it is possible that Romney understands this .
 Early afternoon is the best time to vote, at least in the Northern Virginia area, but probably also in Virginia .
 There was an article on the WTOP web-site about the best time to vote this November 6th . Someone down in Virginia sent along this EMail note: Someone Down in Virginia .
 Please tell all your retired friends to resist the urge to come and vote before breakfast . Please tell them to resist coming and voting before breakfast.
 The actual best time to vote is after a long, leisurely group lunch, before that afternoon nap . The best time for voting should be after a leisurely, group lunch before that nap .
 In Virginia voters will also be asked to consider two Constitutional questions . In Fairfax County, there will be 4 Bond issues . In Virginia, there have also been 4 Bond questions .
 If you wish to vote in the electronic machine, please know how you want to vote before you get there . The issues involved in one of the Constitutional questions are not straightforward .
 The optically scanned ballots are just as reliable as the electronic machines . We too will face ballot initiatives and it is best to have digested them before you show at the polling place .
 Absential voting is not just for those out of state anymore, it's also for those who live in the U.S. It's important for those living in the United States to vote in the state .
 Lowell, Massachusetts, elections are held at City Hall and City Hall . If you have any questions, check at the Elections Office in City Hall or call a local Election Commissioner .
 Vice President Joe Biden got it wrong regarding exemptions to mandatory providing of contraction for employees . VP Debate Update: VP debate update for John McCain .
 Vice Presidential debate this last week contained an error in fact in fact . Apparantly the vice presidential debate was actually a joke .
 The U.S. Conference of Catholic Bishops took exception to the comment .
 No religious institution—Catholic or otherwise, including Catholic social services, Georgetown hospital, Mercy hospital, any hospital—has to refer contraception, none has to pay for contraception . None has to be a vehicle to get contraception in any insurance policy they provide .
 The Bishops, through their spokesperson, says that is not a fact . That is a fact. That is the fact, the Bishops say . That's the fact .
 The exemption does not extend to "Catholic social services, Georgetown hospital, Mercy hospital, any hospital" or any other religious charity that offers its services to all, regardless of the faith of those served .
 The use of derogatory terms based upon gender need to be vetted carefully, says John Avlon . Bidenisms must be carefully vetted .
 Martha McSally is running in Arizona, where a terrible tragedy occurred back in January of 2011 . She is running for the presidency in the state of Arizona . Martha is an Air Force Colonel and a retired USAF Colonel .
 In 2001 she sued Secretary of Defense Rumsfeld over the requirement to wear an Abaya while traveling off base in Saudi Arabia .
 For John, BLUF: We went after Japan's economy in 1941 and they turned on us and attacked Pearl Harbor and our bases in the Philippines .
 The VP suggested that given Iran's economy is in collapse we don't have to be panicked about an Iranian nuclear weapon . Given Iran's economic collapse we shouldn't be worried about a nuclear weapon, he said .
 I am in favor of doing what we can to educate the Iranians on the consequences of a nuclear detonation, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "If they employ nuclear weapons we will respond in kind, only more so"
 Ford Motors benefitted from GM $49.5 billion in 2012 . Bidenisms come with unintended consequences for Obama administration's actions .
 Professor Glenn Reynolds is sharing his blogging duties while on vacation . Over at the InstaPundit Professor Reynolds is on vacation from vacation .
 A new Rasmussen survey of consumer sentiment finds that a majority of those interviewed are more favorably disposed to buying a Ford product because the automaker did NOT go hat-in-hand to Washington for a bailout in 2008, as did GM and Chrysler .
 NYT Foreign Correspondent Walter Duranty received Pulizer Prize in 1932 while reporting out of the Soviet Union .
 Mitt Romney was right from the get-go when he attacked the Benghazi attack . The Benghazi attack was the Benghazi terror attack .
 Erika Johnsen, over at Hot Air, talks about the evolving story regarding the events of 11 September 2012 . Johnsen also discusses the evolution of the story surrounding the events .
 The title is a reference to the accusation that Governor Romney spoke too quickly about the events in Egypt and Libya . Romney was accused of speaking too quickly on the events .
 Romney hit the target because he instinctively stood up for American principles, like Free Speech, and for the integrity of our Diplomatic Missions . I believe Governor Romney hit his target in his statement .
 Rep. Debbie Wasserman Schultz says she's wrong, but just because it's wrong desn't mean it was false . Wasserman Schultz: "I'm sorry, here is the view of Rep. Wasserman Schultz . Just because it was wrong, it's false. I'm sorry."
 Interviewer Piers Morgan was having trouble with that concept and when CNN is having trouble, so are others . CNN is not alone but when CNN has trouble, it's having trouble .