 Events in and around Cuba brought the world to the brink of nuclear war in 1962 . It was events in Cuba that led to the world being at risk of a nuclear war .
 Before 1959, the USA had many troops stationed in Cuba and had invested large amounts of money .
 The country had been run by a dictator called General Batista who was supported by the U.S. government . The country was then ruled by the United States government .
 President supplied Batista with weapons to keep him in power . American businesses made huge profits in Cuba, and so the President supplied weapons .
 The U.S. government withdrew support for the Batista government in 1959 . Batista’s rule became increasingly brutal, and the United States withdrew support .
 As a result of his brutality, Batista and his government were overthrown by a Communist revolution in 1959 .
 He was told that there was a secret CIA plot to invade Cuba and overthrown Castro . He was also told that the CIA plot was to overthrow Castro and overthrow him .
 On April 17th, 1500 anti-Castro rebels landed at the Bay of Pigs on the southern coast of Cuba . The rebels landed in Cuba on April 17, 1969 .
 The invaders were armed and supplied by the USA, and the CIA was confident that other anti-Castro Cubans would join them to overthrow the Communist government .
 They couldn't imagine that Castro’s Communist regime could be popular with the people, so the invasion would give the Cuban population the chance to get rid of Castro . They couldn’t imagine that the Cuban people could be fooled by the regime, they say .
 The Cuban army had easily defeated the rebels, so Castro won even more popularity . Castro's popularity was boosted by the defeat of the rebels .
 Cubans now saw the USA as an active threat to their country, and so Castro asked Khrushchev and the USSR to help defend Cuba . The USSR responded to Castro's request for help defending Cuba .
 Source B is from a speech made by the Cuban revolutionary Che Guevara, talking about the results of the Bay of Pigs invasion . The speech is from the speech made about the success of the invasion in Cuba .
 In your own words, explain Che Guevara’s opinion of the Bay of Pigs . Read Source B .
 Castro turned to Nikita Khrushchev and the USSR for protection from future American invasions . Castro sought protection from the U.S. from the United States .
 In the summer, the CIA reported that Soviet ships were headed for the island . The CIA said in the summer it was believed Soviet ships would be headed for Cuba .
 At the docks, Cubans were thrown out of their homes as Soviet troops guarded the ships as they unloaded their cargo . At the end of the war, Cuban refugees were forced to leave their homes .
 Spies in Cuba had sent in reports of lorries carrying large objects covered in tarpaulins . Others claimed to have seen huge missiles being set up .
 The USSR denied sending nuclear missiles to Cuba, but Kennedy wasn't so sure . Kennedy was skeptical about the possibility of sending them .
 Images showed what appeared to be missile launching sites being built on the island . The sites could be capable of firing nuclear missiles at almost any major U.S. city .
 He could not allow nuclear missiles to be placed in Cuba to threaten his country, and anti-Communist fear in America was reaching new heights .
 In 1960, the USA had been humiliated when the Soviets shot down a U2 spy plane, and in 1961 the communists had built the Berlin Wall . In 1961, the U.S. was humiliated by the Soviet Union shooting down a spy plane .
 The Bay of Pigs had further embarrassed the USA, and so now something had to be done . The USA had to take decisive action . The US had to do more to stop the invasion of Cuba .
 U.S. photo shows Soviet missiles heading for Cuba in 1962 . Soviet missiles were headed for Cuba by the Soviets .
 President Kennedy met with a number of advisors as part of EXCOMM to decide what to do . JFK met with advisors to decide whether to take action against the government . ExCOMM was part of the President Kennedy administration .
 He was particularly keen to get a wider spread of advice after the disaster of the failed Bay of Pigs invasion .
 Initially, EXCOMM favoured bombing Cuba . President John F Kennedy was assassinated in October 1962 . President Kennedy was killed in the Cuban Revolution .
 By the third day, 18 October, another option had come to the fore . By the end of the day, it had been clear that the situation had changed dramatically .
 A U.S. surprise attack on Cuba would be “like Pearl Harbour’s like Pearl Harbour,” a politician said . One politician said the attack would be like a “Pearl Harbour” attack .
 There was no guarantee that the USSR would tolerate Kennedy’s decision . The USSR would not tolerate Kennedy's decision .
 The United States air-force was put on standby and nuclear bombs were loaded into US bombers . Meanwhile, the U.S. air force was placed on standby . The US bombers were loaded with nuclear bombs .
 President Kennedy appeared on television on October 22nd . The outside world knew nothing of this until President Kennedy made the announcement . President Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 He announced the blockade and told the Soviet leader, Khrushchev, to stop supplying missiles to Cuba . The blockade was announced by President Eisenhower in 1961 .
 Khrushchev was no fool – he didn’t want to start a nuclear war . He didn't want to get involved in nuclear war with Russia .
 He had to work with Kennedy to find a solution without appearing weak to his people . A delicate political tightrope now had to be walked by Kennedy .
 On the 24th October, 12 Soviet ships heading for Cuba either stopped or changed course . The ships were headed for Cuba .
 In the USA, Kennedy mobilised troops, ready for a possible invasion of Cuba . In the U.S. it was feared a Cuban invasion would be disastrous .
 Khrushchev sent two letters to Kennedy . Kennedy and Khruschev talked on the telephone . Khruski wrote letters to JFK .
 No more weapons to Cuba and those within Cuba withdrawn or destroyed, and you respond be ending your blockade and also agree not to invade Cuba . Cuba must also end its blockade of Cuba and end its use of weapons and destroy Cuba's weapons .
 You are worried by Cuba because it is 90 miles from America, but Turkey is right next to us, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Turkey is a major ally of the U.S. in the region .
 The sub and three others had orders to sneak past the American naval blockade to set up a secret submarine base at Cuba . But the B-59 became trapped by the aircraft carrier USS Randolph and eleven US Navy destroyers .
 On the 27th October, despite being in international waters, the Americans began to drop practice depth charges to force the Soviet sub to the surface .
 The submarine had been out of radio contact with Moscow for several days and had no idea whether war had broken out or not . The captain wanted to retaliate by launching a nuclear torpedo .
 Such action could only happen with the agreement of the three senior officers . Such action would only happen if the agreement was reached by senior officers at the time .
 Arkhipov argued against the decision . The captain and the political officer were in favour of the decision, which was made by the political and captain .
 Arkhipov persuaded the captain to surface and await orders from Moscow . The B-59 did in the midst of the U.S. fleet, before returning to Russia . It was the last of the American fleet to leave the Soviet Union .
 Arkhipov’s action in preventing a first nuclear strike almost certainly averted all-out nuclear war . The action in Russia averted nuclear war almost certainly avoided all out war .
 Many people across the world feared that nuclear war could start at any minute . Many people in the U.S. feared it would be nuclear war .
 On one occasion, the United States Navy boarded a Soviet merchant ship, but thankfully the USSR did not retaliate . The U.S. Navy boarded one of the Soviet merchant ships .
 Neither Kennedy nor Khrushchev wanted a nuclear war, but neither could allow themselves to be seen as weak . Neither could allow himself to see themselves as weak, but they wanted to avoid war .
 The two men came up with a solution that worked for both sides of the debate .
 Kennedy told the U.S. public that the USSR had agreed to remove its missiles from Cuba . Kennedy said the USSR agreed to pull the missiles from the country .
 President Obama didn't tell the U.S. public that there was another side to the deal . However, he didn’t tell the United States public that .
 Krushchev negotiated removal of U.S. missiles from Britain, Italy and Turkey . This allowed him to announce a positive result to the Soviet people . The removal of American missiles was a good result .
 Both Kennedy and Krushchev could present themselves as ‘winners’ to their people, but it was actually negotiation and diplomacy that had saved the day . Both were able to show themselves as "winners"
 The two leaders installed a “hotline” from the Whitehouse to the Kremlin to ensure that they could communicate directly and easily to prevent future problems .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev used negotiation to stop nuclear war . Explain how they stopped nuclear war using negotiation to prevent it .