 His flight captured images of what turned out to be a Soviet SS-4 medium range nuclear missile site under construction . The site was under construction at the time .
 The United States and the Soviet Union came dangerously close to global nuclear war . It was the first and only time the U.S. military went to Defcon 2 for the first time in its history .
 SS-4 missiles were there as part of Operation Anadyr, the Soviet mission to secretly introduce three MRBM and two IRBM regiments to Cuba that totalled 80 missiles . The TransGriot was a mere five months old when all of this drama was unfolding .
 There was an advance guard of four Foxtrot diesel-electric attack subs deployed each armed with a 10 kiloton nuclear-tipped torpedo .
 Ominously they were issued conflicting rules of engagement before leaving the Soviet Union . They were part of the plan to establish the forward deployment ballistic missile sub base at Mariel . The decision to leave the USSR was made in the 1980s .
 Khrushchev and the Soviet leadership were not too happy about being surrounded by American Jupiter missiles based on the soil of NATO allies such as Turkey . The Polaris missile sub base at Holy Loch, Scotland, is located in Scotland .
 The perceived missile gap became an issue in the 1960s Nixon-Kennedy presidential campaign . Once Kennedy won the presidency, he began to address it by expanding what was in reality an American missile lead .
 The increasing hostility between Cuba's Fidel Castro and the US gave the Soviet Union an opportunity to redress the missile gap imbalance as they saw it . The failed 1961 Bay of Pigs invasion and Castro's embrace of communism gave the Soviets an opportunity .
 USSR would do so by installing ballistic missiles into Cuba . The USSR would set up a forward deployment naval base at Mariel similar to Holy Loch for their ballistic missile subs and keep it secret .
 President Kennedy would have to accept the fait accompli situation . That would force the Americans and President Kennedy to accept it, he says .
 Florida became a staging ground for a major U.S. military buildup . The biggest amphibious invasion since D-Day would have been launched on Florida in 1944 .
 In the hindsight we thankfully have today, the ground invasion would have been a disaster . The ground invasion in the 1990s was a disaster, but it was not a major setback .
 40,000 man deployed Soviet motorized combat brigade in Cuba armed with 12 nuclear tipped FROG-2 battlefield missiles and orders that allowed the Soviet commander on the scene to use them without getting clearance from Moscow .
 The U.S. military at the beginning of the crisis went on Defcon 3 alert as B-52 bombers and Polaris ballistic missile subs were dispatched . ICBM's were prepped for launch .
 ExComm met at the White House as the hawks and doves debated and argued over what to do about the situation . ExComm meets with hawks, doves at White House to discuss how to respond .
 President Kennedy settled on a naval blockade as a first step short of launching the bombing raid and invasion of Cuba to remove them . Kennedy eventually settled on the naval blockade .
 The news that missiles were in Cuba was announced during an October 22 White House address to the nation . The news was announced to the American public and the world during the speech .
 27 Soviet ships were steaming toward the quarantine zone as the world watched and wondered if World War III was imminent . As the announcement to the American public and the world . was occurring 27 Soviet . ships steamed toward it .
 On October 23, several Soviet ships approaching the quarantine line stopped and turned back . The first hopes that sanity was breaking out occurred on October 23 . The quarantine line was set to be closed by the Soviet Union .
 President Kennedy was pressured to use military action to remove the missiles, on the other side Castro was urging Khrushchev to use the missiles if Cuba was invaded . The November 1962 midterm elections were approaching .
 A new message was received from Moscow offering a deal by which the missiles in both Turkey and Cuba would be removed and the USA and Soviet Union would jointly guarantee the security of both nations . The deal would see the U.S. and the Soviet Union remove missiles from both countries .
 President Kennedy insisted that the missiles in Cuba must be removed . Kennedy offered to end the naval blockade and pledged not to invade Cuba if that happened . Kennedy also offered to give up the blockade .
 Khrushchev announced on October 28 they were withdrawing the missiles from Cuba to the disgust of Castro . But when the message was delivered to the Soviet ambassador in Washington, Attorney General Robert Kennedy added a private message that once this was done, the Jupiter missiles in Turkey would be withdrawn a few
 The 'hotline' between Washington and Moscow was installed to ensure rapid direct communications in future conflicts between the two superpowers . The 'Hotline' was installed by the U.S. and Russia in 2003 .
 The Nuclear Test Ban treaty was negotiated and eventually signed . The world exhaled afer coming dangerously close to nuclear annihilation .
 Monica Roberts, AKA the TransGriot, is a native Houstonian, GLAAD award-winning blogger, writer, and award winning trans human rights advocate .
 She's the founding editor of TransGriot, and her writing has appeared at the Bilerico Project, Ebony.com, The Huffington Post and The Advocate .
 She works to foster understanding and acceptance of trans people inside and outside communities of color . She works with people of color to foster acceptance and understanding .
 I'd deeply appreciate a link back to TransGriot if you wish to feature my posts on your blog . I'd like to see some of these posts feature in the weekly blog posts .
 The TransGriot blog's mission is to become the griot of our community . The blog is to be a part of the "griot" community .
 I will introduce you to and talk about your African descended trans brothers and trans sisters across the Diaspora . I will reclaim and document and document our chocolate flavored trans history .
 I have zero tolerance for hate speech, transphobic or blatantly disrespectful comments or ad spam . As soon as I get to them, your comments are posted at my pleasure .
 If you are interested in having me appear as a speaker or panelist, you can e-mail me with the date and details of your proposed event . This is separate from my speaking fee .
 This personal blog allows me to express my constitutionally guaranteed First Amendment free speech rights and kick knowledge to y'all at the same time on various issues . CMBA Disclaimer: This is a violation of the First Amendment .
 If you wish to irrationally hate on former President Obama and the former First Family take your unhinged commentary to a right-wing site who cares . If you want to hate on ex-President Obama and his family, take your comments to the right .