 President John Kennedy notified Americans of the missiles and emphasized that his government was ready to use military force to neutralize this seeming threat to its national security . President Kennedy emphasized that the government was prepared to employ military force . The missiles were launched in the 1960s and 1961 .
 Following this declaration, a lot of people were in fear that nuclear war was almost unavoidable, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The United States gave in to the Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev’s offer to remove the missiles and in return have the United States vacate the Cuban territories . The U.S. was forced to vacate Cuban territories in exchange for removing missiles .
 The installation of the nuclear-armed Soviet missiles in Cuba was a new threat to the U.S. national security, says President Nixon . The installation was a threat to national security in Cuba .
 Soviet Union installed nuclear weapons into Cuba in September 1962 . The Soviet Union started installing nuclear weapons including medium-range R-12 missiles in Cuba .
 In mid-October, an American spy plane captured photos of missile sites under construction on the island . The island is believed to be under construction .
 President Kennedy seemed to be puzzled by Khrushchev’s possible intentions . After learning of these deployments, President Kennedy was puzzled by the possible plans .
 Khrushchev intentions were not only to defend Cuba’s Fidel Castro's Regime but also to supplement the Soviet capacity to hit the U.S. mainland . It was apparent that Khrushchev's intentions were to defend Fidel Castro and support the Cuban regime .
 The missiles were installed just 90 miles from the U.S. shores . They were installed in the region 90 miles away from the United States .
 The U.S. felt vulnerable with missiles based on a neighboring country and in striking range of almost all its cities . As a result, the United States felt vulnerable . The missiles were based on neighboring country .
 On October 22, 1962, President Kennedy explained in a T.V. address that these missiles posed a threat to the country’s national security . President Kennedy said in 1962 that the missiles could be used to launch nuclear weapons .
 Following Kennedy’s address, the majority of the Americans felt that nuclear war was inevitable . Following Kennedy's address, most Americans believed nuclear war had to be inevitable .
 Kennedy had already warned Khrushchev that “the gravest issues would arise” if Russia introduced bases or ballistic missiles in Cuba . Kennedy had been warned that ‘graveest issues’ would arise if Russia installed bases or missiles in the country .
 Kennedy had the option of launching air strikes against the missile construction sites . He decided to come into terms with Khrushchev that would see the Soviets remove the missiles in exchange that the U.S. would not invade the Island .
 The U.S. won by giving in to Khrushchev's demands . Unmistakably, the United States won by . giving in . The United States gave in .
 Most of its people were threatened by the missiles since they were in close striking range of the majority of its cities . The majority of the missiles were fired at Iran . The missiles were launched in Iran's northern part of the country .
 The United States preserved the complexion of the nuclear rivalry that it had dominated before the installation of the Cuban missiles . The U.S. also preserved the balance of nuclear rivalry .
 By giving in to Khrushchev’s demands, the United States avoided the breach of its national security . The U.S. also dominated against the USSR in regards to nuclear superiority, says author .
 The United States did not lose anything by agreeing not to attack Cuba and removing its missiles from Turkey . The U.S. did not agree to remove missiles from Cuba and remove them from Turkey, the U.N. says .
 U.S. was able to dissociate Khrushchev from his primary objectives . Instead, the United States was able, the U.K. successfully dissociate itself from his objectives .
 Khrushchev's motives were to defend Castro's regime, supplement the Soviet’s capacity to hit the U.S. mainland with nuclear missiles and gain an advantage in Berlin after he had failed to eject American forces from the city from 1958 to 1961 .
 Khrushchev succeeded in his motive to defend Cuba from the U.S. aggression by having the United States promise not to invade Cuba . The United States promised not to attack Cuba .
 He also succeeded in getting the United States to remove its missiles from Turkey .
 He failed to accomplish his motive to hit the U.S. mainland . However, he failed to achieve his motive .
 The U.S. understood the significance of protecting its people from dangerous attacks . Undoubtedly, the United States understood the importance of protecting people from attacks .
 Its act to give in to Khrushchev’s demands should not be mistaken to mean that it was a weaker side . The U.S. was weaker side, but not weaker than the other .
 The U.S. understood that it could lose nothing either by removing missiles from Turkey or promising not to attack Cuba . Instead, the country lost nothing by agreeing to remove the missiles or not attack Cuba, officials say .
 The U.S. succeeded in protecting lives that could have been lost if the country was to engage in a nuclear war . In the end, the United States .
 Khrushchev conceded to the U.S. demands more than the United States yielded to his demands . It also appears that Khruschev conceded more than he did to the United Nations .
 According to Sechser & Fuhrmann, there are several indications that Khrushchev was willing to give in to the United States demands to avoid nuclear war . The U.S. and the Soviet Union wanted to avoid a nuclear war, according to the report .
 Khrushchev admitted that the Soviet was willing to retreat to save the entire human race . The Soviet leader admitted that he would be willing to withdraw missiles from Cuba .