 Gerald Posner: Lee Harvey Oswald and the Assassination of JFK were assassinated in 1963 . Posner is the author of a book about the assassination of JFK .
 The response to the hardcover publication of this book surprised both me and my publisher, Random House . The House Select Committee and Latest Developments .
 We were initially worried that the book might be lost in the publicity surrounding the publication of other books espousing convoluted theories . The book was initially published by the publisher of the book, which was published in 2007 .
 After thirty years of virtually unchallenged conspiracy conjecture, the conclusion that Oswald acted alone in assassinating JFK had evolved, ironically, into the most controversial position . But we had underestimated the extent to which, after thirty years, we had overestimated the extent of the .
 While the media’s response was overwhelmingly positive, the reaction from the conspiracy community was the opposite . The reaction from conspiracy theorists was often vitriolic, but often negative .
 "There was little effort to study my overall evidence and conclusions with anything that approached an open mind," says the author of the book .
 There was a concerted counterattack to discredit both the book and its author . Indeed, there was a coordinated counterattack against the book itself .
 There were panel discussions at conspiracy conventions in Boston and Dallas and special publications focused solely on contesting the book . Panel discussions were also held at conspiracist conventions .
 A conspiracy-based “research center” in Washington, D.C., issued a “media alert’s about Case Closed . Case Closed is the latest in a series of conspiracy theories .
 The release consisted of five pages alleging the book was misleading and flawed . But the alert misstated my arguments and distorted the evidence in the case, he says . The alert misstates my arguments, he writes .
 Harold Weisberg, one of the deans of the conspiracy press, found his first publisher to bring out a book titled Case Open . Case Open was a broadside attack attempting to diminish the impact of my work. Harold Weizberg, a dean of the . conspiracy press
 'It was, as one journalist commented, as if overnight I had become the Salmon Rushdie of the assassination world. It was, . as one . journalist commented on the death of the author, 'I had become, as . become the . Salmon Rushdies of the . assassination
 I was accused of treason by a buff who ran a Dallas “research center,” and my wife and I were subjected to several months of harassing telephone calls and letters . The buff ran the Dallas "research center" and accused us of treason . He says he and his wife
 Faxes and letters to the media also charged I was a CIA agent, or that the CIA had written my book . I was part of a conscious effort to deceive the public and hide the truth, he says .
 Television and radio producers were harassed by callers attempting to have my appearances cancelled . "I'm not afraid to make my appearances appear on television," she said .
 Some reviewers who wrote favorably about the book received intimidating calls or letters . Some reviewers received threatening letters or letters from angry people .
 Even my editor, Bob Loomis, was publicly accused of being a CIA agent . My publisher was subjected to the same treatment, and even my editor was accused of the same .
 The vehemence of these personal attacks surprised me. Although I had expected that individuals who had invested their adult lives into investigating JFK conspiracies might react angrily to a book that exposed the fallacies in their arguments .
 Many people who believe in a JFK conspiracy do so with almost a religious fervor . It took little time to discover the extent to . discover, however, that many people are not dissuaded by the facts .
 Case Closed was probably subjected to greater scrutiny by more “critics” than any other book published in recent years . Case Closed is published by John Defterios, a professor at the University of Cambridge, England .
 Several emendations in this book are the result of what some charged as fraudulent omissions in my discussion of various aspects of the case . The emendation is a result of some of the emendedations .
 Case Closed attempted to deal with all the major issues in the assassination, plus countless arguments raised by conspiracy critics in the three decades following the Warren Commission .
 To fit all of my research into a single, manageable volume, I did not have the luxury of presenting and explaining each nuance of every issue, but instead focused only on primary arguments . To fit in the book, I do not present and explain each nuance and every issue .
 JFK’s corpse was stolen from Air Force One and medically altered, although the author of that theory took over seven hundred pages to present it . For instance, in a few pages I addressed the theory that JFK's corpse was taken from Air . Force One .
 Not every point raised in his book could be dealt with in Case Closed . Obviously, not all of the points raised in the book can be resolved .
 There was not one aspect of the assassination in which I did not study all of the available evidence before reaching any conclusion . However, there was no aspect of this case that was not studied before reaching a conclusion .
 Conspiracy critics often complained that I had omitted some information that they contended contradicted one or another of my conclusions . Conspiracy critics, often complained about some of their conclusions .
 In this edition of this edition, I have reinstated material included in earlier drafts but cut for the sake of brevity, to further explain the layers of intricacies in this case . This edition includes material that was cut for brevity .
 The remainder of the updated text in this edition has nothing to do with contentions raised by conspiracy buffs, but rather is the result of new scientific evidence or documents uncovered since the hardcover publication . New scientific evidence has been uncovered since publication .
 Oswald’s visit to Mexico City provides important insights into the extent of his instability . Oswald visited Mexico City only two months before JFK's visit to Dallas . Oswald had a history of instability in Mexico City .
 The new book includes a 1962 CIA debriefing of Oswald . The book also includes a debrief of Oswald from the CIA . Oswald's debriefings have been added to the book .
 The updated and restored information in this edition has only strengthened the book’s original conclusion that Oswald and Ruby acted alone . The updated information in the book has been restored to the original conclusion .
 "I have spoken to individuals who are familiar with the still-classified documents," CNN's John Sutter says . Sutter: "Not only am I familiar" with the content of many already released, but I've spoken to people familiar with those documents .
 None of the government documents to be released alters the judgment reached in Case Closed . The judgment was reached in the judgment of the judge in the case .
 Photographic tests reveal that the backyard photos of Oswald holding his weapons, contested as fakes, are authentic . Ballistics and computer studies confirm the magic bullet theory, long derided by conspiracy theorists as impossible . neutron activation tests provide the final link that Oswald tried to assassinate General Edwin Walker
 After thirty years of studying the case the critics have failed to produce a single, cogent, alternate scenario of how the alleged conspiracy happened or who was involved .
 There is more than enough evidence available on the record to draw conclusions about what happened in the JFK assassination . The JFK assassination is still unsolved .
 Americans do not want to accept the notion that random acts of violence can change the course of history and that Lee Harvey Oswald could affect our lives in a way over which we have no control . But apparently most Americans, despite the strength of the evidence, do not accept the idea .
 It is unsettling to think that a sociopathic twenty-four-year-old loser in life, armed with a $12 rifle and consumed by his own warped motivation, ended Camelot .
 For readers willing to approach this subject with an open mind, it is the only rational judgment . But for those willing to take a look at it, it's only rational judgement .
 More than two thousand books have been written about the assassination of President John Kennedy . John Kennedy was assassinated in 1963 .
 Many critics of Warren Report say the CIA, anti-Castro Cubans, the FBI, and the mafia are among the conspiracy theories . The Warren Report was published in 1996 .
 Writers have identified nearly thirty gunmen, by name, as the second or third, fourth, or fifth shooter at Dealey Plaza, the site of the assassination . Nearly thirty gunmen have been identified by name by name as the shooters .
 Lee Harvey Oswald has evolved from being the lone killer to being part of a conspiracy to being an innocent patsy to being a hero who tried to save the President by warning the FBI of the plot . Oswald's story has evolved into being the one of the most prominent figures in the
 The public has been particularly receptive to conspiracy theories in this case . The public is particularly receptive in the case .
 Oswald’s curious past, especially his defection to the Soviet Union and his apparent pro-Communist philosophy in the middle of the cold war, showed the alleged assassin was anything but ordinary . Oswald defected to Russia in the early 1950s, and his pro-communist
 Nightclub owner Jack Ruby’s killing of Oswald within forty-eight hours of the assassination raised the suspicion he had been silenced . Oswald was shot dead in the head by a nightclub owner in Dallas .
 Public opinion polls confirmed that two thirds of those queried doubted Oswald acted alone . Two thirds said he acted alone in Oswald's death .
 The public was skeptical over Oswald’s murky background and his murder . Strong psychological reasons prompted the early embrace of conspiracy theories, including psychological factors .
 The notion that a misguided sociopath had wreaked such havoc made the crime seem senseless and devoid of political significance . The crime was senseless, devoid of any political significance, the author says .
 By concluding that JFK was killed as the result of an elaborate plot, there is the belief he died for a purpose, that a powerful group eliminated him for some critical issue . The belief that JFK died for some reason is that he was killed for some purpose .
 Public receptivity to theories is fed by suspicions that politicians lie and cover up misdeeds . Theories feed by suspicion that intelligence and military officials plot against the nation they are supposed to protect .
 Today, the Warren Report is almost universally derided, mostly by people who have never read it . The Warren Report was almost universally published in the 1990s .
 Early critics used the Warren Commission’s work as the springboard for their own efforts . The early critics used it as a springboard to their own work .
 They dissected the twenty-six volumes of testimony and exhibits and raised questions about its conclusions by highlighting inconsistencies and errors . They raised questions on the conclusions .
 The next generation of critics used the doubts sown by the initial writers and went far beyond the issues addressed by the Commission . Critics used the questions sown in the original writers to question the Commission's credibility .
 Many of these books championed complex theses involving dozens of conspirators . Focusing on matters such as the history of the mafia or clandestine CIA operations, many of the books were critical of the CIA .
 He is referred to only briefly and often presented as a sterile figure . He is often referred to in the media as a 'sexual figure' and 'a sterile figure'
 With Oswald stripped of character, the reader is seldom given any insight into understanding him . Oswald's character has been stripped of any insight to understand him .
 His personality and temperament are obscured under a deluge of technical details about trajectory angles and bullet speeds . His intricate personality is obscured under the technical details of bullet hits .
 During the past three decades, hundreds of questions have been raised about the assassination .
 Truth in the case can be uncovered by reviewing original documents and testimony and interviewing those involved . However, the truth can be found in the original documents or testimony .
 Despite a seemingly intractable quagmire of conflicting evidence, it is possible to find reliable and accurate information about the assassination . Lee Harvey Oswald and Jack Ruby were assassinated in June 18, 1918 .
 The breadth of the issues in the Kennedy assassination dissuades many reputable journalists from pursuing the subject . Many reputable journalists have not been able to find the truth .
 Others are discouraged because the JFK murder has, regrettably, become an entertainment business . Board games and shopping-mall ‘assassination research centers” stuffed with souvenir T-shirts .
 As in every famous case, people have come out of the woodwork for their fifteen minutes of fame . People have come to the surface for their 15 minutes of celebrity fame .
 Some publicity seekers have implicated themselves in the murder conspiracy . Some have even implicated themselves as the victims .
 These sensational claims may sell books, but they bring us no closer to understanding what really happened . These more sensational claims might sell books but they are no longer relevant .
 The only casualty is truth, especially in a society where people are content to receive all their knowledge on an important issue from a single article or a three-hour movie . "The only casualty in this society is truth," the author says .
 In this book, Oswald’s life is investigated in some detail, and to a lesser extent, so is the life of Ruby . The book also explores the lives of Oswald and Ruby, and Ruby's life .
 As the story progresses, arguments raised by the leading conspiracy critics are resolved in the text or in footnotes . The book is written by Anthony Summers and Mark Lane .
 There are separate chapters about the medical and ballistics issues, the Warren Commission and its critics . Also, the late New Orleans district attorney Jim Garrison. Also, separate chapters are about the death of Jim Garrison .
 Many people, understandably, believe that the truth in the Kennedy assassination will never be discovered . The Kennedy assassination is still unsolved, but the truth may never be known .
 The issue of who killed JFK can be resolved, and Oswald’s motivation revealed . But the troubling issues and questions about the assassination can’t be settled, says author .
 Tippit, only the third Dallas policeman in a decade to die in the line of duty, was killed shortly after the President . He was killed by a Dallas police officer shortly after President Obama .
 Dealey Plaza, the site of the presidential assassination, was in pandemonium . The president was killed in Dallas, Texas, in 1968 .
 Dozens of witnesses sent the police scurrying in different directions in futile search of an assassin . Police scurry in search of assassin in futile bid to find the killer .
 More than a dozen Dallas police rushed to Oak Cliff, a quiet middle-class neighborhood, to search for Tippit’s murderer .
 Within minutes, more than six squad cars sealed the theater’s front and rear exits . The theater was evacuated after the shooting .
 Police armed with shotguns spread into balcony and main floor as lights were turned up . The incident happened in a balcony and the main floor of the apartment .
 McDonald began walking up the left aisle from the rear of the building, searching patrons along the way . McDonald then began walking down the aisle and searching patrons .
 He was near a young man in the third row from the back of the theater . Soon, he was near him in a third row of seats in the theater.
 McDonald instinctively lurched forward just as his assailant pulled a pistol from his waist . McDonald was shot in the head by a man who pulled a gun from the waist. McDonald was hit by the gun, police say . McDonald says he was struck by the bullet in the face .
 They tumbled over the seats as other police rushed to subdue the gunman . The gunman was shot dead by police in a hail of bullets .
 The gun's hammer clicked as the man pulled the trigger, but it did not fire . The gun’s hammer clicked when the man pulls the trigger . The man pulled it off, but the gun didn't fire .
 After the suspect was handcuffed, he shouted, “I am not resisting arrest.” After the arrest, he said, ‘I'm not resisting resisting arrest”
 As the police exited, the crowd surged forward, screaming obscenities and crying, “Let us have him.” The crowd was screaming, "Let us get him," police said . The crowd then surged forward and screamed, "We want to have him," the crowd
 The suspect was pushed into the rear seat between two policemen and three officers . Three officers packed into the front of the vehicle .
 Detective Paul Bentley reached over and pulled a wallet from the suspect’s left hip pocket . The wallet was found in the suspect's hip pocket, Bentley said .
 Police told the suspect he could hide his face from the press as they entered the building . The suspect was told he could not be seen by the press until he was inside .
 He was put into a small interrogation room, with several men standing guard, as they waited for the chief of homicide, Captain Will Fritz . Captain Fritz is the police chief of the homicide .
 Suspect had billfold in his hand, pushed two plastic cards forward . Suspect's billfold was in the suspect’s hand, and he pushed two cards forward.
 Oswald's identity remained in doubt for only a few more minutes at that Dallas police station . The search has continued for the answer to the broader question of who Lee Harvey Oswald was .
 Understanding him is the key to finding out what happened in Dallas on November 22, 1963 . Understanding him will be key to understanding the events in Dallas, Texas .
 Oswald was born on October 18, 1939, into a lower-middle-class family in a downtrodden New Orleans neighborhood . He was born into a low-income family .
 Oswald's father, Robert Edward Lee Oswald, died two months before his birth . His father, Lee Oswald's mother, was assassinated in June 1963 .
 His mother, Marguerite, was consumed with self-pity both over the death of her husband and because she had to return to work to support Lee, his brother, Robert, and a halfbrother, John Pic, from the first of her three marriages .
 Marguerite played an important role in Oswald’s development, and conspiracy critics cast her in a positive light . Oswald's mother played a key role in the development of Oswald .
 High-strung, and failing to keep any job very long,* she committed Robert and John Pic to an orphanage . She committed them to orphanage, but failed to find a job very soon .
 She shuttled him between her sister and an assortment of housekeepers and baby-sitters . Instead of a baby, she kept him in the care of her sister .
 Marguerite had let a couple move into her home to help care for Lee, but had to fire them when she discovered they had been whipping him to control his ‘unmanageable” disposition .
 Lee’s older brothers watched out for him during his stay there, which was quite uneventful . The atmosphere was relaxed, and Lee's older brothers were there to help .
 In early 1944, Marguerite unexpectedly checked her sons out of the Bethlehem Home and moved to Dallas . She unexpectedly checked them out in early 1944 .
 She relocated to New Orleans because of her interest in a local businessman, Edwin Ekdahl . She had met him six months earlier in New Orleans . She relocated there because of a personal interest in him .
 Lee's new stepfather worked for a utility company and extensive travel was part of his job . Lee’s new stepdad worked for the utility company .
 Robert and John Pic were placed in a military boarding school and Marguerite and Lee traveled with Ekdahl . Robert was placed in military boarding and Lee was sent to a boarding school . Lee and Robert Pic were also placed in boarding schools .
 Lee and his wife moved to Benbrook, Texas, a suburb of Fort Worth, in October . Lee missed most of his first year of school, but by late October, they had settled in Benbrook .
 Lee was admitted to Benbrook Common Elementary just after his sixth birthday . Lee is now in kindergarten at age of six .
 Oswald was no longer concerned about the frequent moves or his absence from school because he had found a friend in his stepfather . Oswald's stepfather was also a friend of the family .
 Lee’s half-brother, John Pic, recalled, “I think Lee found in him the father he never had.” Lee found his father, Pic Pic, in his half-sister .
 Ekdahl often walked out, staying at a hotel, and in the summer of 1946, Marguerite moved with Lee to Covington, Louisiana . In the 1950s, Lee moved to Louisiana .
 Lee was ecstatic when his stepfather moved back in, but he hated the fighting and separations . Lee's stepfather was happy when he moved back into the family home . Lee hated fighting and separating from his father .
 The uncertainty in the marriage prevented Lee from ever settling into a single neighborhood and school . Lee's uncertainty in his marriage prevented him from settling in a single school or neighborhood .
 In September 1946, he enrolled in a new school, Covington Elementary, but was again in the first grade, because he had not completed the required work at Benbrook . He enrolled in the new school again in September 1946 . He was in first grade at the time .
 Lee enrolled in his third school, Clayton Public Elementary, in Fort Worth . Marguerite withdrew him from Covington and they moved back to Fort Worth, Texas .
 He finally finished the first grade, but soon after he was registered for the second grade in the fall, they moved again . The family moved again in the summer .
 Oswald was a leader of one of three or four schoolyard gangs, a schoolmate recalls . Oswald was not a bully, but a leader in one or four gangs, Philip Vinson says .
 In January 1948, Ekdahl moved out permanently, and he started divorce proceedings in March . The couple had been married for more than 50 years .
 Soon after, Marguerite moved to a run-down house in a poor Fort Worth neighborhood, adjoining railroad tracks . She moved there to live with her family .
 Unable to afford the tuition at military boarding school for her other two sons, Marguerite moved them in with her and Lee . She and Lee moved the boys into their mother's home after she was unable to afford boarding school tuition .
 Robert Oswald and John Pic described the new home as “lower-class” and “prisonlike” They found Lee even less communicative than when they had previously left the household . Lee often “brooding for hours” at a time, often ‘
 But with the constant moving, he did not easily fit in with his schoolmates and seldom made friends . He did not make friends with schoolmates .
 Lee was brought to court to testify, but refused, saying he would not know the truth from a lie . Lee refused to testify in court, saying it would not be able to know truth from lies . Lee was charged with murder in the death of a woman in 2012 .
 While the divorce dragged along, he stayed home alone with a pet dog, a gift from a neighbor . He stayed with the dog while his wife was in the middle of the divorce .
 Marguerite and her sons moved once again to Benbrook, Texas, in the summer of that year . That summer, the family moved again to Texas .
 By the autumn they had returned to Fort Worth, the thirteenth move since Lee’s birth . Lee's parents had moved to the city of Fort Worth .
 With her marriage over, Marguerite now gave Lee all her attention, spoiling and protecting him . With her husband gone, she now gave her attention to Lee .
 Afraid he could be hurt in physical activities like sports, she instead encouraged gentler pursuits like tap dancing . But he preferred to stay home by himself or with her .
 Until he was almost eleven years of age, Lee often slept in the same bed with his mother . Lee was almost 11 years old at the time .
 Pic, who admittedly resented his mother more than Robert did, said Marguerite’s attitudes made the home atmosphere depressing .
 She was jealous of others, resented what they had, and constantly complained about how unfairly life treated her . She resented others' success, and complained of how unfairly she was treated .
 Even Lee’s wife, Marina, later said that ‘part of the guilt” was with Marguerite, because she did not provide him the correct education, leadership, or guidance . Even Lee's wife said “Part of the . guilt’ was with
 She did not encourage him to attend school when Lee whined that he did not like it . Lee's mother said she did not want him to go to school when he whined about it .
 His mother told him he was brighter and better than other children, and reinforced his feeling that he learned more at home by reading books than from listening to teachers .
 Neighbors noticed the odd relationship between the overbearing mother and the introverted youngster . Neighbors said the mother-in-law was overbearing and the child was shy .
 Lee was a loner who did not like to be disciplined, neighbor says . Lee's death has been ruled out of foul play, police say . Lee was found dead at the scene of an apparent suicide .
 Another neighbor, Hiram Conway, lived two doors away from Lee in Fort Worth, Texas . Lee was Lee's neighbor and neighbor to the late mayor of Fort Worth .
 Conway noticed that on the way home from school, Oswald looked for other children to throw stones at . Conway said he noticed Oswald looking at other children throwing stones at him .
 Conway’s impressions were formed from watching Lee from the age of nine to almost 13 . Conway's impressions of Lee were formed by watching him from nine to 13 years old .
 Lee hurled the knife at Pic, in front of a startled Carlton, but it missed and struck the wall . Lee's knife missed and hit the wall, striking the wall instead of Pic .
 Lee, who had grown closer to Robert than anyone else in the family, bought a copy of the Marine Corps handbook . Lee bought the handbook of Robert's Marine Corps . Lee's son, Robert, was a Marine Corps veteran .
 Although only twelve, “he was going to keep up with me, to learn everything I was learning,” recalled Robert . Although only 12, Robert was determined to keep pace with his older brother .
 He soon realized Marguerite had no intention of moving and finding her own apartment . But he soon realized she was not going to move and find a new home .
 Pic's wife and Marguerite often argued . Tension in the household grew as Pic’s wife and wife often argued.
 Lee added to the strained atmosphere by fighting loudly with his mother and often striking her . Lee's mother was often struck by Lee, who often fought loudly with her mother .
 One day, Marge asked Lee to lower the volume on the television, and instead he pulled out a knife and threatened her . One day she asked him to lower his volume of the TV, and he pulled a knife . Marge says Lee threatened her with a knife when she asked
 When Marguerite rushed into the room and told him to put it away, he punched her in the face . He punched her after she told her to put the toy away .
 Lee enrolled in Trinity Evangelical Lutheran School, but was only there several weeks before moving with Marguerite to a one-room basement apartment in the Bronx .
 At P.S. 117, he missed forty-seven of sixty-four school days . He was failing most of his courses when his mother pulled him out of school when she pulled him from .
 In January 1953, they moved again in the Bronx, their third time in five months . The couple's first move was in 1953, when they moved to the Bronx .
 Two hearings regarding Oswald’s truancy were set, but Marguerite and Lee did not show up . Two hearings were set for Oswald's truancy, but he was not present at the hearings .
 In April, a judge declared him a truant and remanded him to Youth House for three weeks of psychiatric evaluation . He was remanded in custody for psychiatric evaluation in April .
 Social workers noted he made no effort to mix with the other children while there . Social workers also noted he did not mix with other children .
 The probation officer assigned to the case, John Carro, remembered it because it was unique . Carro's probation officer said it was a unique case .
 Oswald told Evelyn Strickman, his caseworker, that he felt his mother “never gave a damn” about him . Oswald said he felt he was better off at Youth House because his mother never gave "a damn" about him.
 Oswald remembered Oswald eleven years later when he testified before the Warren Commission . He vividly remembered Oswald 11 years later in his testimony .
 Hartogs gave seminars for other professionals in which he discussed interesting and unusual cases discovered at Youth House . Hartogs also gave seminars to other professionals, including other professionals .
 The reason Hartogs considered him so interesting was “because he came to us on a charge of truancy from school, and yet when I examined him, I found him to have definite traits of dangerousness.”
 Hartogs’s diagnosis was “personality pattern disturbance with schizoid features and passive-aggressive tendencies” Hartogs said . Hartogs was diagnosed with ‘schizoid’ syndrome .
 Oswald should be placed on probation so long as he was under guidance from a psychiatrist, psychiatrist, he says . Oswald should also be placed under guidance, he adds . Oswald was convicted of sexual assault in 2008, but was cleared of any wrongdoing .
 On several occasions, Marguerite refused to bring him to court, claiming he had returned and adapted well to school . She said he had adapted well after returning to school and adapting well to his new school .
 One of his teachers, H Rosen, said, “When we spoke to him about his behavior, his attitude was belligerent.” The schoolboy's attitude was ‘belligerent’
 Most of the residence homes for which he qualified were overcrowded . Placing him was difficult since most of the residences homes for him qualified are overcrowded, he says .
 At the start of 1954, to avoid Lee’s placement in an institution, she fled the jurisdiction and returned with him to New Orleans . She fled to avoid being placed in a mental institution . Lee was sentenced to an institution in 1954 .
 "e was a lot more difficult this time to understand or control than he was when he was younger. Marguerite dropped whatever else she was doing to take food to his room, where he locked himself away to listen to records and read books," she said .
 Lee had developed a “loud and quite disturbing voice” and used it to order Marguerite around the house . Lee “was getting a little unbearable,” according to his mother . Lee's mother acquiesced to his dictates .
 Evans’s husband, Julian, also noticed that Lee had changed, “was arrogant,” he said . “Was arrogant.”
 Julian took Lee, with some other children, to fish at a small pond . Lee's father took him to a pond in a bid to keep him fishing .
 The other children either threw small fish back into the pond or kept the larger ones to eat later .
 Lee laid everything he caught in a row at his feet and then, when he tired of fishing, walked away, leaving them dying on the bank . Lee laid his catch at his own feet and left the fish to die on the banks .
 "The way he was, nobody could figure him out. I don’t think anybody even came close to it," he says . "Nobody could figure out him out," he adds .
 “He didn’t want you to get too close to him,” Lee’s coldness forced him to abandon his efforts, he says .
 Oswald had a bloody fight with two brothers soon after enrolling, which attracted a crowd from the school . Bennierita Sparacio, a classmate, said, “I could remember him so much because he was always getting in fights …”78
 A couple of days later, a football player surprised Lee and smashed him in the mouth, knocking out a tooth . Lee's tooth was knocked out by a player who knocked it out of his mouth .
 Edward Voebel and several other classmates tried to “fix him up” in the bathroom . Edward Voelke and several others tried to "fix up’s” death .
 According to Voebel, Lee was “bitter” and thought he had a raw deal out of life . Lee was just “living in his own world,” according to the author . Lee thought he was getting a ‘ raw deal’ out of
 Voebel discovered Oswald was an avid reader, and they shared a mutual interest in guns . Oswald was also a fan of guns, and the pair were avid readers .
 Lee owned a plastic model of a .45 caliber pistol, but he wanted a real revolver . Lee had a plastic replica of the gun . Lee wanted a revolver, but it was a revolver .
 Oswald hatched a plan to steal a Smith & Wesson automatic from a local store . Voebel was startled when Oswald hatched the plan . Oswald planned to steal the gun from the store .
 Another Beauregard student who spent time with Lee was William Wulf, the astronomy club president . Wulf was also a student at the Beuregard school .
 Oswald then asked his mother to lie about his age so he could enlist in the Marines . Oswald dropped out of school days before his sixteenth birthday . He then enlisted in the Marine Corps after dropping out of college .
 The Marines realized he was underage and rejected him . His mother gave her help, but the Marines rejected her son .
 He further isolated himself, assiduously avoiding his few acquaintances, and thought only of enlisting as soon as he turned seventeen . He thought only to enlist as soon he turned 17 .
 Palmer McBride, who worked as a messenger for Pfisterer Dental Laboratory, met Oswald Oswald, who was working there in the same capacity . Oswald was working at the same time as Palmer . Oswald died of a heart attack at the age of 50 .
 Oswald and McBride both enjoyed classical music . Oswald went to McBride's home and listened to records in McBride’s bedroom .
 Oswald bristled that Eisenhower "was exploiting the working people" and that if he had the opportunity, he would like to kill him . Oswald said he thought Eisenhower was doing "a pretty good job"
 McBride did not report the threat because he did not think Oswald would act on it . McBride said he thought Oswald would not act on the threat .
 Oswald often praised Khrushchev for his work on Communism . On other occasions, McBride said he hoped the workers would one day "throw off their chains"
 Lee “seemed quite proud” to have library copies of Das Kapital and the Communist Manifesto, says McBride . McBride once accompanied Oswald to his apartment, and there Lee seemed quite proud .
 He discovered Das Kapital on a library bookshelf in New Orleans . He said it was not until he arrived New Orleans that he discovered the novel .
 Lee decided to join the Marines on his seventeenth birthday . Lee's mother decided to return to Fort Worth, Texas, after her son left for the Marines .
 Oswald enrolled at Arlington Heights, his twelfth school, in September . Oswald enrolled in September at the Arlington Heights school .
 He bought his first real gun, a Marlin bolt-action .22 caliber rifle, which he later sold to his brother, Robert . He later sold the gun to Robert .
 His desire to enlist preceded his interest in Communism . Ideology did not control him at that young age, and he wanted to enlist . He was not interested in Communism at that time .
 "Those who knew him best, his mother and brothers, never had any doubts about his reasons," his mother said .
 Lee turned 17 on October 18, 1956, and joined the Marines one week later . Lee turned seventeen on October 17, 1956 . Lee joined the Marine Corps one week after turning 17 .
 After the assassination, she almost always refused to give an interview or sit for photographs unless paid . She refused to sit for interviews or give interviews after the assassination .
 She said, “He did not use the knife— he had an opportunity to use it’s not a knife. She said .
 People who present Lee as fairly stable overlook the incident when he punched his mother and threatened Pic’s wife with a knife . Lee punched his mom and threatened her with a kitchen knife .
 Harold Weisberg, in the first of his six self-published books attacking the Warren Commission, does not even inform the reader that Marguerite and Lee lived with the Pics. He does not tell the reader of his book, which he attacks, that Lee and Marguer
 David Lifton is not even listed in books written by Mark Lane, Josiah Thompson and others . But he is not listed in many books, including those written by Robert Blakey and Henry Hurt .
 Harold Weisberg tells of the tests but does not quote any of Hartogs’s conclusions . Harold tells of tests but not quotes any of the Hartogs conclusions . The tests were conducted by Hartogs at the University of Cambridge .
 After enlisting, he wrote her infrequently, and saw her only sporadically during the remaining seven years of his life . He wrote infrequently to her, and she died in 2007 .
 When she arrived at the police headquarters on the night of November 22, 1963, Marguerite did not even know Lee and his wife, Marina, had a second child . Lee and Marina's second child was born in November 1963 .
 There, he was given a series of aptitude tests and scored slightly below average . He was then given a further aptitude test at the University of Cambridge .
 On December 21, 1956, after three weeks of training, he shot 212, two points over the score required for a “sharpshooter’s qualification, the second highest in the Marine Corps . He shot 212 in his first attempt at a ‘shar
 Oswald certified himself on a firing range before he left the Marine Corps in May 1959 . Oswald again certified himself at the range before leaving the Marines .
 In early May, he was routinely promoted to private first class and given a clearance to handle confidential material . He was given the clearance in early May .
 Allen Felde, a fellow recruit who served with him at both San Diego and Camp Pendleton, said he was a “left-winger” who was not popular with the other recruits and avoided by most of them . Felde: “Left-wing”
 He used weekend passes to escape, returning almost one hundred miles to his native city of New Orleans . He used weekends passes to return to New Orleans, Louisiana .
 Kerry Thornley, a Marine who knew him well, recalled, “Well, definitely, the Marine Corps was not what he had expected it to be when he first joined”
 He griped about the strict discipline, and even got into a fight in the barracks . He soon griped .
 In July 1957, he was transferred to the Marine Corps Air Station in El Toro, California, and was informed he was to be sent in six weeks to Japan . But in July 1957 he was told he would be sent to Japan within six weeks . He was sent to El Toro Air
 The foreign posting opened a new vista for him, one he felt he deserved, he said . He said: "The foreign posting was a new opportunity for him"
 He arrived at Yokosuka on September 12 and was posted to the Marine Air Control Squadron One . Based at Atsugi, about twenty miles west of Tokyo .
 Most of the Marines had seen the strange-looking plane either take off or land, as had many of the townspeople . Many of the Marine's Marines saw the strange looking plane take off, land or take off .
 Radar operators often heard requests for wind speeds at 90,000 feet . But they knew little else about the plane's altitude .
 None of the operators in the MACS-1 unit were involved in the U-2 reconnaissance flights . None of those operators were involved with the flights .
 Oswald found Oswald sitting on a foot locker looking at a wound in his arm . Oswald had a wound to his arm in a wound he had sustained in the shooting . Oswald was wounded by a gunshot wound to the arm .
 Pete Connor admitted that he and some others had been baiting Oswald and initially thought he had fired the shot to scare them . Pete Connor initially thought Oswald had fired a shot at them to scare him . Connor admitted he had baited Oswald .
 Oswald was taken by ambulance to the United States Navy hospital in nearby Yokosuka . Oswald recuperated for more than two weeks in the hospital .
 The Marines intended to bring court-martial charges against him for possessing an unauthorized gun . But they postponed the proceedings until he returned to Japan .
 Oswald’s unit finished its Philippine maneuvers in four weeks, but did not immediately return to Atsugi . The internal war in Indonesia had heated up since the internal conflict in Indonesia has heated up . Oswald's unit completed its maneuvers in 4 weeks .
 He was assigned to KP duty for the duration, a punishment for the derringer incident . But his dissatisfaction intensified as he was assigned as KP duty .
 His deteriorating attitude was reflected in his semiannual performance rating of 3.9, slightly below the minimum required for an honorable discharge . He was discharged from the Navy in 2010 .
 A summary court-martial was brought against him for the unregistered weapon with which he had wounded himself . Within a month, on April 11, he was charged with wounding himself with the weapon he had injured himself .
 Oswald was infuriated, convinced he had been singled out for enough punishment with three months of KP duty . Oswald was angered by the punishment and was sent home from KP duty in June .
 The more dissatisfied he became with the Marine Corps, the more he looked for another horizon for fulfillment, and the Soviet Union was increasingly the likely candidate . The more he became dissatisfied with his job, he looked to another horizon .
 He may have been influenced by Japanese Communists who encouraged him to defect . He may also be influenced by the Japanese Communists .
 The club was frequented by officers and foreign businessmen who ogled the one hundred beautiful hostesses . Some of the hostesses were informants for Japanese and foreign intelligence agencies .
 By the time he defected in the fall of 1959, he had saved $1,500, nearly 75 percent of his Marine salary during two years of service . By the end of his two years in the Marine Corps, he saved $2,500 .
 Some of his fellow Marines saw him with a striking and well-dressed Japanese woman on several occasions . Later during his stay in Japan, he was seen with a Eurasian woman .
 Corporal Thomas Bagshaw recalled Oswald “was almost frail, shy and quiet” when he arrived at Atsugi . Oswald was almost frail and quiet when he died, Bagshaw said .
 Oswald spent his liberties reading instead of bar-hopping and chasing women, others ridiculed him . Oswald spent most of his life reading, not chasing women . Oswald was ridiculed for his lack of interest in women in the Army .
 “Mr. Oswald,” threw him in the shower fully clothed, and provoked him in every possible way. “He’s got into the shower, threw him out of the shower. He’ll be in a shower, and he’d like
 In the Marines, he was far from the toughest and, at five feet nine inches, hardly the biggest in his unit . At 5 feet 9 inches, he is hardly the toughest in the Marines .
 Initially, he did not fight back, instead walking away from any provocation, the anger bottled inside . He walked away from all provocation, instead of fighting back . The anger was bottled inside.
 Oswald decided to mix with his fellow Marines after a couple of abusive months . Oswald was forced to leave the Marine Corps after his abusive treatment .
 Initially, he tried to be funny, thinking it might allow him to be accepted . But he said he was trying to make it funny, and it didn't work .
 Those who knew him said he was absolutely humorless and failed completely . But those who knew them said he failed completely. He failed completely, they said .
 He then began socializing, visiting nearby bars, drinking for the first time in his life . He even had his first sexual experience with a bar girl as some of his newfound buddies cheered him on .
 He became more aggressive, using his knowledge of current affairs to belittle others, especially officers . Slowly, he became increasingly aggressive . He used to be more aggressive .
 Miguel Rodriguez was the man he blamed for his long stint on KP duty during the Philippine posting . Rodriguez blamed Rodriguez for his time away from KP duty . Rodriguez said he was not happy with his time in the Philippines .
 Oswald poured a drink on Rodriguez and challenged him to fight . At the Bluebird Cafe in Yamato, he challenged Rodriguez to a fight . Oswald poured his drink and challenged Rodriguez .
 Oswald was sentenced to twenty-eight days in the brig and fined $55.35 . Oswald's suspended sentence of twenty days from the first court-martial was reinstated . His suspended sentence was reinstated in June . Oswald was also sentenced to a fine of $55 .
 In a performance review, he was given his lowest rating since joining the Marines . A previously granted extension of overseas duty was canceled . The Marine was given the lowest rating in his career .
 Even asking to go to the bathroom required standing at attention and repeatedly screaming a request until a guard gave permission . Even asking for permission from a guard required standing in front of a guard to get permission .
 A few days after arriving, the constant razzing from his colleagues and his overall frustration at the Marine Corps resulted in a breakdown . The Marine Corps is the largest military force in the U.S.
 Oswald started firing his M-1 rifle at shadows in the woods . Oswald was on guard duty at the time of the shooting . Oswald died of a self-inflicted gunshot wound .
 The following day he was transferred out of MACS-1 and placed on general duty . He was transferred to general duty and put on a general duty post .
 Oswald ended his 14-month tour of duty in Japan and sailed for the States . Oswald was the first member of the U.S. Navy to sail to Japan in November .
 He spent a one-month leave in Fort Worth with his mother and brother, Robert, with whom he went hunting . He spent the time with his family and brother .
 On December 21, he boarded a bus and reported for his new Marine assignment . The Air Control Squadron Nine, at El Toro, California, was his new assignment .
 Oswald, disgusted with the Marines, flaunted his Russian studies and Communist leanings . Oswald was disgusted at the Marines . Oswald's Russian studies was at the center of his communist leanings in Russia .
 Court-martialed twice, he seemed no longer seemed to care what the Marines did to him . He seemed to no longer care what he was punished for his actions .
 He walked around the camp with his hat pulled so low over his eyes that he could barely see . He was pulled around with a low hat pulled over his head so low he couldn't see .
 Extremely sloppy, with unshined shoes and his shirt partially hanging out, looking like a caricature of the cartoon character Beetle Bailey, he bid “Hello, Comrade” to acquaintances . Extremely slumpy, he bids ‘Hello’ to acquaintances. Extremely
 Fellow Marine Nelson Delgado became friends with Oswald soon after his arrival at El Toro . Delgado and Oswald became friends soon after their arrival in the U.S.
 It was then that Castro was leading his revolutionary army toward Havana . Castro's revolutionary army was led by Castro . Castro was then leading the revolutionary army .
 Oswald and Delgado shared a mutual respect for Castro, so much so that they eventually spoke about going to Cuba to fight in the revolution . Oswald, Delgado and Castro spoke so much that they planned to fight for the Cuban revolution .
 Oswald kept pressing Delgado for information on how he could get to Cuba, and finally Delgado recalled, “I started getting scared.” Delgado said . Oswald kept pressed Delgado to find out how to get Cuba .
 Delgado's enthusiasm waned as Castro’s commitment to Communism was exposed in the press . “He started actually making plans …”50 Delgado said .
 Oswald told Oswald that the U.S. media was full of propaganda that distorted Castro’s position . Oswald said the United States media distorted Castro's position. Oswald told him that the media had distorted his position.
 He put his hands in his pockets, pulled his cap low over his eyes, and sat by himself . "I don't know why I'm here," he said .
 He also found Oswald ‘impulsive’ and burdened by a ‘persecution complex . Oswald never showed any affection to anyone, and nobody ever showed any in return . Oswald was found to have a “persecution . complex”
 None of his fellow Marines reported that he proselytized Communism during basic training or during his fourteen months in Japan . None of the Marines reported any of their fellow Marines proselylytizing Communist beliefs .
 He complained about the Marines, but that was not thought to be unique . The Marines are considered the most powerful in the Marine Corps .
 Oswald did study the Russian language, but not in the conspicuous way that he did later at El Toro . Oswald did not study the language in a conspicuous way, but did later .
 He gave the Marines no reason to believe he might be a security threat . While he may have been considered a Russophile, he gave no reason for his presence .
 Oswald flaunted his controversial and brazen behavior only after arriving at El Toro . Oswald had two court-martials and a nervous breakdown while on guard duty . Only after arriving in El Toro did Oswald flaunt his controversial behavior .
 By then, he had already been busted to buck private, had spent time in the brig, and was already known as an eccentric troublemaker .
 Instead of working as a trained radar operator, he had been reduced to doing janitorial work around the base . He was reduced to working as an airbase janitor .
 Oswald was receiving leftist literature from the El Toro mailroom . The El Toro operations chief confronted his operations chief, Captain Robert E Block . Block confronted him .
 Oswald dissembled that he was merely trying to indoctrinate himself in the enemies’ philosophy, according to Marine Corps policy . Oswald said he was only trying to learn from the enemy’s philosophy .
 In March 1959, he applied for admission to a small liberal arts school in Churwalden, Switzerland, the Albert Schweitzer College . He was admitted to the college in Switzerland .
 Oswald was expected to fulfill a three-year inactive-reserve commitment . Oswald was discharged from the Marines after a discharge from the Navy .
 During that period, foreign travel was only allowed for a valid reason . Foreign travel was restricted for the duration of the period .
 A candy jar had fallen off a shelf while Marguerite was at work and hurt her nose . A candolary jar fell from a shelf and fell off a wall and hurt the nose . The family was shocked to find out what happened to the candy jar .
 Several doctors could find nothing wrong with her, but she claimed she was totally disabled . She finally found a physician who agreed to her claim .
 She sent her own affidavit, as well as affidavits from a doctor and two friends, attesting to her injury . She maintained she could not support herself and was injured .
 Oswald's request for a dependency discharge was approved two weeks later . Oswald’s request for dependency discharge from the Army was approved . Oswald was released from the active active duty in March .
 On September 4, 1959, he was transferred to another squadron, the H&H, in preparation for his release . He was released from the Navy in September 1959 .
 That day he also applied at the superior court of Santa Ana, California, for a passport . That day, he also appeared in court for passport .
 Oswald was discharged from the Marines on September 11, 1959 . He traveled by bus to Fort Worth, where he arrived at his mother’s house in the early morning hours of September 14 . Oswald was a member of the U.S. House of Representatives from Texas .
 The next day he shocked Marguerite by informing her that he was about to board a ship and was going to work for an import-export business . He shocked her by telling her he was going on a ship .
 It is difficult to tell you how I feel, Just remember this is what I must do. Just remember it must do, just remember this .
 Delgado was not posted with Oswald when Lee qualified as a sharpshooter . Delgado did not work with Lee during the time he qualified for the position . Lee was a sharposhooter, but Delgado worked with Lee in the Navy .
 Oswald's marksmanship experts said he was easily capable of carrying out the JFK assassination . Oswald was a marksman expert who was in charge of the marksmanship branch who were familiar with Oswald's record .
 It was “easy shot for a man with the equipment he had and his ability,” Sgt. Sgt. John Sutter says . Sgt. Sutter: It was an easy shot for him to make .
 Two fellow Marines believed he had a “secret clearance, though they admitted it was merely a hunch and not based on direct knowledge . Two other Marines believed it was based on a "secret clearance"
 The House Select Committee on Assassinations investigated the question in the late 1970s . Oswald did not have a higher clearance, the committee concluded .
 Marine David Christie stayed away from him because he thought he was gay . Another Marine, David Christie, stayed away because of him because of his homosexuality .
 Oswald visited a transvestite bar in Yamato, Japan, while stationed in Japan . Oswald was familiar with the club with which he seemed familiar . Oswald visited the club while stationed there .
 Oswald once crossed with a group of Marines to Tijuana, Mexico . Oswald was stationed in California when he was stationed at the time .
 Lieutenant John Donovan, the officer in charge of Oswald's radar team, said he remembered one day when Oswald discussed the U-2’s radar blips with him . Donovan: "I remember one of the blips"
 Donovan claims the incident happened at Cubi Point in the Philippines . Yet other Marines in Oswald's unit do not recall any radar operations at the time .
 Donovan testified before the Warren Commission in 1964 and never mentioned the U-2 incident in 14 pages of detailed testimony . Donovan testified in 1964 but never mentioned U.2 .
 He told the U-2 story for the first time in the 1970s, as if his memory had improved during the intervening decade . He said the story was first told by him in the '70s .
 Oswald was confined to a hospital for his entire recuperation . Military records show that Oswald spent the entire time in a hospital . Oswald spent most of his recovery in hospital .
 Summers alleges that an unnamed Marine, after the assassination, “heard a rumor” that Oswald was involved in Schrand’s death . Summers: An unnamed Marine heard a rumor of Oswald's involvement in the death of Schrand .
 According to Summers, if that hearsay is true it could have provided the CIA a “handle” to force Oswald into intelligence work . Summers: "If that . if that . is true, it could . have provided a ‘handle’ for the CIA to force
 Summers concedes, “There is no hard evidence that Lee Oswald really was involved in the death of Marine Schrand …” *Oswald appears to have been dyslexic. Summers: “No hard evidence’s that Oswald was involved .”
 Because of his extensive misspellings, when any of his writing is further quoted herein, the author has omitted “” after the errors . The author of this article has omitted "” following the errors.
 The doctor who treated him said that such notations were made routinely to avoid having the person’s pay jeopardized .
 Hurt implies the incarceration may have been a cover story so Oswald could continue purported intelligence work . Hurt implies that Oswald was imprisoned so he could continue to work for the CIA .
 Oswald was confined in a single cell during his imprisonment . Another Marine, confined in the brig at the same time, confirmed that he remembered seeing Oswald in a cell . Oswald died in August 1945 .
 Oswald was recruited by the CIA while he was a Marine stationed in Japan, the evidence is unconvincing . Oswald was not a Marine, but a Marine in Japan .
 When questioned by the House Select Committee in 1978, he could not remember Oswald’s special cryptonym or the project name from which the disbursements allegedly came . When questioned in 1978 by the committee, he was unable to remember Oswald's special cryptonyms .
 Wilcott claimed to have had a conversation with an intelligence analyst about Oswald . The analyst was not even posted overseas at the time .
 Hemming says Oswald never said he was an agent, but Hemming had a hunch he was . Hemming is a self-promoter who has provided other outlandish and unproven ‘disclosures’
 Michael Eddowes, a British author, later wrote an entire book contending that Oswald had been switched with a KGB assassin while in the Soviet Union .
 He led an effort to exhume Oswald's corpse, winning the support of Lee’s mother and wife . Oswald's body was found in a shallow grave in Dallas, Texas, Texas .
 Oswald's body was dug up from its Texas grave in 1981, and forensic pathologists confirmed it was Oswald . Oswald's remains were found in Texas in 1981 .
 Conspiracy buffs now claim the body of the real Oswald was swapped back into the grave before the exhumation . Incredibly, the issue still lives, as some conspiracy buffs now say the body was swapped . The real Oswald is believed to have been in the grave for decades .
 Oswald later told Delgado he had been in contact with the Cuban consulate in Los Angeles . Delgado thought he was lying until he saw a letter in Oswald’s belongings with a gold seal on it and assumed it was from the Cubans . Oswald later said Delgado had been
 Delgado assumed it might be someone from the Cuban government . On another occasion, Oswald received a visitor at the base . Delgado did not see the person and did not even know if it was a man or woman, but assumed it was someone from Cuba .
 Delgado’s speculation has no factual foundation and is only his hunch . Some critics use it to assert Oswald may have had a Cuban intelligence connection . Delgado's speculation is not factual foundation .
 Cuban government has denied having had any contact with Oswald in 1959 . Cuban government denies having had contact with the Oswald family .
 Garrison writes that Thornley “had not served with Oswald as long as a number of others and had not even lived on the same part of the base’s base .
 The other Marines’ affidavits did not contradict Thornley’s testimony . They only said Oswald did not talk to them about the same things he discussed with Thornley . The affidavits do not contradict the testimony .
 Thornley is not even listed in the indexes for books by Robert Groden and Harrison Livingstone, Henry Hurt, John Davis, David Scheim, Mark Lane, and Josiah Thompson . He is not listed in indexes for novels by Livingstone and Hurt .
 He intended to apply for a Soviet visa in a less-trafficked consulate in Helsinki . The statement on the application provided him an excuse for traveling to Finland . He was traveling to Helsinki for a visa application .
 The case of Yuriy Nosenko was a key to unlocking important pieces of the Oswald puzzle . The request was the beginning of one of the most controversial episodes in CIA history, the case .
 Nosenko sought permanent asylum in the U.S. in January 1964, only two months after the Kennedy assassination . He sought asylum in 1964, seeking permanent asylum .
 He claimed to be a lieutenant colonel responsible for compromising Americans visiting Moscow . He also claimed to have been involved in compromising Americans who visited Moscow .
 Oswald was under his jurisdiction when the Marine first defected to the Soviet Union . Oswald was a Marine who defected from the USSR . He was under Oswald's jurisdiction when he defected .
 He was temporarily assigned to investigate whether there was ever any KGB-Oswald relationship . After the assassination, he was assigned to look into the relationship between the two .
 Soviet intelligence viewed Oswald as mentally unfit and had not debriefed him, says Nosenko . He says he had no relationship with Oswald .
 If that was true, it meant the KGB and the Soviet Union were absolved of any complicity in JFK’s murder . The KGB and Soviet Union was cleared of any involvement in JFK's murder .
 If it was false, Nosenko could be a phony defector, intended to deflect the Warren Commission from focusing on evidence of the real Soviet role with Oswald . If it's false, it could deflect Warren Commission's focus from focusing evidence of Soviet role .
 When Nosenko contacted an American diplomat in 1962, the CIA was immediately notified . The CIA was also notified when the incident occurred .
 It dispatched seven-year-old Tennant ‘Pete’ Bagley and an agent fluent in Russian, George Kisevalter, to meet Nosenko four times at a safe house near Geneva’s center .
 Nosenko said he was dissatisfied with the Soviet system and asked for some money in exchange for information . He said he wanted to know more about the system .
 CIA transcripts reveal that Nosenko provided critical leads on a number of intelligence cases . CIA transcripts show that at those meetings, Nosenkos provided critical intelligence leads . The CIA transcripts also reveal the CIA transcripts .
 CIA chief of counterintelligence, James Jesus Angleton, was convinced that no matter what Nosenko said, he was a KGB plant . Bagley was shocked when he returned to CIA headquarters because of his shock .
 Anatoliy Golitsyn was another defector who had arrived in America six months earlier . Angleton’s distrust was the reason for Angleton's distrust . The reason for the distrust was his distrust of the defector .
 Golitsyn had told Angleton that the CIA was penetrated by a high-ranking KGB agent code-named Sasha . Angleton believed the CIA had been penetrated by the KGB agent .
 Angleton’s worst fear was that CIA was compromised, as British intelligence had been by Kim Philby . Angleton feared the CIA had been compromised by Philby, who had infiltrated the CIA . The possibility that the CIA could be compromised was Angleton's worst fear .
 CIA has been on a twenty-year hunt for a phantom mole that destroyed careers of good officers and split the Agency . CIA President Richard Nixon accepted Golitsyn’s revelations without hesitation .
 Angleton convinced the mole existed, Golitsyn warned him that the KGB would send “defectors” intended to deflect the interest in Sasha . Angleton was convinced the KGB had a mole .
 His information was dismissed either as stale or as exposing expendable KGB operations . His information has been dismissed as stale, or that he exposed expendable .
 Nosenko prepared for his eventual goal, defection . He was unaware the CIA thought he was a double agent .
 For the remainder of 1962 and all of 1963, he committed to memory the details of more than three hundred new leads and almost two thousand names for the Agency . For the rest of the 1963 period, he kept up his memory of the leads .
 The same two agents who had met him in 1962, Bagley and Kisevalter, flew in from Washington . They were the same agents who met him from 1962 .
 At a second meeting, the disagreement over his defection continued, with Nosenko increasingly concerned the KGB might uncover his treachery . At a meeting, a week later, he was increasingly concerned about the KGB .
 Nosenko announced he had received a cable ordering him home immediately . Five days later, he said he had been ordered home by the cable .
 He feared the KGB had unmasked him and his return meant arrest and execution . He feared his return would mean arrest or execution for him .
 Nosenko said he fabricated the story because he feared that otherwise Bagley would not allow him to defect . He said he did not want Bagley to know he had defected .
 The story about the cable accomplished its purpose, forcing the CIA to spirit him to the West . The CIA was forced to spirit the man to the U.S.
 The questions raised about his declaration that he was a lieutenant colonel are more complex . He declared he was lieutenant colonel, but the questions are complex .
 CIA document experts determined that Nosenko could not have held the rank or position he claimed in the KGB . Many assassination-conspiracy books say that CIA documents determined that . travel papers he had in his possession had in . possession had been concocted to give his defection credibility .
 In the spring of 1963, he was appointed to lieutenant colonel by his close friend Major General Oleg Gribanov, the director of the Second Chief Directorate .
 His travel document did say he was a lieutenant colonel, but since he defected before the chairman’s approval, the CIA could not verify that rank . The CIA has not confirmed that rank, but the travel document says he was lieutenant colonel .
 Agency mistakenly assumed the higher rank was part of a false legend prepared for Nosenko . Agency mistakenly thought it was a fake legend .
 He did not know that his CIA debriefers were only interested in exposing him as a liar . He did know that he was being targeted by the CIA for being a liar.
 A deep-cover FBI informant at the Soviet mission to the United Nations, code-named Fedora, personally confirmed to Hoover that Nosenko was bona fide . The defection had caused an uproar in the highest Kremlin circles, the informant said .
 FBI believed Nosenko about Oswald and supported his request to testify before the Warren Commission . FBI believed he was Oswald's source and supported him testifying before the commission .
 Richard Helms, then deputy director of plans, met with Earl Warren on June 24, 1964, and informed him the CIA doubted Nosenko’s credibility . Helms then told Warren that the CIA had doubts in the credibility of the CIA .
 Helms warned that if the Commission used his information and it was a lie, it would ruin the rest of their work . Helms said that if it was used in the Commission's work it would 'ruin' the work .
 Nosenko did not testify and is not even mentioned in the Commission’s twenty-six volumes . He is not mentioned in any of the volumes .
 Helms did not tell the Chief Justice that since early April, with the backing of attorney general Robert Kennedy, Nosenko had been under hostile interrogation, treated as a captured spy rather than a voluntary defector .
 The FBI was denied access to him, and his CIA jailers expected him to crack within a few weeks . The FBI has been unable to access him .
 Robert Kennedy called frequently to discover whether he had confessed yet . Robert Kennedy was often called to find out if he'd confessed to the crime . Kennedy called often to discover if he had done so .
 Nosenko’s ordeal had started on April 4, 1964, when he was driven to a three-story safe house in a D.C. suburb . He was taken into custody in April 1964 .
 After an hour of questions, Stoiaken made a big show of discussing the prearranged results with some of the CIA personnel . Stoiak made an hour-long meeting with the CIA officials .
 Nosenko was stripped, inspected inside his mouth, ears, and rectum, and then marched into the attic . The attic would serve as his prison for more than a year .
 Only furniture was a metal bed fastened to the middle of the floor . The only furniture in the room was a bed fastening to the floor of the room .
 Guards watched him twenty-four hours a day through a wire mesh screen built into the door . Guards also watched him through the mesh screen of the door to keep him from being killed .
 The room had no heat or air-conditioning, and during the oppressive Washington summers it was like a furnace . During the oppressive D.C. summers, the room was "like a furnace"
 Nosenko was given little food, allowed to shower only once a week, and not allowed a toothbrush or toothpaste . He was not allowed to take a shower or brush, according to the authorities .
 There were no television, radio, reading material, exercise, or cigarettes . There was no television or radio, radio or reading material .
 The interrogations, which began within days, were extremely aggressive . "The interrogations were very aggressive," says the interrogator .
 He was constantly attacked as a KGB plant and told his only chance of freedom was to confess . He was also told he had to confess to the KGB and was told he must confess .
 CIA agents became increasingly frustrated that he refused to admit he was a bogus defector . Over the months, the CIA agents were increasingly frustrated with his refusal to admit being a fake defector.
 Robert Kennedy had long since stopped telephoning for an update, and the Warren Commission had released its report . Robert Kennedy was long away from calling the White House to check on his son .
 On August 13, 1965, after 16 months closeted in the attic, Nosenko was moved by the CIA to a new prison . The new prison was a top-secret facility constructed especially for him .
 Located on the grounds of the CIA’s training facility, Camp Peary, it made the attic seem luxurious . The attic was located in the attic of the training facility .
 Nosenko was locked inside a ten-foot-by-ten-foot windowless concrete bunker . On a heavily wooded site on the ten-thousand-acre compound, the bunker was located on a heavily-wooded site . The bunker was a ten foot-by
 A single bare bulb illuminated the room’s only piece of furniture, a metal bed . The bed was so small that his feet hung over the edges of the bed . A bare bulb lit up the room .
 The bunker accentuated the weather, either brutally hot or freezing cold . The bunker was set up in a bunker in the middle of the winter .
 After four months, he was finally allowed to walk in a small enclosed yard outside his jail . The yard had been constructed outside the jail in a bid to free him from jail .
 It was the first time in nearly two years he had seen daylight or been in fresh air . It was first time he had been outside for two years, he said .
 The yard was encircled with a twelve-foot-high chain-link fence, and several feet beyond was an eighteen-foot high fence of solid material . Several feet beyond the fence was a solid material fence .
 The CIA did not want anyone, even at Camp Peary, to see what had become of him . The CIA didn't want anyone to know what happened .
 When his jailers finally allowed him to brush his teeth after two years in captivity, he kept a printed piece of paper from the toothpaste package . He was so starved for something to read that he secretly kept the paper from toothpaste .
 Though it was only a list of ingredients, he kept rereading it until his guards saw him and confiscated it . He kept re-reading it, re-watching it until he was stopped .
 He painstakingly created a makeshift deck of cards from shreds of paper napkins . Another time he painstakingly made a deck of card cards from shredded napkins to create .
 The guards watched him for several weeks and destroyed it on the day he completed it . It was destroyed by the guards after he completed the project .
 Each subsequent defector who knew of the Nosenko case vouched for his bona fides. Meanwhile, each subsequent Soviet defector .
 Nosenko had been tried in absentia and was to be executed on his recapture . He was executed on the recapture of his capture . He had been trying to escape from prison .
 Angleton concluded that in the decade after Golitsyn, the Soviets sent twenty-two phony defectors to the U.S. Today, the CIA and FBI consider every one of those defectors as bona fide .
 Angleton and Bagley debated drugging Nosenko to hasten his breakdown . Angleton, Bagley grew increasingly impatient with evidence that he might be authentic . Nosenkos was a member of the gang who was obsessed with drugs .
 Nosenko is positive he was drugged, recalling injections by CIA doctors, followed by days of panic and terror . He says he recalls being drugged and being terrorized by the CIA .
 In October 1966, two and a half years after he was placed into solitary confinement, a second polygraph was administered . He was placed in solitary confinement in October 1966 and placed into a psychiatric hospital .
 During the exam, the doctor inserted a gloved finger inside Nosenko’s rectum and, over his protests, wriggled it around for some ten minutes .
 Nosenko is certain this was done to anger him and stimulate his blood pressure . Blood pressure is a key factor in affecting polygraph readings, he says .
 Instead of asking yes and no questions as on the first test, he spent an hour calling Nosenko a ‘liar’ and asking demeaning questions about alleged homosexuality .
 Stoiaken took a lunch break, leaving Nosenko strapped to the machine . The pair then took a break from the machine and left it strapped to his head . Stoiak took his lunch break with the machine, leaving him strapped to it .
 Stoiaken returned two hours later to continue questioning for another two hours . He continued to be questioned for two hours more than a half an hour .
 No matter how Nosenko responded or what the polygraph showed, Stoiaken said he was a liar . No matter what polygraphs showed, he said he would be a liar, he was lying, he told CNN .
 His desperation was evident when he soon made a list of how the festering case could be closed . He soon made the list of ways to get the case closed .
 Although undecided about Nosenko’s bona fides, he knew the matter had to be resolved . He knew he had to resolve the matter, but was undecided about his bonaFides .
 Bruce Solie, a sixteen-year veteran and the Agency’s most experienced spycatcher, was assigned a complete review by Helms . Solie was a 16-year vet and a 16 year veteran .
 Angleton and Bagley produced a nine-hundred-page report detailing why Nosenko was a plant . Helms’s move was to offset Helms's moves, Angleton said .
 Solie: Angleton/Bagley report was more an unchallenged prosecutor’s brief than an impartial report . It took Solie six months to determine that the Angleton report was seriously flawed .
 CIA guards entered the concrete bunker, blindfolded, handcuffed, and shackled Nosenko, and stuffed him into the backseat of a car . As a result of Solie’s preliminary conclusions, Solie says, “CIA guards entered . The CIA guards .
 CIA safe house is located in a Washington suburb . The CIA says it has a safe house in Washington, D.C., where it is based .
 After three and a half years, he was no longer in solitary confinement . He was released from solitary confinement in 2009 . He has been held in a federal prison since 2009 .
 He was soon moved to a farmhouse, where he was given a comfortable bedroom, ate normal meals, and could exercise . He was moved to the farmhouse where he could exercise and eat normal meals .
 During 1968 Solie interviewed him, often six days a week, six times a week . However, he was still the Agency’s prisoner, and Solie was still a prisoner .
 He found a very different man than the one portrayed by Angleton and Bagley . Angleton found the truth out of Bagley's character .
 In early 1968 the Soviet Division of the CIA, technically responsible for defectors, received a new director . Rolfe Kingsley ordered a complete review of his department’s files .
 In debriefing files tucked away in a safe, he was astonished to discover the defector had provided six solid leads about Soviet penetration of European allies .
 When the information was turned over to foreign governments, Soviet spies were arrested . The information was handed over to the foreign governments .
 In August 1968, after eight months of interviews with Solie, Nosenko had a third polygraph . It was the only valid test he had ever given, and it was the last valid test .
 He passed it, including questions about whether he was telling the truth about Lee Harvey Oswald . He passed the questions, including those questions about Oswald .
 First CIA document accepted Nosenko as a bona fide defector . It was the first CIA document to accept Nosenkos as bona fide defectors .
 FBI agents interviewed Nosenko for the first time in over four years . J. Edgar Hoover received a copy of the book and dispatched FBI agents to interview him . Hoover received the copy and dispatched agents to speak to Nosenkos .
 Nine new counterintelligence cases and seventy-five leads on pending cases were discovered . They discovered nine new counter-intelligence cases .
 Although still confined to the farmhouse, he was allowed to read books and newspapers . He was also given a small black-and-white television .
 Starved for news, he asked for the 1964–67 copies of the World Almanac . He asked for a copy of the 1964-67 copies, which he had requested .
 In December, almost five years after his arrival in the U.S., he was allowed to visit public places, as long as CIA handlers accompanied him . He is allowed to see public places in the United States, but his handlers must accompany him .
 The Soviet Division’s independent review also declared Nosenko a bona fide defector . Angleton watched with frustration, but the review found him to be a genuine defector .
 In March 1969, Helms employed him as an independent consultant on the KGB, at a salary of $16,500 per year . Helms arranged for limited compensation for his illegal imprisonment .
 By April, five years after he was locked into an attic, he was released from all security restrictions . He was locked in an attic for five years before being freed from all restrictions .
 All six directors of Central Intelligence who followed Helms agreed that Nosenko was a bona fide defector . Helms' CIA director: "All six of those who followed him agreed"
 The FBI never wavered from its initial determination of his bona fides . The FBI says it will continue to investigate whether he was a fraud .
 The official CIA position today is that Nosenko is the most valuable KGB defector to come to the West as of 1964 . CIA says he is most valuable defector in the world as of the 1964 .
 Some still disparage his bona fides . Yet despite the gross injustice done to him, some still disparages him . The CIA has corrected its mistakes .
 Assassination critics are not the only ones to use the first polygraph results to impugn Nosenko’s bona fides . The results of the polygraphs were published in the New York Times .
 Nosenko’s three polygraph tests were evaluated by an independent polygraph expert . The tests were conducted by Richard Arther, president of the Scientific Lie Detection, Inc. The company says the tests are designed to test a lie detector .
 He reached his conclusion solely by reviewing the official, typed reports of the test .
 Select Committee used Nosenko’s statements from hostile interrogations to impeach his current testimony . Second, the Select Committee also used the interrogations as a reason for impeaching his testimony .
 In 1967, the CIA discovered massive errors in the translation of the interviews conducted before and during Nosenko’s imprisonment .
 Bagley and Angleton distorted the record by overlaying their interpretations into the transcript . Not only did interrogators often misunderstand his broken English .
 Select Committee used Nosenko’s 1978 testimony to establish whether he was consistent and truthful . Those answers were often used by the Select Committee to determine whether the testimony was consistent or truthful .
 Nosenko pleaded that the hostile interrogations not be used against him . The committee’s counsel persisted .
 Finally, Nosenko refused to answer any more questions and the interview abruptly ended . The interview was abruptly cut short and ended .
 Nosenko has been questioned twice about his CIA treatment, but the interview he granted for this book is the first that focused on Oswald . The interview was the first to focus on Oswald's role in the CIA .
 Nosenko is no longer a full-time counterintelligence consultant for the Agency . There are still paramount concerns for his security in Russia .
 Nothing about him can be reported, including personal details that might compromise his new identity . He is not allowed to be named .
 When Edward Jay Epstein briefly interviewed him in the mid-1970s, the same restrictions applied . The interview took place in the same way as the interview with Epstein . Epstein was interviewed by Epstein in the 1970s .
 Nosenko claims that after swearing him to secrecy, he revealed the state of the state . He claims that he was sworn to secrecy by the government .
 In the interview for this book, John Sutter was asked about the substance of his answers . The substance of the answers are included in this and the following chapter .
 Intourist was made up entirely of KGB informants or agents, says Nosenko . Intourists were in regular contact with personnel of the Soviet tourist agency, he says . The agency was a KGB informant or agent .
 Intourist guide, Rima Shirokova, played an important role in Oswald’s first weeks in Russia .
 Oswald arrived in Helsinki on October 10, 1959, and applied for his visa from the Soviet consulate on October 12, 1959 . Oswald died of a gunshot wound to the head of the Helsinki hospital .
 The Soviets issued his visa in two days,52 and it was valid until October 20, allowing him to take one trip of not more than six days to the Soviet Union . The visa allowed him to travel to Russia for six days .
 Questions raised about the speed with which the visa was issued . Questions have been raised over the speed of the visa being issued .
 Nosenko was deputy chief of the KGB’s Tourist Division in the Second Chief Directorate . He was a member of the Soviet Union's tourist division in Russia . He says he was in charge of the tours of the country .
 Thousands of tourist applications were processed annually . Only cursory review was given the forms, with the names checked against a security watch list .
 Helsinki was not as busy as London, Paris, or other major European capitals, its visa processing was quick . It was routinely approved, and since Helsinki isn't as busy with other major capitals, it was quicker .
 Oswald told his Intourist guide, Rima Shirokova, that he wanted to defect and become a Soviet citizen . The KGB had no inkling that he was anything but a student visitor, it had absolutely no interest .
 Oswald’s defection to Russia seemed so well planned that some refuse to believe he accomplished it by himself . Oswald's defection was so well-planned that some refused to believe it was done by him alone . Oswald defected to Russia from the U.S.
 His disciplined savings from his Marine Corps salary, maneuvers for an early discharge, and rudimentary study of the Russian language all suggest long-term preparation . His discipline from the Marine Corps .
 He confirmed this after his arrival in Moscow, writing to his brother, Robert, that he had thought of defecting for over a year . He wrote that he thought of defectioning for more than a year before arriving in Moscow .
 October 18, two days after he arrived in Russia, was his twentieth birthday . October 18 was his first birthday in Russia .
 Nosenko is adamant the KGB did not interrogate Oswald . Oswald had declared his intention to defect, but Nosenkos is adamant he did not .
 The Soviets had made the U-2 a top priority and finally shot one down on May 1, 1960, less than seven months after Oswald’s arrival . The Soviets finally shot a U.2 down in May 1960 . Oswald's arrival in the U.S. was less
 First, he wasn't in the Marines any longer, but even if he had come to us in a uniform, we still would have had no interest . Even if he was in uniform he would have no interest, he would still have been interested .
 "We had better information already coming from KGB sources than he could ever give us," says CIA official . "We were already having better information coming from our sources than ever given us," he says .
 The media section of the KGB would have seen Oswald’s public interviews, but they would not necessarily have transferred that information to us . Oswald's public interviews would have been seen by the media section, but not necessarily by the KGB, the author says .
 Even if we knew about Atsugi, it is unlikely we would have spoken to him . Even if they knew about him, they would not have been able to speak to him again .
 Intelligence experts on the U-2 concur that Oswald could not have contributed to its eventual downing, as some have suggested . Oswald was not involved in the crash of the U.2, according to U.S. officials .
 Oswald was not interrogated in depth . He was questioned by KGB informants, including Shirokova . Oswald was never questioned in depth, but he was interrogated by informants . Oswald died in August 1945 .
 On October 19, he was interviewed by Radio Moscow correspondent Lev Setyayev . He was interviewed on October 19 by Moscow's Moscow correspondent .
 The purported reason was to record Oswald’s impressions as a tourist for broadcast overseas . But Setyayev was also an informant for the KGB . Based on the information it received, Nosenko's department vetoed Oswald's request for citizenship .
 Webster, another defector who had arrived shortly before Oswald, was happy for three or four months, but then he missed the conveniences of home and wanted to go back to America . Webster, who arrived shortly after Oswald, wanted to return to America, says Webster . Webster was happy
 A Russian defector defected as a civilian to Russia . It was an unusual person who decided to defect as a civilian .
 We could never totally dismiss the idea that any of these defectors might be a provocation from U.S. intelligence . And, of course, we could never completely dismiss the possibility that any defectors may be American intelligence provocation from American intelligence .
 The official was discouraging about his chance for obtaining citizenship but said he would check on extending his visa . The official said he will check if he can get a visa extension .
 Oswald’s citizenship request was officially denied and he was told he must leave Moscow within two hours . Oswald was ordered to leave Moscow by the end of the day . Oswald's passport request was denied .
 He was late by ten minutes, then by twenty minutes, so she went to the duty clerk on his floor . She found him late by 20 minutes, and he was late for 20 minutes . She went to his floor, and she found him on the floor .
 She got the manager of the hotel and told him she was worried about Oswald, and together they went to his room . Oswald was found dead in Oswald's hotel room . She got him back to his hotel .
 I think ‘when Rimma comes at 8.30am to find me dead it wil be a great shock. somewhere, a violin plays, as I wacth my life whirls away.’ I think that when Rimma . comes at . 8am to
 Oswald was transferred to a psychiatric ward at Botkinskaya, where he was kept for three days . Oswald was kept in the ward for a total of three days before being transferred to another psychiatric ward .
 A transcript of a conversation with the doctor who sewed up Oswald’s slashed wrist indicated that he was capable of more irrational acts . A transcript, maintained in the KGB files, indicated that Oswald was likely to commit irrational acts in the future .
 The KGB knew it was right not to grant Oswald citizenship, but now faced with the difficult decision of what to do with him . The KGB had to decide whether to grant him citizenship .
 There were two choices—to force him onto a plane for coerced deportation, or allow him to stay temporarily without granting him citizenship . There were only two choices: force him on a plane, or let him stay temporarily .
 After Khrushchev’s return, the Soviets were acutely aware of how the treatment of visiting Americans might affect the new relationship between the two countries .
 Oswald gained the attention of the USSR’s leaders because of his attempt to kill himself . Oswald's suicide attempt gained the USSR's attention . Oswald was a member of the Soviet Union .
 By telling Oswald he had to leave, he was so unstable he might try and succeed in killing himself . Oswald was unstable enough to try and kill himself, according to Oswald .
 If we forced him onto a plane for deportation, there was still the image of a student being manhandled by the Soviet security forces . The image of the student was still an image of him being dragged out of the Soviet Union .
 Nosenko’s department took more than two months to decide what to do with him . He was found dead at his home in October .
 Oswald continued to try to impress his new hosts with his zeal for the Russian system and his distaste for America . Meanwhile, Oswald continued his efforts to impress the new hosts .
 On October 31, he stormed into the American embassy and tried to renounce his United States citizenship . After three days in which he stayed in his hotel room waiting futilely for word from Soviet officials, he stayed there . On Saturday, after three days, he waited futilely in his
 He declared he was a Marxist, tossed his passport across the consul’s desk, and said he intended to give the Soviets all the information he had acquired as a Marine radar operator . He declared himself a Marxist .
 American consul Richard Snyder was still smarting from a recent would-be defector who had quickly changed his mind afterward . Snyder was angry that a recent defector had quickly reversed his mind after initially saying he wanted to defect .
 Snyder knew Oswald’s act would be irrevocable, and thought he was too young at twenty to make such a permanent decision . Snyder knew his actions would be irreversible, and he thought Oswald's act was too soon .
 He put off by claiming it was too late in the day and the paperwork could not be finished in time . He put him off by saying the paperwork was not ready to be completed in time.
 Snyder told him to return Monday to finish the revocation, but he did not . Snyder said he will not return to the revocation .
 He was apparently satisfied that his bravado had adequately impressed the Soviets . He wrote in his diary that he was “elated” by his scene at the embassy .
 Oswald was explicit in denouncing the United States when writing to his family . Oswald believed his mail might be read by the Soviets . Oswald wrote to the Soviets in fear of his family being read .
 Oswald ended the year in Moscow spending most of his time studying Russian in his hotel room . The KGB decided his fate . Oswald spent the rest of his year studying Russian .
 The local KGB in Minsk was ordered to monitor Oswald once he arrived there . The KGB was also ordered to keep tabs on Oswald's movements .
 Under no conditions could any officer establish an operative relationship with Oswald. Oswald was not allowed to establish a relationship with him . Oswald was the leader of the Oswaldist movement in the early 1940s .
 They could not approach him except in the course of their surveillance . They were not allowed to speak to him . They could only approach him during their surveillance of him .
 In those days no KGB agent would think of violating an order from Moscow . The KGB would not have thought such a move would have surprised them .
 He was working late at KGB headquarters at Dzerzhinsky Square when he heard the news of President Kennedy's assassination .
 Nosenko and several other agents monitored the reports until the confirmation of the President’s death . Turning on the radio, they monitored the news reports .
 Nosenko was shocked by the assassination, but his biggest surprise was yet to come, he said . He said: "If you're shocked by it, you're not surprised by it."
 According to Nosenko, that news sent shock waves through the KGB and the Kremlin . The KGB and Kremlin were shocked by the news, according to the former KGB chief .
 He was initially relieved, because it appeared the local KGB had followed its orders of only conducting surveillance on Oswald . Oswald's father was also relieved, as it appeared it had followed orders to only conduct surveillance . Oswald was killed in November 1945 .
 The other files were just the ordinary reports of the local surveillance files .
 First would show if there was any intelligence approach to Oswald . But the first would show how intelligence approaches were made .
 Later, Nosenko was relieved to discover it referred to a lieutenant colonel in the MVD, the local militia . He was an uncle of Marina, the woman Oswald had married, she said .
 Nosenko is adamant that defection was his goal since 1962 but that 1964 was his first opportunity . He is adamant defection is his first since 1962 and 1964 was the first opportunity to defect .
 The KGB reportedly reached an arrangement with Norman Mailer for access to the file . Yet by the fall the KGB had reportedly reached a deal with Mailer to get access to Mailer .
 Two went to China, one to East Germany, and the remaining eleven to Russia . Four of those with their wives went to Russia, four of them with wives . The remaining eleven went to the Soviet Union .
 When a tourist left his room, he was required to give the key to the clerk for safekeeping . The key was kept in the hotel room for the duration of the stay .
 The early entries seem to be written after the events described, but the later ones appear contemporaneous . The entries reflect life in Minsk, reflecting life in the city .
 He maintains the spelling is too good to belong to Oswald, a terrible speller . He maintains that Oswald is not Oswald, but he is a good speller.
 Oswald's diary is replete with misspellings and transpositions . Oswald’s trademark transpospositions are often misspelled . The diary contains misspelling and a series of errors .
 Handwriting experts used by both the Warren Commission and the House Select Committee determined the diary was written by Oswald . Oswald's diary is believed to have been written by the president of the United States .
 It was created in response to a State Department request about defectors in general . The State Department created the State Department response to the request .
 Some exaggerate uncle’s position to suggest an intelligence connection for either Marina or Lee . Marina's uncle's position is said to have been at the center of her life .
 He arrived in the provincial capital on January 7 and was met by Roza Kuznetsova, an Intourist worker who would become a friend . He arrived at the airport in the province's capital on Jan 7 .
 As the only American defector in the city, he was a minor celebrity . He discovered that as the only U.S. citizen in the country, he had become a major celebrity .
 The next day he met the mayor and was promised a rent-free apartment, something normally took years to achieve . The mayor met him and he was promised rent free apartments .
 Oswald began his job as a metalworker at the Belorussian Radio and Television Factory on January 13 . The factory was an enormous complex that employed over five thousand workers . Oswald is the son of a former Soviet spy .
 He was initially disappointed with his work, since he had told Soviet officials he was instead interested in going back to school to study economics, philosophy, and politics . He was disappointed with Soviet officials, but he eventually returned to school .
 His monthly income, between his salary and a Red Cross subsidy, was a very comfortable $150 . His monthly salary was between $150 and $150.
 By March, extraordinarily fast by Soviet standards, he was placed in a one-room apartment in a middle-class complex at 4 Kalininin Street . By March he had been moved out of the Soviet Union by a year .
 Although his room had no telephone or television, neighbors described it as sparsely furnished and dismal, it was in a good building and afforded a fine view from two small balconies of the Svisloch River .
 As an American defector at the height of the cold war, he was an oddity . Russians, who called him Alik, because Lee sounded too Chinese, went out of their way to ask him questions about America .
 Oswald was more social and contented than at any other time in his life . Oswald was 'more social' and 'contented' than ever before . He was more contented and happy than ever .
 From his first days at the factory, he formed a friendship with the plant’s deputy engineer, Alexander Ziger, a Polish Jew who had immigrated to Argentina in 1938, and then to Russia in 1955 . Ziger was also a deputy engineer at the plant .
 Ziger spoke English, and he and his wife, Maria, often entertained Oswald at their home . Oswald often entertained Ziger at his home .
 Lee briefly dated the Zigers’ daughters, Anita and Eleonora . Lee later dated their daughters . Lee was married to Zigers' daughter, Anita . Lee dated Anita in the 1970s .
 For several months, Oswald took Roza Kuznetsova, the In-tourist worker who also acted as his interpreter, to the movies, opera, or theater almost every night .
 One was Pavel Golovachev, the son of a highly decorated World War II pilot . Kuznetsova also introduced him to Ernst Titovets, a medical student who spoke English .
 By the summer, he bought a 16-gauge shotgun, joined a hunting club, and went on several excursions in the countryside .
 KGB agent Aleksandr Kostyukov approached eighteen-year-old Golovachev outside his apartment building and pressured him to meet with agents several times a week to supply information about Alik Alik .
 At other times the KGB used informants to engage him in anti-Soviet conversations . The KGB also engaged him with informants to talk about anti-Russian attitudes .
 When Oswald went hunting in the nearby woods, KGB agents followed him to ensure he did not try to observe military or restricted sites . Oswald was hunted in the woods by KGB agents in the early 1950s .
 He heard nothing about his request to attend a university, and the factory work had become tedious . The factory work became tedious and he heard nothing from his request for university .
 He later said he “perhaps fell in love with her the first minute” he saw her . He said he later said that he ‘fell in love’ with her first .
 They dated through the fall of 1960 and spent New Year’s Eve of 1961 with her family .
 It was another of his failures, following on the footsteps of school and the Marines, he says . It's another of many failures for him, including failing to graduate from high school .
 His diary entry for January 4, only two days after Ella's rejection, reveals his disillusionment with Russia was now pronounced .
 He told them no, asking only that his temporary papers be extended a year . He asked only that they be extended for a year, but he said no .
 His changing opinions about the Soviet Union were reflected in his deteriorating performance at the factory . The Soviet Union was the source of his changing opinions, he said .
 Oswald became increasingly lazy, and took to propping his feet on a table and complaining about not being paid enough . Over several months Oswald became more lazy and complained about not getting paid .
 In his diary, he whined about the compulsory mass gymnastics, political lectures, and weekend crop work . He also complained about the trade union meetings and the compulsory gymnastics .
 He slowly discovered the Soviet system was much more regimented than he had ever imagined . Always rebellious against authority, he slowly discovered he had to accept the system .
 The Soviets promoted a privileged Communist party class while forcing most of the population into compliant workers' collectives . Expecting to find a classless society, Marxist theory, he instead recognized that the Soviets promoted the party class .
 Instead of abandoning his Communist philosophy, he merely concluded that the Soviet system was a perversion of Marxist goals . But instead of abandoning Communism, he simply concluded that it was a Soviet system .
 He considered himself the pure ideologue, not corrupted by petty desires for privilege and material accumulation . The writer considered himself himself the "pure ideologue"
 As Russia’s luster dimmed, Oswald found America less objectionable than when he had defected . Oswald found the U.S. less objectionable when he defected to the United States . As Russia's luster dented, Oswald decided to defect to America .
 Oswald said he could not leave Minsk without Soviet approval and requested that everything be resolved through the mail . Oswald answered a week later, March 5, saying he was not allowed to leave the country .
 On March 24, the embassy again wrote that he would have to visit Moscow . The embassy said he would need to go to Moscow .
 The State Department had decided to return Oswald’s passport only if he personally appeared at the embassy and the consular staff was satisfied, after talking to him, that he had not renounced his U.S. citizenship .
 At the last hour I am introduced to a girl with a French hair-do and red-dress with white slipper . I dance with her. Boring but at the end of the hour I'm introduced to her .
 Born out of wedlock, she remained unsure of her father’s real identity throughout her childhood .
 Marina's mother died when Marina was fifteen, and unable to endure a terrible relationship with her stepfather, Marina had moved from Leningrad to Minsk in August 1959 .
 Marina’s comments about her first encounter with Oswald have raised suspicion that he must have had ‘official’ help to be so fluent in the Russian language . Marina's comments have been mistakenly raised suspicion he had had “official” help .
 Oswald had studied at the Monterey School, the Warren Commission’s chief counsel once indicated he was trying to “run down” a report that Oswald studied there . Such conjecture was fueled when Lee Rankin, the chief counsel, once said he wanted to ‘run
 After investigation, Commission convinced Oswald had never been there . Commission was convinced Oswald never was there . Oswald was never found at the site .
 Oswald was never enrolled at the Monterey School and never attended a single class, records show . Oswald was not an intelligence facility, and his student roster shows he was never in class . Oswald never attended any class at the school .
 Since the autumn of 1957, when he was in the Marines, he had been studying the language, sometimes with the help of an officer in his unit who shared his interest .
 By the end of 1958, Oswald was so disillusioned with his Marine service that he flaunted his interest in Russian while posted to the El Toro air base . Oswald's interest in the language grew so much that he became interested in Russian .
 Oswald took an Army Russian equivalency exam on February 25, 1959, 17 months after he began his “crash course’s course” Oswald took the exam . Oswald was the only person in the U.S. to take the test .
 He often sat in the barracks testing himself against the dictionary, a Russian paper, or a textbook . He often tested himself against a dictionary or Russian paper .
 By the time he defected in October 1959, two years of efforts produced meager results . He defected from the Soviet Union in February 1959 .
 Richard Snyder, the embassy consul, said, “He did not know very much Russian.” He said he did not speak Russian .
 I don't think he could have gotten along on his own in Russian society. I don’t think he would have got along in Russia, he says .
 In 1959, he wrote, “I have bought myself two self-teaching Russian Lan. Lan’s” books .
 Oswald wrote in his diary that his Russian was improving in the fall of 1960, nearly a year after his arrival in Russia . Oswald wrote that he was improving his Russian by the end of the 1960s .
 Russian language skills are limited after two and a half years in Russia . But even after two-and-a-half years, his language ability was limited .
 In Minsk, his upstairs neighbor Mayya Gertsovich said he spoke Russian poorly . She said he was speaking Russian badly .
 The day after the dance, Oswald was admitted to a hospital to have his adenoids removed . Oswald had the surgery the day after his dance .
 Marina asked Marina to visit, and feeling sorry for him, she stopped by daily . He asked her to visit and she visited him daily . Marina stopped by every day .
 Her association with a foreigner carried a certain prestige, and she liked the attention from her friends, she said . She said: "Her association with [a foreigner] carried a . certain prestige"
 The couple were married twelve days later, April 30, 1961, in the Minsk registry office .
 Henry Hurt writes “Nothing about Oswald’s time in the Soviet Union is more peculiar and beguiling than his marriage to Marina.” Henry Hurt says . Henry Hurt: ‘Nothing about his time in Soviet Union was more peculiar than that of Marina’
 She says she liked him more than any of her other boyfriends . She admits that he had his own apartment was a great inducement .
 George de Mohrenschildt, Oswald’s good friend, later said, “She said it was her dream some day to live in an apartment like that.… was one of the greatest things she desired ... and she finally achieved her dream.”
 Oswald asked for assurances that he would not be prosecuted for any crimes if he returned to the U.S. Marina had complained about Oswald to some friends about him . Oswald also wrote a letter to his wife asking for assurances he wouldn't be prosecuted .
 She confided to her neighbor Mayya Gertsovich that he was a tyrant, fought constantly with her, brought home little money from his job, and was demanding in peculiar ways, she said .
 He refused to allow her to wear makeup and was obsessed that she stay ultra-thin, almost boyish, in her figure . He was obsessed with her thin figure and her beauty, he said .
 Marina discovered in June that she was pregnant with her first child . The couple has been married for more than two years .
 Marina had learned about Ella, felt ambivalent about having the child, was repulsed by sex with him, and thought she had made a mistake by marrying him . She thought she'd had a child with Ella .
 His changeable nature was evident not only in his relationship with Marina but even in small matters . The actor's relationship with his wife Marina has been described as 'changeable'
 While in Russia, he initially attended dances with Ernst Titovets, and then tired of them . He attended dances in Russia with Titovetts, but tired of the dances . He was married to a woman who died of a heart attack .
 He bought a camera, started developing a photo hobby, and then quickly dropped the project . The project was a hobby of photography, but was quickly abandoned .
 Oswald purchased a radio so he could listen to Voice of America, but his listening became sporadic over the months . He purchased a single-barreled shotgun and joined the plant’s hunting club . Oswald was extremely enthusiastic when he had purchased a shotgun .
 After a few outings, he tired of the sport and sold the gun to a secondhand store for 18 rubles . The gun was bought by a Russian store for $18 .
 By the beginning of July, the embassy had still not answered his May letter disclosing his marriage and his wife’s desire to join him . The embassy has not responded to the letter .
 Oswald decided to visit Moscow, obtained Soviet permission to travel . He unexpectedly arrived at the embassy on Saturday, July 8, 1961 . Oswald's visit was a surprise visit to the embassy .
 It was the same day of the week he had arrived in 1959 to try and revoke his U.S. citizenship, and again he was asked to return Monday . The same day he had tried to revoke his United States citizenship .
 Oswald telephoned Marina in Minsk, and she joined him in Moscow,* waiting outside the embassy while he met with American consul Richard Snyder, the same consul who had encountered him in 1959 . Snyder found him remorseful and Oswald was remorseful .
 Oswald told Snyder that he had never applied for Soviet citizenship, had not made derogatory statements about the U.S., and was not a member of the factory trade union . Unknown to Snyder, Oswald told him several lies, including not applying for Soviet membership .
 He truthfully told Snyder that he had never given the Soviets any military information . The KGB had not debriefed him, he said . He said he never gave them any military info .
 Oswald had to fill out an application for renewal of his American passport . Snyder had him fill out a passport application .
 Snyder considered it very unlikely that the Soviets would issue an exit visa in the next two months . Snyder's passport was set to expire on September 10, 1961, and he considered it unlikely that he would be able to leave the country .
 Waterman’s decision was further reviewed and approved by the Passport Office chief of the foreign operations division, as well as the legal division . Waterman's decision was reviewed by the chief of Passport .
 Oswald reappeared at the embassy, this time with Marina, the next day, July 11 . Oswald was seen with Marina at the time of the July 11 attack . Oswald's wife, Marina, was killed in the attack .
 Marina had told the truth, but it was not an automatic disqualification . Some Russian wives of American citizens had previously been admitted to the United States although they were Komsomol members .
 Marina’s membership in a Communist trade union did not adversely affect her application . McVickar concluded it was mandatory and not adversely affected her application for the job .
 He informed him that they were doing everything possible to leave the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union was in the grip of the Cold War .
 Marina and Lee returned to Minsk on July 14 and then began the work of obtaining permission to leave the country from Soviet authorities . Marina, Lee and Lee were allowed to leave Minsk in July .
 When the news of their effort spread in Minsk, Marina was pressured to change her mind . Marina was forced to give up her decision to join the campaign .
 Oswald wrote to the U.S. embassy complaining “there have been some unusual and crude attempts on my wife at her place of work” Oswald wrote four days after their joint appearance at the United States embassy . Oswald: “There have been ... crude attempts at my wife
 Marina recalls that her apparently dyslexic husband had to bring five or six blank forms home for each one he managed to complete error-free . The Russian officials had reams of forms to fill out, all in triplicate, she recalls .
 In his diary he wrote, “On August 20th we give the papers out they say it will be 3½ months before we know if we know wheather they let us go or not.” In the diary he said it would be three½ months .
 Two of her aunts tried to scare Marina by telling her that the U.S. was racked with poverty and unemployment . Marina's aunt said that the United States is racked with unemployment and poverty .
 Oswald wrote a letter to Senator John Tower of Texas, seeking his assistance in budging the Soviets . In December, Oswald wrote to Tower seeking his help in getting the Soviets to allow him and his wife to leave the Soviet Union .
 She was not the daughter of a prominent family or a government official . She was born in New York City, New Jersey .
 A little over a month after the news of Soviet approval, Marina gave birth to a daughter, June . “She was not considered so wonderful herself,” she wrote .
 In February and March his regular flow of letters to the U.S. embassy dropped to only one . As he concentrated on his daughter, his mania to return to the States subsided .
 Consul John McVickar recommended to State Department on August 28, 1961, that her visa application be approved . After she interviewed with consul at the embassy in July, he recommended to the State Department .
 State informed the United States embassy in Moscow in October 1961 that Marina was eligible for an immigrant visa . Two months later, State informed U.S. Embassy in Moscow that Marina had been eligible for a visa . Marina was awarded the visa in 1961 .
 State told INS that it “believes it is in the interest of the United States to get Lee Harvey Oswald and his family out of the Soviet Union and on their way to this country soon” State believes it is “in the interest” of the U.S
 In point of fact, their approval to come to the U.S. was not easily obtained from either government, nor was speedy . In point, the approval for them to be in the United States was not easy obtained .
 Instead of providing evidence of conspiracy, it is a classic study of how bureaucracies strictly follow narrowly drafted regulations, mixed with some blunders and inefficiency . The case is classic case of how bureaucracy follows narrowly drafted rules and blunders, but not conspiracy .
 Oswald returned with his family to the U.S. from the United States embassy in Moscow . It took nearly a year for Oswald to return to the States . Oswald's family was in Moscow when he was killed .
 Since 1953, the average time for Soviet citizens seeking to immigrate had been between three and six months . It took Marina six months to get a U.S. visa, and since 1953, average time was between 3 and 6 months . Marina was the first woman in the Soviet Union
 The Soviet exit visas for both of them also took six months, with the average being four months . The average was four months, according to the Soviet Union .
 He frequently complained, blaming both Russian and American bureaucratic incompetence . He also frequently complained about the lack of transparency in Russia .
 Oswald’s request for a repatriation loan so he could pay for transportation to the U.S. State Department granted Oswald a loan to pay for transport to the States . Oswald's request was granted .
 On June 1, he signed a promissory note for $435.71.99* On that same day, Oswald, Marina, and June left by train for Rotterdam, from where they had reserved passage on a ship to the U.S. The Zigers and
 Maybe he'll go back and not like it there and then he’ll want to come back here, he says . Maybe he won’t want to go back, but maybe he might like it here again, he adds .
 Summers speculates that Oswald stopped over in West Berlin, without Marina, and then continued west on his own .
 His passport is not marked on the entry to the West, at Helmstedt . They share the same visa stamps, with the exception that he does not have a passport .
 Marina's passport would automatically be stamped at a crossing to the West . Marina’s passport, a Soviet document, would be automatically stamped at the border . Marina would be the first Russian woman to have a passport in the country .
 The decision to stamp Oswald’s American passport was at the discretion of the border guards . Oswald's passport was stamped by border guards at the time .
 He was indifferent toward her for most of the journey, but occasionally they argued, with Marina again feeling he did not love her . Marina again felt he did love her, but he was indifferent .
 They finally arrived at Hoboken, New Jersey, on June 13, 1962, in the midst of a heavy downpour . They arrived in a heavy rain in the middle of the day .
 Traveler's Aid Society had been contacted by the State Department . They were met by a representative of the Traveler’s Aid Society .
 The next day, with a $200 wire transfer from his brother, Robert, they left by air for Texas . They left the next day for Texas, with the help of his brother .
 He was as deflated as when the Russians initially ignored him after his defection . He said: "I'm not surprised that he was ignored by the Russians after defecting."
 Robert recalled, “He seemed, perhaps the word is, disappointed, when there were no newspaper reporters around.” Robert recalled how he was disappointed .
 Oswald later wrote his own questions and answers, the ones he had hoped to be asked . He wanted to announce his discovery that Russia was as bad as the U.S. Oswald wanted to make his discovery public .
 It would be very easy to dupe myself into believing one system is better than the other, I know they are not . I live no man I, have lived under both systems, I have sought the answers . I have lived in both systems and have sought answers .
 Oswald wrote that he believed the money was authorized by the Soviet Interior Ministry to reward him for his anti-American statements . Oswald wrote in his diary that he thought the money came from the Interior Ministry .
 Some contend he was put to work in Shop Number 25, an experimental plant in a restricted area . Some say he worked in the restricted area of the plant . Others say he was placed in the experimental plant .
 Summers also notes there was a Soviet intelligence school in Minsk, with the inference there is a connection with Oswald . Summers says there was also a connection between Oswald and Minsk .
 Epstein believes Oswald may have received Soviet training in propaganda and street demonstrations while there . Epstein believes that Oswald received Soviet propaganda training while in the Soviet Union .
 Before his arrival in Minsk, the KGB external surveillance in Moscow had code-named Oswald Nalim, a Russian fish . The KGB in Moscow was code-ed up for the operation, but it was later banned .
 Titovets gave Oswald passages by Hemingway and Shakespeare, among others, to record on the tape . Oswald was given a copy of Shakespeare's works .
 They were just standing there loafing around and I didn't like their faces, so I just shot them all with a machine gun . I didn’t like the faces, he said . They were standing there loaning around, he added .
 Oswald referred to an earlier letter he said he had sent to the embassy, but none of it was ever received . In it, Oswald said he'd sent an earlier version of the letter to the Embassy in London .
 Oswald's Red Cross subsidies were terminated when the Soviets intercepted his February letter . Oswald’s Red Cross subsidy was terminated when he was intercepted by the Soviets .
 The only person he informed of his plans was his friend Alexander Ziger . Ziger advised him not to tell any of his other acquaintances .
 Oswald had successfully renounced his American citizenship . One of the Americans, Robert Webster, was an even more extreme case .
 By 1963, thirty-six defectors to Communist countries had come back to the United States . During this six-week period, the KGB file, informants’ statements and Oswald’s own writings confirm he stayed in his Moscow hotel and worked on improving his Russian .
 Marina's friend lived in the same apartment complex as another American defector . Marina’s friend lived there with another defector, Marina said . Marina said the defector lived in a complex with another American .
 Swald told Marina he had once slept with a peasant girl, Nella, and “there was so much of her” that it made him physically sick . Henry Hurt admits, “It could, of course, be mere coincidence …” *
 When he saw a girl he liked, he commented to Marina, “She’d suit me fine.” She said to Marina that she'd suit him fine .
 KGB counterintelligence said the former Marine did not even grasp the fundamentals of simple radio devices . The former Marine could not have had any intelligence training, it said .
 Oswald complained to his brother, Robert, that the firing pin on his rifle was defective . Oswald was returning from the U.S. when he returned to the United States . Oswald's brother says he complained to Robert that his rifle firing pin was defective.
 At the bottom of the form, four acts were listed that would indicate a person had forfeited his American citizenship . Four acts would indicate that a person has forfeited citizenship .
 All the prohibitions related to actions in a foreign state, including swearing allegiance, serving in the armed forces or the government, or voting in an election, are prohibited in the U.S.
 Oswald’s form, have not was apparently stricken, indicating he had committed one or more of the prescribed acts . Oswald's form, which he had not committed, is apparently stricken . Oswald had not been stricken on the form .
 In approving Oswald, Snyder bent the rules, it appeared that Snyder had bent the rule . Snyder's approval of Oswald's actions appeared to be a violation of the law .
 The author tried to examine both the original and the carbon at the National Archives in 1993, but neither could be located by the archive’s staff . Neither the original nor the carbon could be found by the archives .
 Marina needed a birth certificate for the United States authorities, and the “new” one was merely an official copy of her original . Marina was born in New York City, New Jersey, in 2007 .
 Some in the KGB thought Oswald might try to use the bombs to force the issue of his exit visas . Oswald's bombs were thought to be a move to force him to leave the country .
 He abandoned his project shortly after receiving permission to emigrate . But he abandoned it shortly after being allowed to leave the country .
 Marina ran a fever and had too much breast milk, he offered to suck the milk . Marina ran to the hospital with a fever when she had a breast milk .
 She was surprised when he swallowed it instead of spitting it out as she expected . She was further surprised when she saw him swallow instead of spit it out .
 The State Department loan, together with $200 he had saved, was almost the exact amount needed for train and sea travel to America, the cheapest form of transportation . The State Dept. loan, plus $200 saved, provided the money needed to travel .
 A lookout card, a warning tag attached to a person's passport file, should have been posted to Oswald's when he received the loan, to make sure he repaid it . Oswald’s loan was supposed to be repaid, but he was not .
 After the assassination, the State Department’s legal adviser, Abram Chayes, admitted that it was a bureaucratic mistake . Some view it as evidence of wrongdoing and even conspiracy .
 The State Department held the clause applied to Oswald since his “unstable character and prior criticisms of the United States” made his presence in the USSR damaging to U.S. prestige . State Department said Oswald's presence in USSR was damaging to United States prestige .
 She testified to the Select Committee that they stayed in a cheap boarding-house, and Oswald paid for the stay . She testified that she and Oswald stayed at the boarding house .
 Raikin was chosen because he was a native Russian, and the State Department was unsure of the quality of Oswald’s Russian . State Department thought it best to have a translator meet Marina Marina .
 She told Lee she intended to write a book about his defection, and they were arguing before the end of the weekend . They were arguing over the weekend, and she was planning to write the book .
 Oswald smuggled the notes out of Russia, and told her he wished to publish them as a memoir . Oswald had smuggled them out, and said he wanted them to be a memoir, she said .
 Oswald sat in her office for three days to help her decipher his writing . Oswald sat for the next three days, helping her decipher the letters . Oswald was the author of the novel, "The Last Star of the Stars," in which he was assassinated .
 When Bates had typed ten pages, about a third of his notes, he said he was out of money, but turned down her offer of continuing the work for nothing . Bates turned down the chance to continue typing for free .
 Russian-born petroleum engineer Peter Gregory is a part-time language teacher at the Fort Worth Public Library . Gregory is an engineer and petroleum engineer . He says he has a "memoir" of his own .
 Dressed in a poorly cut heavy flannel Russian suit, he visited Gregory twice at his office, not only to show his memoirs, but also to inquire about possible work as a translator . Gregory's memoirs are published in New York City .
 Oswald’s presence became known to a local Russian community of emigres, most of them middleor upper-middle-class, politically conservative, and staunchly anti-Communist . Oswald's presence was known to the community of Russians . Gregory, Oswald's son, was
 There were a couple of dozen families living between Fort Worth and Dallas, Texas . Most of them attended the area’s single Eastern Orthodox church .
 Oswald met Gregory, who had lived in the USSR for a couple of years . Oswald had returned with a young Russian wife and baby . Oswald was always curious about current conditions inside the USSR .
 Gregory and his son, Paul, arranged for Marina to earn some money by giving Paul Russian-language lessons over the summer . Within a week, Gregory and Paul visited Marina and arranged for her to earn money .
 Members of the émigré community were not the only ones talking about the couple from Russia .
 Oswald refused to be interviewed, still piqued because no one had met him at the airport . Several journalists called Oswald after he settled into Robert’s home, but he wouldn't be interviewed .
 President Obama received a call from the White House in the first week of his presidency . The White House has been in touch with the nation's largest city in Washington, D.C.
 Special agents John Fain and B Tom Carter conducted the two-hour interview . The interview lasted for two hours .
 Oswald denied he had any contacts with the KGB or that he had threatened to disclose military secrets . Oswald even disavowed his attempt to renounce his citizenship . Oswald denied that he threatened to reveal military secrets to the Soviets .
 He also flatly disowned any effort on his part to become a Soviet citizen . He promised to inform the FBI if any Soviet agents approached him in America .
 Oswald had hit Marina Marina for the first time in one of their fights . Oswald hit Marina just two days before the FBI interview . Oswald had also hit Marina in the first fight .
 He had been rude over the telephone to one of the local Russians, Gali Clark . He had spoken rudely to a local Russian who had been in contact with him .
 Oswald told Marina of the call, and she was angry with him . Oswald told Robert and Vada at the dinner table . Marina was angry at him .
 He kept smiling and told her in Russian that he did not want Robert to know they were fighting . He said in Russian he didn't want Robert know he was fighting with her .
 When she walked away from the table, he rushed after her and had a cold look in his eyes she had never seen before . When she left, he had a look of his eyes that she never saw before .
 He slapped her hard around the face and threatened to kill her if she spoke a word to Robert or Vada . She said he slapped her with a hard slap and threatened her with death .
 Marina ran from the house and wandered the neighborhood for two hours wondering what to do . Marina was so stunned she ran from her home and wandered around the neighborhood .
 Marina excused Lee’s outburst because she felt that without a high school diploma and with no job skills, he was under tremendous pressure to find work . Marina felt that Lee was under pressure to get a job .
 Robert's mother showed up again after he had been at Robert's a month and announced she had given up her job and rented a small Fort Worth apartment that Marina and Lee could move into . Lee's mother then showed up to Robert's house and said she was moving in .
 She intended to live with them, sleeping in the living room and paying the rent . She planned to live in the house and pay the rent, she said .
 Lee was referred to as a sheet-metal worker by the Texas Employment Commission . Lee was a sheet metal worker for the Louv-R-Pak division of Leslie Welding Company .
 He hated the menial work, and his foreman later remembered he never mixed with any of the other workers . He hated work and was never allowed to mix with the other men .
 Lee, as usual, was cool to his mother, but she now blamed Marina for alienating her son . Lee was very cool to Marina, but now blames Marina for her son's behaviour .
 She suspected Marina really spoke more English than she indicated, and speculated that her daughter-in-law, and maybe even her son, had become Russian spies . She also suspected that she and her son may have been spies .
 When Marina and Lee played a Russian version of tic-tac-toe, Marguerite worried they were passing secret codes . Marina worried she was playing secret codes with Lee .
 On August 10, Marguerite screamed and cried in front of the house, even chasing the car down the street as it drove away . On the day Robert picked them up, August 10 .
 Marina feared she might have a heart attack, but Lee coldly told her, “She’ll be all right. She’s all right,” she says . Marina feared that she might be suffering from a cardiac arrest .
 Oswald lived in a block on the block on which Oswald lived . Oswald was waiting for him to return from work when agents drove to the end of the block . Oswald died in August 1963 .
 At 5:30, as they saw him walking home, the agents slowly drove alongside . The agents saw him as he walked home, and the agents drove alongside him .
 Fain noticed he had changed since the first interview, seven weeks earlier . Fain said he noticed he'd changed since he first interview .
 Oswald still refused to say why he had defected to the USSR . He again promised to contact them if he heard from Soviet agents . Oswald promised to return to the Soviet Union in the future .
 Marina and Lee had nothing to do with the local Communist party, Fain said . Fain recommended the case be closed . Based on his answers, the case was closed .
 Oswald was more tense and withdrawn than usual, with the arguments and physical abuse of Marina increased . Marina was physically abused by Oswald, and Oswald was physically abusive to her .
 At a dinner party on August 25, the senior Gregorys invited the Oswalds for dinner . The Oswalds were invited to the Gregorys' August 25 dinner party .
 He had hesitated about meeting a defector from the Soviet Union, but he wanted to hear from the Oswalds what was happening in Russia . He met with the Oswald family in Moscow .
 Marina had lived in Bouhe’s birthplace, she told him what she could about the city since his departure . She told him about his departure from Bouhe's birthplace .
 Frail and caring constantly for her infant daughter, she evoked both sympathy and affection . She evoked sympathy and sympathy for her daughter .
 The Soviets were initially fascinated to hear his stories about the United States . But now the emigres’ interest in Russia was satisfied by Marina. Marina .
 His favorite subject was politics, and he had no use for them, he said . They avoided his favorite subject, politics . He said: "They avoided politics, they avoided it."
 Katya Ford remembered, “I had heard of them … from Mr George Bouhe … who had told us that there was a young Russian girl came to Fort Worth.”
 Elena Hall, another emigree, was at the Oswald home and says he got “real mad” and yelled at Bouhe and Marina . Elena Hall says he yelled at them and Bouhe, Marina, Bouhe .
 Anna Meller, another Russian, also saw Oswald get “mad people tried to help Marina’s” Marina Marina . ‘mad people’ were ‘trying’ to help her, Anna said . Anna said: “I’m not
 Lee sat on the sofa reading Lenin and later praised both Khrushchev and Castro . Paul Gregory reported that during his Russian lessons, Lee sat . reading Lenin . Lee later praised the Soviet leader and Soviet leader .
 Meller, on her third visit, noticed Das Kapital and Communist literature on a small table . Meller: "I'm glad to see the Communist literature in my home"
 Bouhe saw an assortment of Communist books, including works by Marx and Lenin . Bouhe said he saw an array of Communist works, including those by Marx .
 He flipped open the covers and noticed some were Fort Worth Public Library books . He was “aghast,” and flipped the covers open, flipping open the books .
 They thought it would punish Marina if they cut him out of the community, and none of them wanted to do that . They thought that it would punishment Marina if she cut him from the community . None of the family members wanted to cut Marina out of their community .
 Marina told Meller she had walked into the door during the middle of the night, but Meller knew the “girl trying to hide something …” George Bouhe also saw Marina with a black eye, but when he asked what happened, she told him that Lee hit her
 De Mohrenschildt simply stopped at the Mercedes Street apartment and introduced himself to the residents .
 He was the only person who grew to like the introverted youngster . But eventually he grew to love the shy youngster .
 As opposed to many others who met Oswald, de Mohrenschildt never found him arrogant . Oswald was not found to be arrogant, but he was never arrogant .
 Oswald had a ninth-grade education, was humorless and introverted, and had a provincial view of the world despite his time in Japan and Russia . Oswald had an eighth grade education, but was also introverted .
 For most people, it was difficult to get more than a few sentences out of him during a conversation, and he disliked socializing . For most of the time, he would not be able to engage in a conversation with most people .
 De Mohrenschildt, an oil geologist, was a handsome six-foot-two-inch, fifty-one-year-old sportsman and adventurer who had been involved in diverse business ventures .
 Perennially tanned, he was a womanizer and partygoer who also happened to hold numerous university degrees . He was born into an aristocratic Russian family .
 He was loud and boisterous, able to drink heavily without showing the effect . Married four times, friends of the Bouvier family, including the parents of Jacqueline Kennedy .
 CIA interviewed him following a 1957 geological survey in Yugoslavia . CIA’s Domestic Contact Division interviewed him .
 Summers postulates that de Mohrenschildt monitored Oswald for the CIA, at Moore’s request . Summers: Moore was asked to watch Oswald at the request of the CIA .
 The two men had a similar rebellious streak that often made them outsiders . Although extremely different on the surface, the two men often had a common rebellious streak .
 Emigres remember that if he was talking to someone who was a right-winger, he advocated Communism, and in front of leftists, he praised fascism . In front of leftist people, he said: "In front of right-wingers, he was speaking to them about
 He praised the Nazi SS chieftan Heinrich Himmler in a speech at a Dallas social club . The club's members included some of the city's most prominent Jewish businessmen .
 He and his wife, Jeanne, often walked Dallas streets, or drove their convertible, attired only in bathing suits . Even during the winter months, they wore only bathing suits, even during the summer .
 Voshinin said he was constantly trying to pose as “a big shot” and she normally discounted 30 to 40 percent of what he said because of exaggeration, and some 90 percent of his wife's stories .
 De Mohrenschildt shared with Oswald an outcast’s perspective on life . Instead of being the aristocratic baron portrayed in many books, he was at odds with the lowly Oswald . It is evident that de Mohranschildt .
 Both de Mohrenschildt and his wife were in touch with Oswald . Oswald's wife was also a strong supporter of the de Mohranschildt family . Oswald had a close relationship with the family .
 The de Mohrenschildts were aggressive atheists,64 but Igor Voshinin considered both of them leftists . Igor Vashinin also considered both men to be leftists .
 In his own Warren Commission testimony, de Mohrenschildt admitted he was politically the furthest left of the Dallas Russians . Declan Ford, the husband of emigree Katya Ford, said he was “a leftwing enthusiast”
 He said Communism “is a system that can work and works, and possibly for a very poor man, and a very undeveloped nation it may be a solution’s solution .
 De Mohrenschildt was his mentor, almost a political and social guide whom Oswald respected . Oswald respected his mentor and mentor . Oswald was a social and political guide .
 He relished the opportunity to talk to someone he viewed as his intellectual equal . He relishes the chance to talk with someone he saw as his 'intellectual equal'
 de Mohrenschildt cultivated Oswald by doing something few had ever done—he was attentive to him . He cultivated Oswald in a way that few have ever done, he cultivated him .
 "If you asked him some questions about him, he was just out of this world," he said . "He was out of the world. He was just like a man," he added. "I'm not sure what I'm going to do next."
 He noticed Oswald was egocentric, and “that’s probably the reason he was clinging to me," he said . Oswald was "probably the reason" Oswald was clinging to him, he said. Oswald was egoentric .
 "I am a promoter and a salesman. He would try to be next to me," he says . "Let's face it, I am a salesman and a promoter," he adds .
 "You could see that it was a delightful idea. And he said—he sort of smiled—you could see it was an idea," he said .
 Oswald said he was behind in his rent and complained he couldn’t find a higher-paying job . Oswald said that he couldn't find a better job and that he is behind on his rent . Oswald was behind on rent and said he is struggling to find a job .
 They advised him that Dallas would have better prospects than Fort Worth . Fort Worth would have had better prospects, he said .
 Elena Hall invited Marina and June to stay in her home while Oswald looked for work in Dallas . Elena Hall invites Marina to stay with June and Oswald while Oswald looks for work .
 Marina and June moved to Hall’s home, while Oswald went to Dallas looking for work . Oswald went for work in Dallas, Texas .
 Hall learned that Oswald was “cruel to her, and they would argue for nothing, just nothing.” Oswald was a ‘cruel’ to Hall, Hall said . Hall learned of Oswald’s treatment of her, Hall learned he had been “
 She felt trapped in a strange country, unable to speak the language, and without her family, she felt trapped . She was forced to leave her family behind .
 She told Hall of how “cold” Lee was to her, and that she never wanted another child with him . Now she told Hall that she had no desire for another child .
 Marina assumed Lee would oppose it, and decided to do it before they reunited . She decided to take the action before she and Lee reunited .
 Oswald spent weekends at Hall’s house with Marina and June . Oswald spent the next two weeks at Hall's house with June and Marina and Marina .
 Both de Mohrenschildt and Bouhe tried to find work for the unskilled Oswald . Oswald was an unskilled man who was found to be the only survivor .
 Oswald scored well on tests given by the Texas Employment Commission, indicating aptitude for clerical work . Oswald is a graduate of the University of Texas University of Houston .
 Helen Cunningham, a counselor in the commission’s clerical and sales division, decided to get him any job she could find . Cunningham: Knowing he needed money badly, Helen Cunningham decided to help him get him .
 She sent him first to an architect’s firm to be a messenger, but he was not hired . She tried to hire him as a messenger but he never got a job .
 Oswald referred Oswald to Jaggars-Chiles-Stovall Co., a graphic-arts company, to fill the post of a photoprint trainee . On October 11, Oswald was referred to the company by the company .
 He was hired, and delighted since he had a longstanding interest in photography . He was delighted to be hired .
 His employment at Jaggars-Chiles-Stovall has created considerable controversy . His employment has been described as 'controversial' by some .
 The company prepared advertisements for newspapers, magazines, and trade publications . It was also under contract to the Army’s Map Service .
 Jaggars’s work for the government was almost entirely unclassified . But his work was mostly unclassified, he said .
 The small percentage that was confidential involved involved setting of words, letters, and figures for maps, but at no time did the company have any idea of what the material correlated to . The actual maps were never at Jaggars.
 Oswald did not have one, did not work with the Army maps, and never had access to that section . Oswald was never allowed to use that section of maps .
 Garrison is correct that Oswald learned a good deal about photographic techniques at Jaggars . Garrison mistakenly assumes it was for an intelligence employer . Garrison correct: Oswald learned good photography techniques at the facility . Garrison: "Oswold learned a lot about photography, but mistakenly assumes that it was
 Oswald worked hard, but his efforts were part of a fantasy world he slowly invented, one that made it increasingly difficult for him to differentiate reality from illusion . Oswald's efforts made him increasingly difficult to distinguish between reality and illusion, he says .
 When he lived in Russia, he once told Marina he “would love a life” of a spy . He once said he would love to be a spy.
 Lydia Dymitruk once noticed a book, How to Be a Spy, on his living room table . One of the emigres had a copy of the book How to be a Spy on his table .
 He asked another co-worker, Dennis Ofstein, to teach him advanced photographic techniques . He asked him to learn more about photography .
 He constantly requested overtime, and tried to stay late on many days to practice with the plant’s equipment . He also requested overtime .
 At first, he tried making calling cards for himself and de Mohrenschildt . At first he tried to make calling cards with himself and a friend .
 He created samples of his work and sent them to two leftist publications to which he had subscribed to . The Worker, the Communist party newspaper, and The Militant, the Socialist Workers party paper .
 Oswald tried to join the Socialist Workers party, but it did not have a Texas branch . Oswald was a member of the Socialist Party, but the party had no Texas branches .
 After months of honing his skills, and enrolling in an evening typing course, he was ready to try more sophisticated applications . He enrolled in a typing course and learned how to use the keyboard .
 Alek Hidell produced poor forgeries of a Selective Service Notice of Classification and Marine Corps Certificate of Service, both in the name of Hidell . There is no direct evidence that Hidell was at Jaggars, where he had the necessary equipment .
 Oswald had made photographic reproductions of his own Selective Service and Certificate of Service cards . Experts said he blotted out the information he did not want, blotted it out of his cards . He then made new copies on which he typed the Hidell data .
 Oswald feared the FBI had him under surveillance, but he felt safe using Hidell and the supporting documents whenever he thought his own name might attract government scrutiny that he wished to avoid . Oswald used Hidell to avoid government scrutiny, but felt safe in using the documents .
 He later told Bouhe he was temporarily staying at the Carolton Boarding House in Oak Cliff, Texas . Records show he was never there .
 The Oswalds, with the help of de Mohrenschildt’s daughter, Alexandra, and son-in-law, Gary Taylor, packed their meager belongings at Hall’S house . The next day, the Oswalds packed up the meager belongings .
 Alex Kleinlerer, who also arrived to help, witnessed yet another outburst aimed at Marina Marina . Marina was hit by a barrage of verbal abuse from Marina .
 He summoned her “in a commanding tone of voice just like … you would call a dog,” recalled Kleinlerer . He summoned the woman in a “commanding tone of . voice, just like you would like to call a . dog, he said .
 He screamed at her in Russian and, while she had the baby in her arms, slapped her twice, hard across the face . He screamed in Russian before slapping her twice .
 Marina, who called it a pigsty, so hated the new apartment that when she first saw it she almost refused to move in . Marina called the apartment 'a pigsty'
 The Taylors, who had come along in a rented van, thought the place was terrible . The Taylsors thought the house was terrible. The Taysors were not impressed with the house .
 Oswald persuaded her to try it—they could fix it up, and it was three rooms for only $68 a month . Oswald convinced her to stay at the $68-a-month hotel .
 Marina ran from the house after a violent argument with her husband . The couple had an argument on Monday, November 5, and Marina ran away .
 From a nearby gas station, she called Anna Meller and, sobbing, pleaded for help . Meller called the woman to say, 'Please, please, please'
 The Mellers paid for a taxi to bring her to their one-bedroom apartment . She was taken to a one-bed apartment by a taxi . She is now in a coma .
 The following day, the emigres held a conference regarding Marina’s predicament . Marina was forced to leave the country . The emigues held a press conference to discuss the situation .
 Bouhe told her that if she left Lee, the community would help her, but if she went back, she was on her own . Bouhe said if she returned to Lee, she would be helped by the community, but she would have to leave Lee .
 De Mohrenschildt drove to the Elsbeth Street apartment the next morning to fetch Marina and June’s belongings . He was the only person who could even have attempted it .
 It was the first time de Mohrenschildt had ever seen him angry, but it drove him to even greater fury . The first time he'd seen him was angry, he drove him even more angry .
 Before de Mohrenschildt finished packing Marina’s goods, Oswald even helped . Oswald helped .
 She was annoying him all the time, he said, 'Why don’t you make some money?' She was annoyed at him for living in a 'miserable flunkies'
 Marina and June moved to the home of an emigre couple, Frank and Valentina Ray . After a week with the Fords, the couple moved to a home of a couple of emigres .
 Marina and Lee went into a guest bedroom and spoke for an hour with Lee . He arrived in the late afternoon, and Marina said he arrived in late afternoon . Lee and Marina went to a guest room to talk to Lee about their relationship .
 Lee engaged Frank Ray in a discussion on economics, and eventually gave Ray a lecture about the shortfalls of capitalism . Lee engaged Ray in an economic discussion about capitalism . Ray was the author of the book, "Capitalism"
 Marina was even more distraught because now she had lost the support of the emigres by returning to him . Marina was distraught that she had returned to him and lost his support . She was devastated by the loss of her support .
 Oswald tried to break out of isolation by reaching out to his own family for Thanksgiving . Oswald's Thanksgiving was the first time he had seen his family since his assassination .
 Marina, Lee, and June went to Robert and Vada’s house for the holiday . Lee saw and spoke to John Pic for the first time in ten years .
 Robert would not see Lee again until after the assassination . It was the last time Pic ever saw him, and Robert never saw Lee again .
 De Mohrenschildt brought the embattled couple to a December 28 celebration of the Russian New Year at the Fords’ house . The Fords' house was also a party at the couple’s house .
 For the provocative de Mohrenschildt, it was an ideal way to crash the party . The provocative film was shot in New York City, New York .
 Oswald spent most of the night talking to Yaeko Okui, a Japanese woman who had been brought to the party by Lev Aronson, the first cellist of the Dallas Symphony Orchestra .
 Oswald talked to her about Japan and briefly discussed economics with Aronson . Oswald also talked to Aronson about the economy .
 That night she wrote an old boyfriend in Russia, complaining how Lee had changed, that she was lonely, and that she wished she had married him instead . She wrote him in a letter to her old boyfriend, complaining about how Lee has changed .
 Oswald's letter was returned within a week for insufficient postage and Oswald discovered it . Oswald discovered the letter after Oswald returned it for a week . Oswald returned the letter and Oswald found it in the mail .
 Marina’s future letters had to be approved by Lee before he gave her postage money . Lee had to approve her future letters before giving her money .
 One note that had his full approval arrived at the Soviet embassy in Washington, D.C., at the end of the year . The note was signed by the Soviet Embassy in Washington .
 Oswald refused to teach his wife Russian, fearing he would lose his weak mastery of Russian . Despite the prodding of acquaintances and his family, Oswald steadfastly refused to learn .
 He also told a reporter in Moscow that he wanted to write about the Soviet Union .
 Oswald told an acquaintance that he had no intent to publish his memoirs, as they were not meant for people to read . But five months after having Bates type the notes, Oswald told a friend that he did not intend to publish them .
 Between 1958 and 1963, the CIA did not automatically debrief returning defectors, instead allowing the FBI to report significant results from its interviews . The FBI was able to interview significant results .
 Of the twenty-two American defectors who returned to the U.S. during those five years, the CIA only interviewed four of them . All interviews related to intelligence matters .
 In 1993, documents discovered at the National Archives indicated that the Domestic Contact Division, through a CIA employee, Andy Anderson, had probably debriefed Oswald in 1962 .
 As of early 1994, neither the interview notes nor Anderson had been located . Anderson's interview notes and Anderson interview notes were found .
 CIA employees confirmed they knew of the debriefing . Those familiar with its contents described it as innocuous, showing that Oswald knew nothing about Soviet intelligence . Yet other CIA employees said the contents were innocuous .
 CIA feared any pre-assassination contact with Oswald might be embarrassing and therefore denied the existence of the file . After the death of JFK, the CIA evidently feared that any . any . contact with . Oswald might have been embarrassing .
 The desire to protect their reputations led the CIA and FBI to often hide or destroy the extent of their early contacts to Oswald . These actions were later misinterpreted by critics as a cover-up of a murder conspiracy .
 Some contend that Oswald must have had U.S. government backing, since the Justice Department never charged him with any crime . Oswald was never charged with a crime, but the government never accused him of a crime .
 There was no evidence he ever gave military information to the Soviets . But there was only his threat to do so when he first defected .
 His unsubstantiated assertion was not enough to build a case against him . He was accused of lying to the FBI, but it's not a strong case .
 On one occasion, after she had let his mother in, he exploded and slapped Marina about the face and head . Marina said he slapped her about the head and face after she let her in .
 Fain later said he did not want to upset Oswald’s wife by talking to him in the house . Fain said the car was the only alternative to talking to Oswald in the home .
 FBI agents parked the car directly in front of Oswald’s house and conducted the interview in full view of the neighborhood . The interview was not a very effective means of protecting an alleged informant from Oswald .
 The House Select Committee reviewed the question of whether Oswald was ever an FBI informant . The committee concluded there was no evidence the FBI even considered it, much less proposed it to Oswald .
 Seventeen agents were secretly reprimanded for the preassassination investigation of Oswald . The agents were reprimanded by the FBI for their actions .
 Hoover said Oswald did not meet the criteria for the FBI’s security index . Hoover replied “no one in full possession of all his faculties” could make such a claim, he said . Hoover: “No one in [Oswood's] faculties’
 Hoover believed that agents with early contact to Oswald too willingly accepted his word that he was not in touch with Soviet agents or subversive elements . Oswald should have been the subject of a more rigorous investigation, Hoover said .
 Hoover kept this criticism private since he feared it would hurt the Bureau’s reputation . Hoover kept the criticism private . Hoover feared its disclosure would hurt his reputation .
 DCD was an overt CIA branch and annually interviewed over twenty-five thousand U.S. travelers who visited Communist-bloc countries during the cold war . The DCD interviewed over 25,000 United States travelers .
 Near the YMCA, in the Oak Cliff section of Dallas, there are many small rooming houses . Owners rent rooms at daily or weekly rates . The rooms can be rented at a rate of up to $100 a day .
 Although he probably stayed at one of those houses, he never told Marina which one . He never told her which one of the houses .
 Since the 1960s, a DD-1173 has only been issued to reservists if they suffered an injury while on active duty, or were a civilian employee overseas . The reservists have been issued with the injury since they were injured in the military .
 Some critics try to attach importance to the card by questioning why it was issued to Oswald, they usually omit that such cards were routinely issued to reservists through most of 1959, the year of Oswald’s discharge .
 Oswald was given a military privileges card valid for three years . Oswald had no relation to any U.S. intelligence agency, none of which could afford to expose him .
 It appears he later changed the card’s photo to one taken of him in Minsk, the same one he put on his forged notice of classification .
 The DD-1173 also has an added stamped date, “October 23 1963,” as well as “JUL,’ both of which give the appearance of extending the expiration date of December 7, 1962 .
 Oswald’s cheap rubber-stamping kit appears to have been used to stamp dates . Some have interpreted the dates as part of a postmark, but they appear to be done with a cheap rubber stamp .
 Since the original card is now in such poor condition, it is impossible to definitely settle forgery questions . The original card was in such a poor condition that it is now impossible to say forgery .
 Marina told the author, “It’s a lie.” Regarding his statement that Marina nagged Lee, Marina said it was “a lie” Marina said Lee's statement was a lie .
 On the twenty-fifth, he sent two postal money orders, totaling $106, to the State Department as the final installment on his repatriation loan . He sent the money orders as the last installment of the loan to the U.S.
 He also made the final payment on the $200 loan his brother, Robert, had given him the previous October . He also paid for the loan he received from his brother .
 On January 28, he sent a mail-order coupon with $10 in cash to the Los Angeles-based Seaport Traders . He ordered a Smith & Wesson .38 special revolver and ordered it .
 After the assassination, handwriting experts confirmed Oswald had signed both Hidell and Drittal . Oswald signed Hidell, Drittal, and signed Drittal after the assassination .
 He no longer just slapped her, but now delivered multiple punches to her head . He punched her repeatedly in the head .
 Marina remembered that late in January he began arguing over “trifling reasons” and was “very unrestrained and very explosive …” Whenever he wanted sex, he forced himself on her .
 Once when she called him “crazy,” he grabbed her by the throat and threatened to kill her if she ever called him that again . She says he threatened her with a knife if she calls him "crazy"
 Their first night away from their flat was on February 13, when the de Mohrenschildts invited them to a dinner party at their house . They were invited to the party by their friends .
 Oswald spent the evening talking to a young German geologist, Volkmar Schmidt . Schmidt is a young geologist from Germany .
 De Mohrenschildt was surprised to see them getting along at all . He had expected that Schmidt, a right-winger, would antagonize Oswald .
 De Mohrenschildt gave him a lecture about the dangers posed by right-wing fanatics like Schmidt . Schmidt is a member of the anti-immigration movement .
 Marina thought Oswald acted differently after the conversations that evening . Marina thought he acted differently following the conversations with Oswald . Oswald's actions were the result of a series of conversations .
 No one in Dallas had political sway over him except de Mohrenschildt, whose opinion he respected, he said . He said, "No one in Texas has political sway"
 General Edwin Walker joined right-wing evangelist Billy James Hargis in Operation Midnight Ride, a five-week national tour to fight the threat of Communism . The News had extensive coverage of the tour, which included extensive coverage .
 President Kennedy relieved him of his post in 1961 for distributing right-wing literature to his troops . General Edwin Walker had been the commanding officer of the 24th Army Division under NATO .
 He was a virulent anti-Communist and strict segregationist . He quickly became a prominent voice in the right-wing John Birch Society . He was an anti-communist and segregationist who quickly became prominent .
 In 1962, he ran for governor of Texas . He lost in a six-man primary to John Connally . He received over 138,000 votes .
 Following the press coverage of Operation Midnight Ride, the papers and local radio and television had additional stories about the general, focusing on his radical anti-Castro stance .
 De Mohrenschildt never hid his own distaste for the John Birch Society and people like Walker . Walker was a member of the Birch Society . Walker died in prison last year .
 Lee spent several evenings in the kitchen, poring over maps of Dallas and bus schedules, Marina noticed . Lee ordered a revolver from de Mohrenschildt, which he used to use to carry a gun .
 He was trying to find the quickest way from his job at Jaggars to the typing course in which he had enrolled . When she asked him what he was doing, he said he was looking for the quickest route .
 The typing institute was only a few blocks from Jaggars, a walk of less than five minutes . It is only a short walk from the typing institute .
 Oswald read the news coverage about Walker's Operation Midnight Ride on February 14 . He and Marina also celebrated their daughter June’s first birthday that same day .
 He was temporarily pleased with the news, but it did not stop him from instituting a new punishment for her .
 Oswald recognized Marina’s predicament and knew the threat of sending her back to Russia was one that further tormented her . Oswald recognized the threat and knew it was one of the threats Marina faced . Oswald knew that Marina was being sent back to Moscow .
 Oswalds attended a small dinner party given by Everett Glover and his roommate, Volkmar Schmidt . The Oswalds were invited by Glover and Schmidt to a dinner party .
 The de Mohrenschildts were also at the dinner, as were several of Glover’s friends who were studying Russian . Schmidt was curious about Oswald, and Glover remembered “it was a gathering for a fairly specific reason, to look at this fellow and let some other people
 Despite the language barriers, Ruth spent most of the evening trying to talk to Marina . The couple spent the night trying to communicate with each other .
 Ruth Paine was a Quaker, scrupulously honest, with a strong conscience . She was scrupulously honest and had a strong sense of conscience . Paine's work was published by the Quaker in the 1840s .
 Marina immediately liked Marina's sincere and direct approach . Although she could not always understand her, Marina liked her . Marina said she could always understand Marina's direct approach.
 Ruth and her husband, Michael, were ACLU members, and in 1963 Texas they were part of a liberal political minority . Ruth and Michael were both members of the ACLU . Ruth was a member of the Democratic Party in Texas .
 The de Mohrenschildts left early; they had heard Lee expound often before . Lee's family had heard him expound before, but he had heard it often . Lee was not the first to hear him speak .
 Oswald told the group he was a Marxist who had failed to find the ideal society . Oswald told them he was an ideal Marxist who failed to come up with an ideal society.
 The dinner party did not provide Marina much of a break from Lee’s abuse, she said . Lee was married to Marina, Marina's partner of the night .
 Although he knew she was pregnant, he continued to pummel her for the slightest infraction . He continued to beat her up for the smallest infraction, even though he knew he was pregnant .
 Marina later reported that the week after she had been forced to write the Soviet embassy was the most violent of their marriage . The week after the embassy incident was the 'most violent' of the marriage .
 Oswald flew into a rage over Marina’s inability to cook a Southern dish, red beans and rice, which he demanded for dinner . The next night, Saturday, Oswald flew . Oswald demanded red beans, rice, from his wife Marina .
 Marina looked at her bruised face in a mirror and decided her life was useless . As he tended to the baby, Marina decided she was useless and decided to live her life .
 Within a few minutes she had taken the clothesline rope, climbed onto the toilet seat, and looked for a place to hook the rope .
 Only a block away from their current apartment, it had a balcony and a small private room he could make into a study, and cost eight dollars less a month . It was only a block from the current apartment he was living in .
 It had been forwarded from the Elsbeth Street address and was from Ruth Paine, requesting permission to visit . The letter had been sent from the address and asked permission to go to the address .
 Marina wrote a short note to Ruth, providing the new address and welcoming her . Marina wrote the short note and welcomed her .
 She and Marina took a walk in a nearby park, and Marina confided her pregnancy . The couple then went for a walk and Marina told her that she was pregnant .
 The Soviet embassy replied to Marina's request for a return to Russia on March 8 . Marina was sent to the Soviet embassy in Moscow on March 6 .
 Marina's passport photos, letters from relatives living in the USSR, and some indication of professional interest, all in triplicate . It asked for complete applications, a biography, letters to the Soviet ambassador, passport photos and passport photos .
 Oswald even had Marina prepare a response, an application, and a biography to start her file, all of which she finally sent on March 17 . Meanwhile, he began promoting his political philosophy .
 The results were evident in a letter published in the March 11 issue of The Militant .
 He took at least two photos of the back of Walker’s house, and one that depicted an entrance to the general's driveway from a back alley . The general's house is located in Walker's hometown .
 Two other photos show rail tracks about half a mile from the Walker home . The Walker home was hit by a train crash in 2010 .
 The day after his vigil, March 12, he clipped a coupon from the February issue of American Rifleman and sent a $21.45 money order to a Chicago-based mail order .
 He ordered, under his alias A Hidell, an Italian military rifle, a 6.5mm Mannlicher-Carcano, complete with a four-power scope .
 Robert Sam Anson says the rifle "had a reputation for being notoriously inaccurate" and that the Italians had dubbed it “the humanitarian rifle” since it never was known to hurt anyone .
 With a 4x scope, even an untrained shooter could fire at a target like a marksman . The scope can be used to shoot at targets with a single shot .
 The Carcano is rated an effective battle weapon, good at killing people, and as accurate as the U.S. Army’s M-14 rifle . The weapon is rated as effective battle weapons, as accurate and effective .
 The Carcano’s bullets, 6. millimeter shells, are 30 to 50 percent heavier than the average bullet of that diameter, and travel with the same velocity, 2,100 feet per second, as the Russian AK-47 assault rifle .
 Some game hunters use the 6.5mm shell to bring down animals as large as elephants . The shell can be used by game hunters to kill elephants and elephants .
 FBI considered bullets made for Oswald’s Carcano were “very accurate … very dependable,” FBI considered them ‘very accurate’ FBI considered the bullets never having misfired .
 The FBI concluded the Carcano was a good rifle for the assassination . The FBI’s Frazier concluded the . Carcano rifle was the best rifle to use in the assassination.
 Oswald was anxious for his rifle and pistol he had ordered in January, to arrive . Oswald had ordered a pistol and a rifle, and he was anxious to get them . Oswald's pistol was ordered by the President of the United States .
 Marina was cleaning the apartment when she came across photos of a house she didn't recognize . Marina was shocked to find photos of the house she did not recognize in her apartment .
 Lee kept his study clean himself so she would not have to enter . She asked Lee what they were, but he didn't answer, and later kept it clean himself himself .
 Lee had always been secretive; even in Russia he closeted himself to one side of the apartment and scribbled notes about his Soviet experiences . Lee refused to share any of the notes with her .
 She did not know he had ordered a revolver or rifle or forged IDs in another name . She didn't know that he had forged identifications or forged ID cards .
 The rifle from Klein's and the revolver from Seaport Traders were shipped on the same day, March 20 . By coincidence, the rifle and revolver shipped on same day .
 He went first to the post office, where he picked up the rifle, and then traveled across town for the revolver . The revolver was sent to the offices of REA Express .
 It was leaning against the corner of Lee’s study, a raincoat partially hiding it . Lee's book is leaning against a corner of the study . Lee: "It's not a book. It's a book"
 There, unknown to Marina, he compiled a blue looseleaf folder, an operations manual for an action he was planning against Walker .
 It was filled with photographs of the general’s house and a safe place to stash a rifle, as well as maps of a carefully designed escape route . The general's house is filled with photos of the house and maps of the escape route, it was found .
 Later, when Marina discovered its existence, he told her it was “a complete record so that all the details would be in it.” Later, he said it was a “complete record” so that ‘all the details’ would be included .
 She had an opportunity to develop her budding friendship with Ruth Paine . She had a chance to develop a friendship with Paine.
 Ruth stopped by to visit the Neely Street apartment again on March 20 . The following week she took Marina and June for a visit to her house in Irving, a Dallas suburb . Ruth's first visit was to the apartment on March 18 .
 Marina told Ruth about Lee’s insistence she return to Russia and her desire to stay in America . Lee's letter to the Soviet embassy is fresh in her mind .
 Ruth was angered by Lee's refusal to teach Marina English . Lee refused to teach her English, Ruth said .
 Ruth decided to put her thoughts into Russian in a letter instead of struggling through a conversation . Since her command of Russian was poor, she decided to write a letter .
 She decided to invite Marina to live with her, so there would be another option besides staying with Oswald or returning to Russia . She invited Marina to stay with her so she would have another option .
 Marina carried the book with her on another visit to Neely Street, but did not give it to Marina . She even carried it with her .
 She protested that she had never taken a photo in her life, but he assured her it was simple . He assured her that taking a photo of her would be simple .
 He returned to the apartment and in a few minutes emerged dressed all in black, a revolver tucked into the waist of his pants, a rifle held in one hand, and a camera and newspapers in the other hand .
 Marina became a “little scared” as she worried about taking the pictures correctly . Marina worried about whether anyone in the neighborhood could see him . Marina became “a little scared’s”
 He walked over and reset the shutter and she did it again, and again . Then he walked over to reset the camera and took the pictures .
 Marina was flabbergasted and asked why June would want a picture of him holding guns . Marina was asked why she wanted a photo of him with guns .
 The backyard photos have become one of the most debated issues in the conspiracy press . The photos were taken in the backyard of a man's backyard .
 The critics are led by self-appointed photo expert Jack White . White has made a small business from producing videos, booklets, and lecture series on why he believes photos are fake .
 His primary arguments are alleged shadow inconsistencies, conflicting body proportions, a variant chin, and suggestion of a grafting line between the mouth and the chin . His primary argument is that there is a graft line between mouth and chin .
 The Warren Commission’s FBI photo experts concluded the shots were real and there was no evidence of retouching . The technology did not exist in 1964 to settle the issue dispositively .
 By the time of the House Select Committee on Assassinations in the late 1970s, science could resolve the matter . Science could have resolved the matter by the time the committee was in power .
 Twenty-two of the nation’s leading experts studied the backyard photos . They used sophisticated photo enhancements and measurements .
 Oswald’s Imperial Reflex took the photos, to the exclusion of any other camera ever made . Because of microscopic frame edge marks and scratches left by a camera on a negative, they concluded that Oswald's .
 Oswald’s camera took the shots, experts tested to see if the photos were composites . Oswald's camera was determined to take the photos .
 Twenty-one photos, revealing fifty-six different and unique marks on the rifle found at the depository, were compared to enhancements of the photo . Panel concluded the rifle was the same, to the exclusion of all others .
 HSCA handwriting experts determined that Oswald’s handwriting was present in an inscription on the back of one of the originals . Oswald's handwriting was also found in a back inscription on a back of a copy of the original .
 Oswald told Marina he intended to send one of the prints to The Militant . Oswald said he planned to send a copy of his prints to Marina Marina .
 The quality of his work had deteriorated since the beginning of the year, when Jaggars tried to give him more responsibility, when he was given more responsibility . His work has deteriorated since beginning of this year, according to the manager .
 The area in which they worked was small and required that workers be considerate of each other as they moved about the room . The area was so small that workers were required to be careful .
 Oswald charged around the shop, constantly knocking into other workers and never uttering an apology . Oswald never uttered an apology. Instead, he charged around and never said anything to anyone else .
 Some became so frustrated with his “selfish and aggressive” actions they almost had fistfights with him . Finally, some became so angry with his actions that they almost fought .
 Oswald was also spotted reading a Russian paper, Krokodil, in the firm cafeteria, and his supervisor, John Graef, had enough . Oswald's supervisor had enough to take action .
 It was the only job he had ever liked, and since he had spent almost everything he earned, the dismissal was crushing news . The dismissal was crushed news for him .
 He confided in a co-worker, Dennis Ofstein, that he had been dismissed .
 Oswald said “he would look around and if he didn’t find anything else he could always go back to the Soviet Union ...” recalled Ofstein . Oswald said he would always go to Soviet Union, Ofstein said .
 He sought help from the Texas Employment Commission, but it was unable to find him new work . He again sought help, but the commission failed to find a new job .
 Oswald and Marina went to dinner at Ruth Paine’s house the day after he was informed of his discharge . The day after Oswald was told he was discharged, he and Marina had dinner at Paine's house .
 It was his first meeting with the Oswalds, and he was immediately ‘shocked’ by Lee’s ‘cruel’ conduct toward Marina, he says . Lee was “cruel,’ he says, but he was not surprised by his
 Paine’s father had been an avid Trotskyite, and Michael was intensely interested in politics . Paine's father was a Trotskyite and Paine was fascinated with politics .
 Lee’s defection to Russia was one of the reasons Paine wanted to meet him . Lee defected to Russia, Paine said . Lee's defection is one of Paine's reasons for meeting him .
 Oswald's half-hour talk with Oswald was the most open and informative he ever had with Oswald . Oswald had a "open and informative" conversation with Oswald, the former president says . Oswald was one of the world's most open-minded men, he says .
 Lee told him of his early attraction to Marxism, “without ever having met a communist,” and his search for the “paradise of the world” when he defected to Russia . Lee said he was looking for a “Paradise”
 When Paine tried to have a debate with Oswald, he found it not possible . Paine found it impossible to argue with Oswald .
 General Edwin Walker is Dallas’s most prominent far right representative . General Walker is a member of the Dallas Republican Party . Walker has a long history as a far-right activist .
 The evening ended on the sour note, again, of Lee’s mistreatment of Marina . Lee's treatment of Marina ended on a sour note again .
 Lee had been calling Marina a "fool" during dinner and telling her that she did not know anything, Ruth said . After the supper, Ruth informed her husband that Lee called Marina a 'fool'
 Michael thought Marina was in “bondage and servitude,” but he did not express his distaste to Oswald . Oswald was the president of the Soviet Union in 1945 .
 Lee checked out of work a few minutes after 5:00 P.M. Friday, Friday, and as he approached the apartment in a rush, he ran into Marina outside with the baby carriage . Lee checked into Marina's apartment and ran into her with the child .
 He disappeared inside the flat for a moment, and when he returned she noticed he was carrying his rifle, hidden under his Marine Corps raincoat . She noticed he had been carrying the rifle under his raincoat when he went inside .
 Marina told him not to come home and that she hoped the police caught him . Marina said she hoped she hoped he was caught by the police .
 Marina again warned him about the police, but he told her not to worry since no one could hear him where he practiced . When he returned at 9:00 P.M. he returned to practice, Marina warned him of the police . Marina told him that no one can hear him
 The FBI studied the Love Field bus route and found that Oswald was within walking distance of a protected levee . Oswald's five-minute bus ride took him within five minutes of walking distance from a levee, the FBI says .
 Firearms experts testified after the assassination that a marksman such as Oswald would need to fire only ten rounds to adjust the scope and become familiar with the peculiarities of that rifle . Experts testified that Oswald would have to fire just 10 rounds before adjusting the scope .
 Jeanne de Mohrenschildt stopped by for an afternoon visit April 4 or 5, 2014 .
 The de Mohrenschildts had been preparing to move from Dallas to Haiti . George had another of his ambitious business projects in the works in Haiti .
 Marina showed Jeanne around the apartment, she opened a clothes closet and a rifle was leaning against the corner . Marina was carrying a rifle when she found the rifle in the closet .
 On the following day, he left the apartment with his rifle, and when he returned home that evening, he no longer had it . The next day he left his apartment with the rifle, leaving it empty .
 He buried the Carcano near some railroad tracks only some minutes’ walk from Walker’s house . He later told Marina that he buried it near the tracks he had photographed .
 Oswald left in the evening on a bus, which Marina assumed was to take him to his typing course, but she didn't know he had already quit the class . Marina assumed that the bus was going to take Oswald to the typing course but she did not know that he had quit the
 He traveled to Walker’s house, where he intended to assassinate the general . Instead, he traveled to the general's house where he planned to kill him .
 The Mormon church whose parking lot was adjacent to General Walker’s home had services scheduled for Wednesday evening, he said . General Walker later told Marina he discovered that the Mormon church had services for Wednesday night .
 Oswald continued the charade over his job, telling Marina that it was a holiday . On Tuesday, Oswald continued to tell Marina that he had a day off from his job .
 She recalled he had tears in his eyes, blaming the FBI for inquiring about him and costing him the position . She recalled that he blamed FBI for asking him to resign .
 By the time she put June to bed, between 8:00 and 9:00, she wondered why he was not home . By the end of the night, she had to wonder why he wasn't home .
 She paced between the rooms, and on a supposition, opened the door to his small study . She opened it to him in a small study room .
 I think the Embassy will come quickly to your aid once they know everything. I think it will be a matter of days before they find out .
 I left you as much money as I could, $60 on the second of the month, and you and Junie can live for two months on $10 a week . I left $60 in the bank account, and $60 a month on the month .
 Oswald returned at 11:30.90 and was pale and out of breath from walking quickly . She was frantic by the time Oswald returned to the scene . Oswald was pale .
 Oswald could not understand that the radio was silent about the assassination . Oswald was not impressed with the radio's silence .
 Marina was appalled that Lee had tried to kill someone, but she never seriously thought of turning him in to the police . Marina never seriously turned him in, despite her disgust .
 Her Russian upbringing made her fear the police, and she was dependent on him . Not only was she completely dependent upon him, but she feared the police .
 She worried what would happen to her, alone in the U.S., if her husband was charged with murder . She was worried about her safety in the United States .
 There was no way she could have imagined that by postponing any decision on the Walker shooting, she would find herself in seven months in the very situation she hoped to avoid, only with a much more prominent victim . She said she hopes to avoid the situation, which she'd hoped to
 The general had been sitting behind a desk in his dining room, working on his income taxes, when the shot was fired . He had been working on income taxes when the shooting occurred .
 Oswald had likely taken a position inside Walker's backyard fence, leaning against the general’s station wagon to brace himself for the shot . Oswald was likely to be leaning against Walker's station wagon in the backyard .
 He was less than one hundred feet away from the window, which had no covering to block his view into the brightly lit room . The window had no cover to block him from entering into the bright light .
 Several minutes later he noticed his right forearm was bleeding, the result of bullet fragments . He went upstairs to get a gun and it was several minutes before he noticed it was bleeding . He then went to get his gun and noticed his arm was bleeding.
 What saved Walker’s life was the wooden frame across the middle of the double window . The wooden frame was the only thing that saved his life was a wooden frame .
 The bullet had passed through a wire screen, then grooved along the bottom of the wooden bar, and then through the glass . Upon close examination, it turned out that the bullet had been passed through wire screen . The bullet was found to have passed through the wire .
 When it struck the wooden frame, the bullet was deflected so minutely that it passed through Walker’s hair instead of into his skull . Walker was hit by a bullet that deflected the bullet through his hair . Walker survived the bullet wound to his skull, but was killed
 He told Marina that he had planned the Walker assassination for two months . He showed her his operations book, crammed with photographs of Walker’s residence, a map, and pages of handwritten notes .
 She thought he had been writing his memoirs, as he had when they lived in Russia . "He said if someone had killed Hitler in time it would have saved many lives," she said .
 "I told him that this is no method to prove your ideas, by means of a rifle," he said . He said: "This is no way of proving your ideas by using a rifle"
 The police mistakenly identified the mangled bullet as a .30–06 . In the initial reports, the bullet was mistakenly identified as a bullet . The bullet was found in the car .
 Walker aide said he had seen an unlicensed car near the general’s house several nights before the shooting . Walker aide says he saw unlicensed vehicle near general's house .
 A fifteen-year-old neighbor, Walter Kirk Coleman, said he saw two cars speed away from the scene right after the shooting . Two cars were seen fleeing the scene, Coleman said .
 She asked him what he intended to do with his notebook of Walker photos and assassination plans . Then she asked him if he planned to use the notebook as a political tool .
 Marina was convinced there was only one guarantee that Oswald would not try again to kill Walker . Oswald's wife was convinced he would not kill Walker again . Oswald was killed in the assassination of Walker .
 By Friday, he tried to return to a normal routine, filing a claim for unemployment benefits . He filed for benefits on Friday .
 They had just gone to bed that night when there was loud pounding at the front door . The couple had been going to bed when the doorbell rang .
 Marina's heart jumped, as she feared it was the police, until she heard George de Mohrenschildt’s deep voice . She heard George's deep voice as she heard him speak to her .
 Less than an hour after his return with it, he decided Marina was right about his operations book for the Walker assassination .
 Oswald had told Marina he was ready to move to New Orleans . Lee was burning most of the evidence over the washbasin .
 The decision seemed to improve his mood, which had been miserable after his failure to kill Walker a week earlier . The decision seems to have improved his mood .
 The Oswalds even joined Ruth Paine and her two children for a picnic on Sunday, April 21 . Paine's family also attended a picnic with the Oswalds and Paine .
 Marina began to relax over the Walker episode and Lee’s receding temper, another incident sent her into a panic . But as soon as she relaxed, she was back in a panic again, she got into an argument .
 She asked him to join her in the bathroom, and when he entered she jumped out and slammed the door shut . When he entered, she slammed the bathroom shut shut .
 She struggled to keep the door closed against his efforts to push out . Bracing her feet against the nearby wall, she struggled as hard as she could to keep him out .
 Oswald agreed to strip to his underwear, and stayed home reading the remainder of the day . At first he was furious, but as he calmed, he settled down to read again .
 The next day he informed her that Nixon had not come to town after all . He informed her he had not been in town that day .
 She was shocked to see Lee Oswald fully packed and ready to move . She was expecting to spend the morning visiting Marina Marina and instead was shocked .
 She helped him load her 1955 Chevrolet station wagon and drove him to the downtown bus station . She drove him back to the bus station where he was waiting for a bus .
 He added the items to his luggage for the overnight bus trip home to New Orleans . Adding those to the luggage, he was set for an overnight trip home .
 Copies of Oswald’s tax returns show he had little money left after paying monthly expenses . Oswald had to pay monthly expenses to pay for his monthly bills .
 Although the Paines were temporarily separated, they remained very friendly and saw each other frequently . The Paines are still friendly and see each other often .
 Oswald subscribed to Time magazine, which he subscribed to . The campaign in question, of H Stuart Hughes, was covered in the September 7, 1962, issue of Time .
 Others claim Oswald did not write the letter since it does not have his trademark misspellings . Others claim that Oswald wrote the letter himself . Oswald is accused of writing the letter .
 The Militant did not have the original, and admitted its policy was to edit for syntax, grammar and spelling .
 He may have taken other photos that day, but only those five have survived . Only those five survived .
 Both were sent second class and should have arrived in Dallas in six to seven days, well in time for the March 31 photos .
 It is unrealistic to think that anyone making a composite photograph would make three versions, thereby allowing photo experts more basis for comparison in uncovering any fake . Photo experts say composite photographs should not be composite photographs .
 Some critics have used the number of photos to attack Marina’s credibility since she originally said she took one, then later admitted to two or more . Marina has since admitted to taking two photos of herself .
 A digital computer enhancement showed a grain pattern unique to each photo .
 When the entire print is scanned, any disruption in the minute pattern is clear evidence of fakery . Any disruption in a print is clearly clear evidence that fakery is not possible .
 In 1993, two former Militant staffers reportedly admitted that one of Oswald’s backyard photos had indeed arrived at their office before the assassination . Oswald's backyard photo was reportedly found in the back yard .
 Oswald's photo was apparently sent to de Mohrenschildt from New Orleans sometime after May 4, 1963 . House Select Committee handwriting experts determined Oswald had inscribed Oswald on the rear of the photo . That photo, together with some English-Russian language records, was sent to the de Moh
 Oswald could have carried out his demonstrations on any day from Sunday, April 7, until Wednesday, April 10 . Oswald's demonstrations could have taken place on April 7 or April 10 at any time .
 Although he practiced with his rifle and also conducted some surveillance at General Walker’s house on those days, he had time to distribute the pamphlets . The pamphlets were distributed by the General Walker .
 The Walker slug was a Western Cartridge Company 6.5mm bullet, the same type of bullet, made by the same manufacturer, as that used later in President Kennedy’s assassination . The House Select Committee tested the bullet to neutron-activation tests .
 He told the FBI that he only saw one car leave, and it moved at a normal rate of speed . Contrary to press reports that he saw two men get into separate cars and race away, he said he did not see two cars .
 Other neighbors contradicted Coleman’s story, saying no cars left after the noise . Coleman says the noise was so loud that no cars were left .
 If he did see a departing car, it was probably because church services had just finished . It's probably because he didn't see the departing car because of church services just finished.
 The pastor told the FBI that on Wednesdays, services began at 7:30 and finished at 9:00, leaving the area busy with people . The pastor said the area was packed with people on Wednesday night .
 A photo of evidence taken from Oswald’s flat after the assassination shows the hole was in the print at that time . The hole was found in a print from Oswald's flat at the time .
 The photo was taken from such a distance that the license plate of the car would not have been legible . It was later determined the car belonged to a Walker aide, Charles Klihr .
 Jeanne had forgotten about her solo visit to Marina Marina, Marina, April 4 or 5 . Jeanne's solo visit was April 4 and 5 .
 She confused the sighting of the rifle and the joke her husband made about the shooting and thought they both happened on April 13 . She thought the sighting and joke she made were April 13 and April 14 .
 Oswald did not retrieve his rifle until Sunday, April 14, a day after the de Mohrenschildts’ visit . Marina is clear about two separate visits, and more important, Oswald didn't retrieve the rifle until April 14 .
 Mrs. de Mohrenschildt could not have seen the rifle on April 13 as she thought, but only on the earlier visit on either April 4 or 5 . The rifle was found on April 4 and April 5, but not April 13 .
 Several hours later, de Mohrenschildt killed himself with a shotgun blast to the head . Several hours after the shooting, he killed himself .
 Most books fail to disclose that de Mohrenschildt was quite mad by the time he gave his final interview . However, most books do not disclose that he was actually mad .
 For nearly a year before his death, he was paranoid, fearful that the “FBI and Jewish mafia” were out to kill him . He was paranoid that the FBI and the ‘Jewish mafia’ were out for him to kill .
 He twice tried to kill himself with drug overdoses, and another time cut his wrists and submerged himself in a bathtub . He was found guilty of multiple counts of suicide .
 After waking in the middle of every night, his wife committed him to a psychiatric unit . He was diagnosed as psychotic and given two months of shock therapy .
 After his treatment he said he had been with Oswald on the day of the assassination . He said he was actually with dozens of guests at the Bulgarian embassy in Haiti the day JFK was killed .
 Epstein and others quote de Mohrenschildt's final interview as though it were an uncontested fact . Epstein says the interview was an interview that should have been made public .
 John Davis, in more than six hundred pages of Mafia Kingfish, covers the shooting in a single sentence . Davis rejects the shooting as unproven . Davis: "Mafia Kingfish" is a book by John Davis .
 David Scheim, in Contract on America; Jim Garrison, in On the Trail of the Assassins; and David Lifton, in Best Evidence, do not even mention the Walker shooting . The Walker shooting was the first time Walker was shot .
 Even the House Select Committee on Assassinations dropped the entire Walker incident into a single footnote . The committee could not find any accomplices to fit into its eventual conclusion .
 Marina is certain the name was Nixon . Vice-President Lyndon Johnson was due in Dallas within a day, but Marina says Nixon was in Dallas .
 Oswald was dyslexic and could have confused the news about Nixon’s anti-Castro plans with the visit of the “VicePresident,” a title still used to refer to Nixon . Oswald could have been confused by the news of the visit with the "Vice
 Nixon may have just been the excuse given to Marina, and it's possible Oswald had second thoughts about agreeing to let Walker live . Also, Nixon may just be the excuse .
 Oswald could not physically fulfill his stated mission does not extirpate the seriousness of the incident, and again highlights his increasing instability . Oswald's inability to fulfill the mission highlights his instability, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 He told Lillian and his uncle, Charles "Dutz" Murret, that he wanted quickly to find a job and have his wife and daughter join him . Murret said he wanted to look quickly and have them join him with his family .
 He read the help-wanted section in each day’s newspaper, and left mid-morning to visit the ads he had checked as promising . He read out the ads in the newspaper .
 Later that day he visited the cemetery where his father was buried and a groundskeeper helped him find the tombstone .
 He pored over the telephone book, calling every Oswald until he found an aunt by marriage, Hazel . The Murrets’ were at the Murrets' home in New York, New York .
 Only two aunts and some cousins are still alive in New Orleans, she says . When he called on her in the late afternoon, she gave him a photo of his father . She gave him photos of her father .
 He filed an appeal to Texas’s decision to deny him unemployment benefits since his wages at Jaggars were too low to qualify . Monday, he filed his appeal to the decision .
 Oswald wrote Marina saying that while he still had no work, he was receiving “15 to 20 dollars a week from the unemployment office . That was enough money on which to live, he wrote . Oswald later wrote Marina that he was still receiving $20 a week .
 Without rent or food costs, he saved more than when he supported his family in Dallas on his small salary . He saved more when he was able to support his family without food or rent .
 He found a job on May 9, two weeks to the day after he arrived in New Orleans, New Orleans .
 He claimed his last job was ‘active duty’ in the Marines and that he was a high school graduate and currently a college student . He claimed he was high school grad and college student before he was arrested .
 For references, he listed John Murret, a cousin, without his permission, and then added fictitious names, Sgt. Sgt. John Murrettes . For reference, Murret used a cousin's name without permission . Murret listed Murret's cousin without permission, adding fictitious names
 J Evans, both of whom were on active duty, were found with false addresses . Evans' false addresses included false addresses from Evans' mother and father . Evans was found dead at the scene of the incident in November .
 Evans was asked to help find an apartment in New Orleans . He explained he had returned with a Russian wife and daughter . He said he wanted to bring them to New Orleans if Evans could help him find a new apartment .
 Oswald had given a $5 deposit toward a $65-a-month ground-floor apartment in a two-story house at 4907 Magazine Street . Oswald was given the deposit toward the $65 apartment .
 He returned to New Orleans to have lunch with Myrtle Evans . They discussed Marina and his daughter as well as his reasons for settling there .
 Oswald telephoned Marina to tell her about the Reily job and the new apartment . Oswald called Marina that night to say he had moved to Reily . Oswald's new apartment was the first time Marina had seen him .
 Marina was worried she might not hear from Lee for some time . Marina was excited about joining him so quickly . She was excited to hear from him again .
 The next day, Friday, May 10, Ruth Paine, her two children, and Marina and June set off in Paine’s station wagon . Ruth and Marina set off with Paine's station wagon in May 10 .
 Marina and Ruth spent an hour talking to Oswald’s aunt and uncle . The Murrets were Oswald's uncle, Oswald's aunt and aunt . Oswald died in 1963, his wife says .
 Initially, Marina thought the Murret home was the place Lee had rented, and she was very pleased . Marina thought it was the home of Lee Murret, who had rented it out .
 She was disappointed to find it dark and dirty, with little ventilation, and cockroach-infested . But when he took her to their new apartment on Magazine Street, she was disappointed .
 Ruth slept in the living room with her children while the Oswalds took the only bedroom . Ruth slept with the Oswald family in the Oswald's living room . The Oswalds also slept with Ruth and her children .
 He wrote Vincent Lee, the president of the Fair Play for Cuba Committee, requesting formal membership and saying he wanted to open a Fair Play branch office in New Orleans . Four days later he wrote to Lee asking for formal membership in the committee .
 Oswald’s attraction to Fair Play for Cuba as an instrument for exercising his pro-Castro sentiments fit with his view of Marxism/Leninism . Also, Oswald's attraction to the Cuban government fits with his Marxist/Leninist view .
 Marina and Ruth and Michael Paine said Oswald was a Trotskyite Marxist . Oswald was the leader of the Second World War . Oswald's wife, Marina, said he was a Marxist .
 Oswald acted as though he had permission to start an independent chapter . Oswald acted without waiting for a formal reply from the national office . Oswald was a member of the British National Socialist Party .
 The Fair Play activist is now passing out leaflets in New Orleans, New Orleans . Picking up where he left off with his Dallas demonstration on behalf of Fair Play .
 On Wednesday, May 29, he went to the Jones Printing Company, opposite the side entrance of the Reily company . The Jones printing company is located in the middle of the street .
 Next, also with Mailers’ Service, he placed an order for three hundred 2½-by-3½ inch membership cards .
 Lee sent Oswald an official membership card, and in a three-page typewritten letter offered him advice regarding a possible New Orleans chapter . Lee also sent Oswald a letter offering him advice on a possible chapter in New Orleans .
 Lee also told Oswald that a review of the committee’s records indicated there were probably “too few members … in the New Orleans area” to make a successful chapter . Lee also said there are probably too few members in the committee's records in New Orleans .
 Lee’s response was the friendliest Oswald ever received to any of his letters to leftist organizations, and it strengthened his faith in Fair Play for Cuba . Lee's response to the leftist organizations was his friendliest ever received .
 Oswald’s preoccupation with Fair Play led him to neglect Marina . Meanwhile, Oswald was preoccupying himself with his wife, Marina, in the 1930s . Oswald was obsessed with the idea of Fair Play .
 She could not have a normal relationship with him while his obsession was Castro, she said . She said .
 "As soon as you left all ‘love’ stopped, and I am very hurt that Lee’s attitude toward me is such that I feel each minute that I bind him," she said . "I am very angry that Lee's attitude toward her is such," she
 Couple's neighbors were talking about the bad relationship between the new couple . It was not long before their New Orleans neighbors began talking about their relationship .
 When they had sex, Oswald would roll over when finished, turn his back to Marina, and say, “Don’t touch me,” she said . Oswald would sometimes roll over and turn back to his wife, Marina, when he was finished .
 Marina told Ruth, “You know that Lee either yells at me or is silent, but never talks.” In another letter, Marina wrote that Lee “either yelled at me ... or silent”
 Lee involved her in his fantasy political world . On June 4, a letter arrived from the Soviet embassy suggesting she travel to Washington to discuss her request to return to the USSR . Lee is a former CIA director .
 Marina signed the ‘Hidell’ as the chapter president for Lee’s Fair Play for Cuba membership card, as well as a couple of blank cards .
 Marina assumed the alias was a rhyme for Fidel. Marina assumed it was the alias of her colleague Heindel . Unaware of his colleague's identity, Marina assumed he was Fidel .
 Hideel .40 Oswald wanted to travel and planned to apply for a passport . Oswald apparently thought the vaccination certificate might be needed for visas to some countries . Oswald thought that vaccination certificate may be needed to get visas .
 Instead of threatening to send her to Russia on her own, he insisted he would join her in the Soviet Union . On this occasion, instead of threatening her, he said she would go to Russia .
 Besides himself and Hidell, he listed Marina as well, giving a false home address for all three .
 As Oswald began to implement his Fair Play for Cuba activities, he slacked off at his work at Reily . Oswald slacked on at the end of his first term in office .
 Oswald's supervisor was increasingly dissatisfied with Oswald’s performance . Charles Le Blanc, his supervisor, was unhappy with Oswald's performance . Oswald was assassinated in November 1945 .
 Le Blanc later estimated that Oswald probably spoke one hundred words to him during his two and a half months at Reily . Le Blanc estimates that Oswald spoke only a few words to Le Blanc during his time there .
 Oswald asked Le Blanc if he had worked for Reily Coffee Company for eight years . Le Blanc, thinking Oswald was referring to the Reily coffee company, told him yes .
 Oswald turned around and walked away without saying anything else . When Le Blanc said he “loved it,” Oswald again just walked away from the scene .
 "As he had on other jobs, he stayed to himself, ate lunch alone, and made no friends among the workers," he says .
 Some remembered that during their coffee breaks he often sat in a chair and stared blankly into space . He often sat blankly in his coffee breaks and often looked blankly .
 Oswald further alienated his co-workers, recalled Le Blanc, by walking past and aiming his forefinger at them . Oswald later walked past and aimed his fore finger at them, said Le Blanc . Oswald was killed in November 1945 in a car crash .
 Adrian Alba, a gun enthusiast, subscribed to American Rifleman, Field and Stream, Argosy and National Rifle Association magazines .
 Oswald sat in the garage reading these and often borrowed the magazines overnight . Oswald often borrowed them from the garage overnight .
 Alba remembered Oswald as inquisitive about guns and specifically about which caliber bullet was the most deadly on a human target . Alba said Oswald was inquistative about guns, specifically about what caliber bullet is most deadly . Oswald was an avid gun enthusiast .
 Oswald offered to buy the rifle sight unseen sight unseen . Alba had ordered a .30-06-caliber rifle and Oswald bought it sight unseen. Alba ordered the rifle . Oswald had ordered the gun .
 On another occasion, he saw a Japanese rifle at the garage, and again wanted it, but Alba would not sell it . Alba refused to sell the rifle, saying it was too expensive .
 Oswald told a story, repeated by many conspiracy writers, that he saw Oswald approach a car occupied by an FBI agent from Washington . Oswald's story has been repeated by some conspiracy writers .
 If true, Alba’s story is the critical link to establish a covert government connection to Oswald . Alba's story is a critical link for the CIA, according to the report .
 Alba was interviewed immediately after the assassination, on at least three occasions by the FBI, and later extensively testified to the Warren Commission . Alba never mentioned this story .
 He did not disclose it publicly until 1978, fifteen years after it allegedly happened, when interviewed by Anthony Summers . He was interviewed by Summers .
 Alba’s excuse for not mentioning the incident was that he forgot it until his memory was triggered years after the incident . Alba said he forgot the incident until he was watching a television commercial .
 The 1970 commercial was for a local furniture store . It portrayed an elderly man walking up to a car, leaning over toward the window, inviting the driver into the store .
 On June 8, he was reminded of his weak finances when he could not afford to provide for Marina’s prenatal care . Marina's father says he is proud of his family's strong financial record .
 New Orleans Charity Hospital refused to treat her free of charge . She had not lived long enough in Louisiana to qualify as a resident . Hospital refused treatment because she was not a resident of Louisiana .
 Marina never recalled him saying anything bad about President Kennedy . He complained that “his papa bought him the Presidency,” she said .
 He wrote to The Worker requesting more Communist party literature, announcing his formation of a local chapter of Fair Play for Cuba . Benjamin Davis sent honorary membership cards to “those fighters for peace” Benjamin Davis and Gus Hall, .
 The officer of the deck aboard the ship complained to harbor patrolman Girod Ray, who found Oswald and asked if he had permission to distribute the leaflets . Oswald had been distributing leaflets from the ship's deck .
 Oswald said he did not need it, and would distribute his pamphlets wherever he desired . Oswald said: "I would distribute my pamphlets everywhere I desired"
 Oswald was on port authority property and without authorization he had to leave, but Oswald argued with him . Ray told him that he was on Port authority property . Oswald said he was trespassing on the property and must leave .
 He asked her if she liked Cuba and “Uncle Fidel” and said that his demonstrating “will help make people be on the side of Cuba’s side,” he told her .
 Oswald said he intended to travel as a tourist, starting in October, for three months to a year . Oswald plans to spend the rest of his life in the United States . Oswald says he intends to travel around the world for three or a year to see the country .
 He listed the Lykes shipping line, the same he took during his 1959 defection, as his means of transportation . Destinations included England, France, Germany, Holland, Finland, Poland, Italy, and the USSR .
 President Obama spoke of his dissatisfaction with the U.S. with the United States . But he did begin talking about how dissatisfied he was with the country .
 He said he was lost, and she tried to console him by saying they could stay together in America . She said they could still make a better life in America and still live in the U.S.
 Marina: "He was extremely upset. He refused, telling her it was too difficult for him in the U.S. to live in the United States. But he refused . Marina: “He was very upset. It was too hard for him to live here. He was
 It would be better to have less and not be concerned about tomorrow than tomorrow . And that it would be best not to worry about tomorrow. And that's better than having less .
 Oswald returned to the U.S. a year after returning to the United States filled with hatred for the USSR . The mercurial Oswald had second thoughts as his life in the United. seemed in a quagmire over which he had lost control .
 Oswald had Marina write another letter to the Soviet embassy . Less than a week after getting his new passport, Marina wrote another letter . Oswald had his passport revoked .
 A letter from the embassy had arrived on June 4, asking Marina to visit in person or to send a detailed explanation of why she wanted to return to Russia . Marina had been asked to return in person by the embassy .
 She expressed “homesickness” for Russia, and asked for financial help for a return to the Soviet Union . She excused the delay in answering due to “certain family problems,” she said .
 Make us happy again, help us to return that which we lost because of our foolishness . Help us return that that which which we have lost because we are foolishness. Make us happiness again, make us happy .
 Lee completed an application for permission to enter the Soviet Union . Lee's application was enclosed with a letter of acceptance . Lee applied for entry to Soviet Union, but was denied entry .
 The Soviets told him he should be sure he wanted to return, as his next Atlantic crossing was likely to be the last the Soviets allowed him . One answered him saying that he should not be allowed to return .
 Marina again wrote the Soviet embassy on July 8, emphasizing their “impatience” with the delay over visas and asking for expedited service . Marina wrote the embassy again in July, emphasizing the delay .
 Marina received a letter from Ruth Paine, who was unaware of Lee’s recent change of mind about returning to Russia . A few days later, Ruth wrote a letter to Marina asking her to return to Russia.
 Ruth invited Marina to live with her if Lee still insisted she return to the Soviet Union . Ruth invited her to stay with Marina if Lee wanted her to return to Russia .
 Oswald was fired from Reily, on July 19, 2013 . It was the third job dismissal in less than a year . Oswald's firing comes as things seemed to stabilize .
 His efforts to find a job through the help-wanted ads met with constant rejection . To worsen his sense of failure, he tried to find another job . He said, "I don't think it's possible"
 In order to continue collecting unemployment benefits of $33 per week, he had to visit the Louisiana Employment Commission personally every Tuesday and report on his job-hunting progress . He had to report to the state Employment Commission every Tuesday .
 He let his fantasies run free and listed scores of employers to which he never applied, including NASA . He also lied extensively on applications he did submit for work, including those to NASA .
 Marina received a letter from Ruth Paine offering to visit New Orleans in mid-to late September . Paine offered to take Marina back to Dallas to have her baby . Oswald was fired by Paine days after she was fired .
 Lee did not relish the idea of Marina returning to Dallas and the Russian community that so disliked him . Paine’s offer now looked more acceptable in case Lee could not find work, but he did not .
 Oswald was notified that his 1962 demand for a review of his undesirable Marine Corps discharge was rejected . Oswald's request for an Army discharge from the Marine Corps was rejected on July 25, 1962 .
 The Marine Corps had initially given him an honorable discharge and then belatedly changed it to an ‘undesirable” discharge . The discharge was based upon his defection to Russia and anti-American statements he made to the press .
 Marina and Lee Murret traveled to Mobile, Alabama, with Lillian and Dutz Murret, to visit his cousin Eugene Murret . Eugene was training to be a Jesuit priest .
 He confirmed he was a Marxist, although he admitted that he was disillusioned with the USSR . In fact, he said he was against most forms of organized government .
 The New Orleans Times-Picayune ran a front-page story saying that federal agents had seized a ton of dynamite and other materials on a raid of an anti-Castro paramilitary group planning operations against Cuba .
 Oswald stamped addresses for his fictional chapter of the Fair Play for Cuba Committee on the printed leaflets . Oswald stamped address addresses for the fictional chapter on the leaflets .
 David Ferrie, a rabid anti-Communist who worked with Banister, for some of the most radical anti-Cuban groups, was a frequent Camp Street visitor . Ferrie also worked for Marcello's attorney, and also for the attorney for Banister . David Fer
 Ferrie was a self-ordained ultra-orthodox Catholic bishop . He was also an amateur hypnotist and cancer researcher . Ferrie died in 2003 .
 This self-proclaimed fighter pilot and soldier of fortune was eccentric but brilliant . He said he wanted to be a fighter pilot but was eccentric and brilliant .
 He suffered from alopecia totalis, a rare disease that left him hairless . The disease left him totally hairless and hairless.
 He wore a badly fitted red wig and sometimes glued on tufts of synthetic fabric for eyebrows . He also wore a badly fitted wig and often glued on fake eyebrows .
 Banister established his own detective agency in 1958 . Banister was former agent-in-charge of the Chicago FBI office and New Orleans police chief .
 He even published his own virulently racist journal, The Intelligence Digest . He published it in his own racist journal .
 Many claim Banister was possibly the middleman linking the CIA and the mafia in a plot to kill the President . Banister is believed to have been a middleman in the CIA-led plot .
 None of the building’s five tenants, or the janitor who lived there, recalled ever seeing Oswald visit there . The building's five tenants said they never saw Oswald visit .
 None ever heard of the Fair Play for Cuba Committee or saw any propaganda from the organization . None ever saw any of the organization's propaganda from Cuba .
 Jack Martin, a former private investigator who sometimes worked with Banister, was a friend of Banister . Martin was also a private investigator . Banister was convicted of perjury in a federal court in 2008 .
 Hubie Badeaux, the former chief of the New Orleans police intelligence division, knew both Banister and Martin . He says he knew Banister, Martin .
 Anthony Summers interviewed Roberts in 1978, and she told him a different, and wilder, story than the one she gave to the Select Committee . Roberts' story is a wilder version of that interview with Summers .
 Roberts’s daughter, also named Delphine, claimed she used an upstairs room for photographic work .
 Many subsequent conspiracy writers, as well as Oliver Stone in the film JFK, have relied heavily on these statements . Oliver Stone's film JFK was based on the statements .
 She warmly remembers that she first met Guy Banister when she was demonstrating in downtown New Orleans . With a Confederate flag draped behind her, she says she met him at a New Orleans demonstration .
 She said she not only became Banister’s secretary but his mistress as well . Banister's mistress said she became his secretary and mistress .
 She claims Summers paid her money to make the story . Summers was then shooting a television documentary when she told her story .
 As unreliable as Delphine Roberts is regarding the Oswald-544 Camp Street issue, her daughter spins an equally untenable tale . John Lanne, a former Banister friend and attorney, acknowledges that Roberts refused to speak to Summers .
 Summers caveated Delphine Roberts’s story by writing, “It is by no means certain that has told the whole truth …” and attempted to buttress her testimony by citing her daughter . Summers wrote that Roberts “has told the truth ...”
 He easily could have seen the FOR RENT signs at the small corner building . The owner of the building could have easily seen the For Rent signs .
 The building’s janitor, James Arthus, who lived in the basement, told the FBI after the assassination that someone had attempted to rent an office, but he had discouraged him . The janitor said he discouraged him from renting an office .
 Oswald may have talked to Arthus about an office, but that was the extent of his contact to the building, though he still stamped it on some of his leaflets as the ‘official’ office address for Fair Play .
 Guy Banister would have been very interested in Oswald’s Fair Play activities, his brother says . Ross Banister is convinced that Banister, who monitored Communist agitators, would be interested in Fair Play .
 Oswald's propaganda still carried the old Camp Street address even when Oswald lived in New Orleans . Some of its propaganda still carries the old address even though Oswald lived there .
 Oswald had used phony addresses on dozens of applications and forms . It is possible he decided to embarrass his nemesis, the extreme right wing and the city’s anti-Castro militants .
 The issue of whether Oswald associated with David Ferrie during the summer of 1963 is equally important . Ferrie had extensive anti-Castro Cuban contacts and did some work for Carlos Marcello, the New Orleans godfather .
 Oswald's 1955 Civil Air Patrol service, when Ferrie allegedly was allegedly the commanding officer, is the most credible piece of information linking Oswald and Ferrie . Six witnesses identified Ferrie, Oswald, and a third person, New Orleans businessman Clay Shaw, in 1963 .
 Summers suggests Oswald may have been the object of Ferrie’s homosexual advances or, at the very least, his political influence .
 Garrison charges that through Oswald’s attendance at several CAP meetings, Ferrie initiated him into the CIA . Ferrie was interviewed by the FBI on November 27, 1963, and denied ever knowing Oswald in the Civil Air Patrol .
 A photo produced in 1993 purported to show Ferrie and Oswald standing on opposite sides of a small group at a CAP cookout . A photo of the two appeared to show a photo taken in 1993 . Ferrie: "I'm glad to be able to get back together"
 Another photo, yet to be published, shows Oswald and Ferrie talking to each other . Another photo of Oswald, Ferrie, has not been published yet .
 Oswald and JFK met in 1955 when Oswald was fifteen years old . The question is whether the two rekindled any association in 1963, months before JFK’s assassination .
 The evidence for a later Oswald-Ferrie relationship is the testimony of witnesses from Clinton, Louisiana . Oswald and Ferrie were both killed in the September 9, 1963, attack .
 The witnesses were found by Jim Garrison’s investigators, in 1967, when they interviewed more than three hundred people in Clinton and the neighboring township of Jackson, some 20 percent of the local population . Garrison's investigators interviewed over 3,000 people in 1967 .
 Oswald conspicuously appeared in Clinton, a dusty, backwater town of fifteen hundred people, some ninety miles from New Orleans . The allegation is that in early September 1963, Oswald mysteriously appeared in the town .
 The Congress of Racial Equality was organizing blacks to register to vote in the still-segregated South . At the time of the supposed appearance, the Congress was organizing black voters .
 A large, expensive car pulled into Clinton's office on the same day that a long line of black residents waited to sign forms at the registrar’s office . The witnesses now tell the story . According to the witnesses, a large car pulled in and parked near that office .
 One young man got out of the car and joined the line of blacks waiting to register . The line of black waiting for the register was the first black person to get out .
 Clinton episode used to establish the Oswald-Ferrie link, but some give it greater significance . Clinton episode is used as an example of the link between Oswald and Ferrie . Some say the Clinton episode has greater significance, others say .
 Since Garrison’s investigators uncovered the Clinton witnesses, evidently no researcher has gained access to the witnesses’ original statements . The Clinton witnesses were interviewed by Garrison . Garrison's investigators uncovered Clinton witnesses .
 The author obtained affidavits, handwritten statements, and summary memoranda to Garrison regarding the initial stories the witnesses told investigators . The author, however, obtained affidavit and handwritten statements from the witnesses .
 By the time they testified to the Select Committee, they had ironed out fundamental contradictions . They had told their story so often that they'd iron out some of the contradictions . By the end of their testimony, they'd had ironned out many contradictions .
 The following discussion is based on the witnesses’ original statements . The witnesses' original statements were made in the interview . The interview will be aired on CNN.com .
 Edward McGehee claims to have cut Oswald’s hair and advised him about a job at the local mental hospital . He said it “was kind of cool” on the day he saw Oswald, the barber said .
 Oswald visited his parish representative to inquire about obtaining the hospital job . Reeves Morgan, a state representative for the parish, said Oswald visited him at his home to inquire . Morgan: Oswald asked for the job .
 There was a chill in the air, and Morgan recalled lighting the fireplace . Morgan recalls lighting the fire in the fireplace in his home .
 U.S. Weather Bureau records show daily temperatures above 90 degrees . Only a few days dip into the eighties, with high humidity .
 There was certainly no day that was “cool” or required a burning fireplace . There were certainly no "cool" days that required a fireplace .
 All the witnesses described a black Cadillac entering the town . In their testimony at the Shaw trial, and in subsequent statements, all the witnesses said the black Cadillac entered .
 CORE chairman said it was a big, black, expensive-looking car, with four doors, and not more than two years old . Garrison's investigators say the car was a two-year-old, expensive car .
 Edward McGehee described it as an old, dark-colored, beat-up car, probably a Nash or Kaiser, but probably not a station wagon . The car was described as a 'beat-up' car .
 Witnesses have consistently described only three men --Oswald, Ferrie, and Shaw -- in the car . Since the Garrison trial, witnesses have consistently said they saw three men in the vehicle .
 Originally, it was not nearly as certain on the number of people, much less their identifications . However, originally, they were not as certain as they were originally .
 Corey Collins said the driver of the car was about forty-five years old and wore a light hat that prevented Collins from seeing his hair . The driver was not wearing a hat, Collins said .
 Town marshal says the driver did not have a hat and his hair was gray . John Manchester, the town marshal, said the driver had gray hair and gray hair .
 Only Oswald and a young woman were in the car, with a baby bassinet in the rear seat . Dunn said there were four men and that one of them was Estes Morgan .
 At the Garrison trial, Dunn described only three men and omitted Morgan Morgan . Dunn described Morgan as a "loner"
 Town marshal John Manchester said there were only two men in the car and that about that time he also saw Estes Morgan, whom he knew well, in voter-registration line .
 Henry Burnell Clark, on the other hand, said there was only one man in the car . Clark said the car was full of men, but Clark said only one was inside .
 She also connected Oswald to Estes Morgan, but dropped that association during her trial testimony . Oswald's trial testimony was also dropped .
 Another hospital employee testified she did not see Oswald, but saw a job application with his name on it . Another hospital worker said she saw the application with Oswald's name on the application .
 A thorough search of the hospital’s records shows no such application existed or had been filed . The hospital says no application had been made or filed for such an application .
 Registrar of voters Henry Palmer, at the Garrison trial, gave the most potentially damaging testimony identifying Oswald . Palmer's testimony was crucial to the prosecution of Garrison .
 He said that when Oswald was attempting to register to vote, he had interviewed him . He said he interviewed Oswald when he was trying to register for the vote .
 Summers: "I asked him for his identification, and he pulled out a United States Navy ID card" He later told Summers, “I asked . for his ID, he pulled . out of his wallet, he said . He later said, "He pulled out his United States
 There were only two white men in the voter-registration line that morning that morning, and as a result they were very conspicuous . Not only did he think the visit was in October, but he said there were only white men .
 Lee Oswald was Lee Oswald, Estes Morgan and Lee Morgan . Lee Oswald had been Lee Oswald's target in the assassination of President Kennedy Kennedy . Lee was Lee's assassin .
 Oswald produced a “cancelled Navy I.D. card” and told him he had been living in Jackson for six months with a doctor from the hospital, he said . Morgan and Oswald were interviewed separately in his office, the prosecutor said .
 Oswald lived with a local doctor for six months . Estes Morgan and Oswald's story of Oswald living with a doctor were omitted from his testimony .
 At the trial, under oath, he emphatically picked out Clay Shaw as the driver . Yet at the trial he said Shaw was Clay Shaw, the driver of the car .
 None of the Clinton witnesses had a good explanation for why they had not contacted the authorities if they thought they had seen Oswald . The Clinton witnesses did not explain why they did not contact the authorities .
 Reeves Morgan testified he had called the FBI after the assassination . One of Reeves Morgan's testimony: "I'm not afraid to call the FBI"
 There is little doubt the Clinton witnesses are telling the truth as they now recall it . Clinton witnesses tell the truth, as they recall it, but there's little doubt .
 The original statements to Garrison’s staff reveal considerable contradictions, so much so that the very heart of their story is invalidated . However, their original statements . reveal considerable . contradictions .
 Oswald clearly was not in Clinton in October or when it was cold, nor was he there with Marina, nor did he live there for six months with a doctor, or apply for a job at the local mental institution . Oswald was not there in October, nor in cold weather, nor
 Garrison’s staff realized that Estes Morgan had no connection to Oswald, Ferrie, and Shaw and required the witnesses to drop their reference to Morgan being with Oswald . Garrison's staff also realized that the local resident had no . connection to the three men .
 Evidence shows witnesses saw Estes Morgan with someone whom they later mistook to be Oswald . The evidence shows the witnesses mistook the man for Estes .
 Garrison never mentioned Morgan because he did not support Garrison's hypothesis . Garrison's theory was based on Morgan's theory that he was a naturalist . Garrison said Morgan was the only person to support Garrison theory .
 Garrison trial began almost six years after the alleged incident in Clinton . Witnesses first testified at the Garrison trial . Garrison is accused of shooting a woman in the head in 1998 .
 Garrison’s staff had only presented photos of Oswald, Ferrie, and Shaw, and incorrectly said that others had already identified those as the people who had visited the town . Garrison's staff incorrectly said others had identified Oswald and Shaw as those who had already visited .
 The power of suggestion and coaching developed the testimony that today has been repeated so often that the House Select Committee found it convincing . This power of suggesting, and later coaching, developed today's testimony .
 Irvin Dymond, the New Orleans attorney who led the legal team that defended Clay Shaw in 1967, told the author that the Clinton testimony is “a pack of lies.”
 Oswald’s wife and relatives say he was not cavorting with anti-Castro Cubans, homosexuals, or soldiers of fortune . His quiet home life contradicts numerous post-assassination tales of Oswald's alleged late-night cavorting .
 Ex-FBI agent, Guy Banister, says job was arranged by U.S. intelligence for Oswald to be near to Banister . He says it was arranged for him to be nearby to an ex-FBI officer . Banister says the job was done to protect Banister from
 Handwriting experts confirmed the writing on all the applications was Oswald’s . Witnesses later identified him as the applicant in each case .
 Oswald's lawyer for the Defense Committee was John Abt, the legal counsel Oswald requested five months later, when he was arrested for killing the President . Abt was the lawyer for Oswald's defense committee .
 Officer Ray said Oswald was alone on the day he confronted him on the wharf . Oswald was found dead at the scene of the incident .
 The New Orleans office had instituted a state-of-the-art teletype to Washington . Only a few months earlier, in order to speed up passport applications, the office instituted a teletype system .
 The local newspapers covered the innovation as a major technological advance . The innovation was covered in the local newspapers .
 All that was required was for the field office, in New Orleans, to telex the names of the applicants, together with their place and date of birth, to the Department of State . The applicants' names were sent to the State Department's New Orleans office .
 Washington checks through a lookout-card file for a person without a passport . If there is no card for that person, it automatically authorized the field office to issue a passport.
 Fonzi seems an unusual choice for an inquiry that claimed to be impartial, as he was a committed believer in a conspiracy . He was critical of the Warren Commission in 1966, having written his first article critical of it .
 Fonzi wrote an 80,000-word article in The Washingtonian attacking the House Select Committee for not going far enough in its conspiracy conclusions . He set forth his own hypothesis of how renegade CIA agents masterminded JFK’s death .
 Garrison found a local resident, David Lewis, who claimed he often saw Oswald in Mancuso’s Restaurant on the ground floor of Camp Street . Garrison, during his investigation, found a . local resident who claimed to have seen Oswald in the restaurant .
 Lewis swore he saw Oswald there in early 1962, when Lee was still in Russia . The problem was that Lewis said he saw Lee Oswald there . Lee was in Russia at the time of the shooting .
 After Banister’s unexpected death by heart attack in 1964, his wife took possession of all of his files and barred Delphine from the office, leaving her bitter . They both said that after Banister's unexpected death .
 There, Lanne pulled a pistol from his desk, waved it in the air, and told Summers he could not interview his client, Delphine . Lanne, whom Summers “thought to be fairly mad, certainly odd,” pulled the pistol out .
 Summers told Roberts that he wanted to do an interview for television . Summers said he wants to do a television interview .
 Russo only remembered the story when given drugs and asked leading questions while under hypnosis . The problem is that Russo didn't remember the story because he had been given drugs .
 Ferrie's New Orleans library card had been found in a search of Oswald’s house in Dallas after the assassination . The card was found in the search of the Oswald's home in Dallas .
 Ferrie produced his library card for the FBI agents in the November 27 interview . That was false, and he produced the library card . Ferrie has been charged with attempted murder in connection with the case .
 The second rumor was that Ferrie was to use his plane as a getaway vehicle for Oswald . Ferrie's plane was reportedly to be used as a vehicle for the assassin .
 The FBI discovered that his single-engine four-passenger monoplane had not been airworthy since 1962 . The FBI found the plane was not airworthy for more than 50 years .
 During the late 1960s probe by Garrison, two other photos purported to show Oswald and Ferrie together in CAP were unmasked as composites . Two other photos that purported to have shown Oswald with Ferrie in CAP also were revealed as composite photos .
 Jim Garrison used the Clinton evidence in his unsuccessful 1969 trial against Shaw, trying to tie him to Oswald . Garrison used it in an attempt to tie Shaw to Oswald, but it was unsuccessful . Garrison tried to use the evidence in an unsuccessful trial .
 Shaw and Banister did not look alike . Except for their both having white hair, they both had white hair . Shaw was the co-star of the series .
 Marina testified he was in New Orleans every day during August and September . Postulating a second Oswald car trip, especially since he did not drive, compounds the critics’ problems . Marina testified that Oswald traveled to New Orleans daily during August .
 Marina found Marina found him somewhat disillusioned, but he remained committed to his cause . Marina said she found him "disillusioned"
 She was concerned because she thought he was increasingly disconnected from reality . But she was concerned about his 'disconnected from reality' She said he was 'increasingly disconnected' with reality .
 Johnson was responding to Oswald’s letter in which he sent honorary Fair Play membership cards to Communist party directors Gus Hall and Benjamin Davis .
 Johnson enclosed Communist literature on Cuba and congratulated Oswald . Johnson was one of the highest-ranking U.S. Communist officials ever to acknowledge one of Oswald’s letters .
 "People don’t care about that here,” his response was often a tearful reading of the Johnson letter .
 On Monday, August 5, he walked into a Cuban-owned general goods store, Casa Roca . He walked into the store, which is owned by the government .
 Casa Roca served as the Student Directorate’s unofficial headquarters, as well as a general clearinghouse for Cuban activities in New Orleans . Casa was a clearinghouse of Cuban activities for Cuban students .
 Bringuier was explaining the Cuban fight against Castro to two 15-year-olds when Oswald walked up to them . Oswald walked into the Cuban exile camp and killed himself .
 Oswald regaled them with stories of how to derail a train, blow up a bridge, and make a homemade pistol and gunpowder . Oswald told Oswald they were interested in guerrilla warfare . Oswald was fascinated by the stories he told them of his guerrilla warfare skills .
 He left his Marine Corps training manual for Bringuier as evidence of his good faith . He left the manual for the Marine Corps manual .
 One of his Cuban friends, Celso Hernandez, ran into the store three days later . Hernandez was found dead in the store on August 9 .
 On the way, they stopped at a nearby restaurant and picked up another young Cuban, Miguel Cruz . They stopped at the restaurant to pick up a young Cuban man .
 A few minutes later Miguel Cruz dashed in with the news that the American was back at Canal and St. Louis . The American had been missing for several hours .
 Oswald had a placard around his neck and was distributing Fair Play for Cuba leaflets . Oswald was distributing the leaflets at the time .
 Bringuier tried to incite the throng against Oswald, telling them he was a Communist who had pretended to befriend the Cuban movement when actually he was friend of Castro . Bringuiers said he pretended to be a Communist when he was actually a friend of Fidel Castro .
 Oswald jeered at Oswald, telling him to go to Russia . Some in the crowd began jeering at Oswald . Oswald was shot in the head by a White House aide .
 Hernandez snatched the stack of Fair Play pamphlets from Oswald’s hands and tossed them into the air . Hernandez then tossed them in the air.
 Oswald had no idea that Fair Play was active in New Orleans, or that Oswald was its only member . Oswald was the only member of Fair Play, which Oswald had been in contact with .
 Oswald had to spend the night in jail . Bringuier noticed that in the interrogation room, Oswald was “really cold-blooded.”
 Francis Martello, the former deputy commander of the New Orleans police intelligence division, saw one of Oswald’s Fair Play leaflets and decided to interview him . Martello interviewed Oswald after seeing one of the leaflets .
 Oswald lied throughout the interview, telling Martello that he had lived at Mercedes Street in Fort Worth since his honorable discharge from the Marine Corps in 1959 . Oswald told Martello he'd lived there since he was discharged from the Marines in 1959.
 He said that besides Reily, he had worked at the city's largest brewery, Jax. He said he had also worked at Reily and Jax .
 Oswald had been worried about the FBI’s interest in him since the first interview in Fort Worth, Texas . Oswald was convinced it had cost him at least two jobs with its inquiries . Oswald believed the FBI's inquiries cost him two jobs .
 Oswald probably figured it best to summon the Bureau to him as if he had nothing to hide about his Fair Play for Cuba activity . If the FBI did not know he was arrested, he thought, it would shortly, and Oswald thought it would be shortly .
 Oswald called for an FBI agent is strong evidence there was no association between him and the Bureau . Oswald's call for an agent was strong evidence he had no association with the FBI . Oswald was a member of the FBI, but he was not an agent of any connection to the Bureau,
 Summers charges that the evidence of a special relationship is evident because it happened on “a Saturday morning, not the most likely time for an agent to respond speedily to a request by an insignificant prisoner’s request . Summers says the agent responded quickly to the request because it was
 Quigley would never have spoken to Oswald if it had not been a Saturday, an FBI agent says . The Saturday was the date of the Oswald-Quigley conversation .
 One of the responsibilities of the duty agent is to check with the local police and see if there are any cases that might interest the Bureau . The duty agent has a duty agent who checks with local police .
 If he hadn’t, he would have been kicked in the butt for failing to do it . ‘That was part of his duty,’ he said. ‘If he hadn't. hadn't . He would have . been censured because that was . part
 Quigley typed a five-page, single-spaced report of his hour-and-a-half interview . The interview lasted an hour and a half .
 Oswald said he had spoken to Hidell several times on the telephone, but he had never met him . Oswald said his number had been disconnected, and he did not remember what the number was . Oswald did not recall Hidell's name .
 Oswald said Hidell told him to pass out leaflets at the corner where he was arrested . It was a note from Hidell, said Oswald, that told him pass out the leaflets .
 He claimed he attended two Fair Play meetings at different apartments, but could not remember any of them . He said he had been introduced to five different members each time, only by their first name .
 He said there were no regularly scheduled meetings, but someone would call him when one was planned . He said someone will call him if one is planned .
 Once he said a meeting was held at his own house, but he could not explain how he had informed the other members . He claimed he claimed not to know their names or telephone numbers, and he had no telephone . He said he did not know the names or numbers of the other
 Quigley’s report on his bizarre jailhouse interview quickly became part of the growing FBI file . Oswald's interview with the FBI quickly became a key piece of the Oswald case . Oswald was found guilty of shooting the president of the United States in 1945 .
 Uncle Dutz was out of town at a Catholic retreat, Aunt Lillian was in the hospital with an ear infection, and the only person at their house was his cousin Joyce Murret, who was visiting from Beaumont, Texas . Joyce Murrets was visiting the family from Be
 Martello, intrigued by Murret’s disclosures, returned for a second interview . Martello interviewed Murret again for the second time .
 He told her to get Marina, who had $70 in savings, and bring her to the station . Marina's $70 was saved, but she had no money .
 Joyce got off the phone with him, she instead telephoned her mother . Joyce's mother is also a mother-of-two .
 She was afraid to leave her two children while she traveled across town to see Marina Marina . She said she didn't want to leave them alone .
 Bruneau paid Oswald’s $25 bail, and he was released late Saturday afternoon . Oswald was charged with attempted murder, but was released without bail .
 She checked the closet and was relieved to see the rifle leaning against the corner of the closet . She was at least relieved to find the rifle in the corner .
 She was angry when he told her of his arrest, but also so pleased he was home safely that she fed him and then helped him to bed .
 When he heard the news of his nephew’s arrest, he was “horrified” and promptly went to the apartment . The suspect's nephew was arrested in December .
 It was the first time he had visited the Oswalds’ home and he was shocked to see a picture of Castro hanging over the mantel . He was shocked by the picture, which he said was a picture he found in the house .
 Dutz told him to get a job to support his family and to straighten out his life . Dutz said he should straighten up his life and get back on track .
 The relationship between the Oswalds and the Murrets cooled considerably after Lee’s arrest . The Murrets were angry over his nephews' demonstrations on behalf of Castro .
 Oswald and Bringuier and two associates were scheduled to appear in court on August 12 . Oswald was charged with conspiracy to cover up the events . The two men were charged with murder in August 2012 .
 Carlos Bringuier went to the National American Bank to make a deposit . The bank is located in New Jersey City, New Jersey .
 Stuckey had previously done a newspaper interview about Bringuier and his anti-Castro efforts .
 He said anti-Castro groups in New Orleans have always been hard to find . He said it had always been difficult to find pro-Cuban advocates in the city .
 Stuckey sent a cameraman, Johann Rush, to get some film for the evening newscasts for the television branch of WDSU . The judge refused to allow the short hearing to be filmed .
 “Oswald entered the room and sat in the black section,” says Bringuier . Inside the courtroom, the courtroom was split into a segregated white and black section .
 The judge dismissed the charges against the three Cubans and fined Oswald $10 . Oswald was fined $10. The judge dismisses the charges and dismissed Oswald .
 On the way out of the courtroom, Rush briefly interviewed Oswald, just enough time for Lee to say he was a Marxist . Rush interviewed Oswald on the way into the courtroom .
 Oswald pleased that his efforts for Cuba had finally begun to receive public attention . Oswald was pleased that he had finally received public attention for his efforts . Oswald's efforts to Cuba were finally receiving public attention in Cuba .
 Marina said he spoke of Cuba increasingly during August . Marina wanted to be able to get a visa to Cuba . She said she spoke of the island as a tourist .
 Oswald wrote that he had “incured the displeasure of the Cuban exile ‘worms’ here,” and that three of them had attacked him. Lee, Fair Play’s president, wrote . Lee, the president of Fair Play, said three of the exiled
 He offered $2 to anybody who would help him distribute leaflets for half an hour . Friday, late in the morning, he went to the unemployment office, offering $2 .
 Oswald’s demonstration for posterity on film for nearly twenty minutes . Two accepted his offer, and they walked to the Trade Mart . Johann Rush captured Oswald's demonstration on film .
 His new demonstration had attracted television coverage, and with two ‘volunteers,” it appeared that Fair Play was more than a one-person operation .
 Marina was appalled that he was seeking publicity for his radical politics and refused to leave the apartment . That night he tried to encourage Marina to watch him on television, but she was appalled .
 It began at 8:00 A.M. when Bill Stuckey stopped by his apartment to ask if he wanted to tape a segment for that evening’s radio broadcast . It was the first time he had taped a segment of the show .
 Oswald, woken from his sleep, had on just a pair of Marine Corps fatigue pants . Oswald had just been woken up from a nightmarish sleep . Oswald was a Marine Corps member .
 Oswald showed him his Fair Play membership card and gave him copies of two Castro speeches, a pamphlet titled Ideology and Revolution by Jean-Paul Sartre and another called The Crime Against Cuba by Corliss Lamont . Still, Stuckey was pleasantly surprised by his “
 Stuckey agreed to meet at the WDSU station at five that evening to tape a show . Fair Play had twelve to thirteen local members, and he was only the secretary .
 Bringuier was afraid that the televised demonstration of the previous day might enhance the local standing of Fan Play for Cuba . The Cuban government was concerned that the demonstration might enhance Fan Play's standing .
 Bringuier also embarked on an effort to infiltrate Fair Play’s local chapter to find out what he could about Lee Oswald . The Fair Play chapter is based in New York .
 Oswald sent a Cuban associate, Carlos Quiroga, to Oswald’s apartment on Saturday . On Saturday, he sent an associate, who spoke excellent English, to the apartment . The Cuban associate is known to speak excellent English .
 Quiroga pretended to have been given a leaflet by Oswald and expressed his interest in joining Fair Play for Cuba . Oswald pretended to be given the leaflet and said he wanted to join the group .
 He was the first person who ever responded to Oswald’s public demonstrations, and they spoke for nearly forty-five minutes . He was first to respond to Oswald's public demonstrations .
 Marina later said, “I asked Lee who that was, and he said that is probably some anti-Cuban, or perhaps an FBI agent.” Marina said she asked Lee about the incident .
 Oswald told Quiroga that Fidel Castro was not a dictator and that if the U.S. invaded Cuba, he would fight with Castro against America . Oswald said he would join Castro if the United States invaded Cuba . Oswald also said that he would also fight with Fidel Castro against
 Oswald edited a thirty-seven-minute interview with Stuckey, edited to a four-and-a-half minute program that was broadcast that evening . Oswald’s suggestions, with Oswald's suggestions, edited the interview into a four and a half minute program .
 Oswald considered Carlos Bringuier’s idea of a debate with Oswald . Oswald's idea was that he would debate Oswald with the French president . Oswald was the first person to suggest a debate .
 Oswald, at Stuckey’s suggestion, called the radio station on Monday, August 19 . Oswald called the station at the request of the radio host . Oswald, who had been in the military, is now in the U.S.
 Oswald instantly accepted the invitation . Oswald was pleased to have another chance at publicity for his Cuban cause . Oswald accepted the opportunity to be photographed with the president .
 To counter Oswald, Stuckey selected Carlos Bringuier and Edward Butler . Butler was the executive director of the Information Council of the Americas . Butler is an anti-Communist propaganda organization .
 Stuckey provided a copy of the thirty-seven-minute original interview tape to the local FBI office on Monday .
 Stuckey said he was put through to either the chief or deputy chief of the New Orleans office . While he was later talking to an FBI source, he said he didn't get through to them . The FBI has not responded to the request .
 Butler used his contacts at the House Un-American Activities Committee in Washington independently to uncover information about Oswald’s Russian venture . Butler also used contacts with the U.S. House Un. Activities Committee .
 Oswald appeared at 5:30 P.M. on Wednesday, in his thick flannel Russian suit, carrying a black looseleaf notebook and looking very uncomfortable in the sweltering August heat . Oswald appeared in a thickly flannel suit and looked very uncomfortable .
 He was nervous, though he had practiced throughout the day, walking around the apartment reading notes aloud . "I was nervous," he said .
 When Bringuier arrived, Oswald tried to shake hands with him, but he refused . Instead, he traded jibes with him about his Communist beliefs . Oswald tried shaking hands with the Communist leader .
 Oswald said he had an honorable discharge from the Marines in 1959 and lived in Fort Worth before moving to New Orleans . Oswald had claimed to have lived in New Orleans, Texas, Fort Worth and Fort Worth, Texas . Oswald's interview with Stuckey repeated Oswald's statements .
 The personal attacks increasingly portrayed him as a liar and a Communist and traitor . Despite his attempts to fend off the attacks, the attacks continued to grow .
 Stuckey felt so sorry for him that he took him to Cameaux’s, a neighborhood bar, for some drinks . He took him there for a few drinks .
 He remembered Oswald was “dejected,” and over some beers, he relaxed and opened up a little . Oswald was "dejected," he said, and over a few beers, relaxed . Oswald remembered Oswald as ‘dejected’
 He told Stuckey of his early attraction to Marxism and disenchantment with Russia, but also about his unhappiness in the U.S. “It was my impression Oswald regarded himself as living in a world of intellectual inferiors.”
 Oswald’s statement that the Russians had “gone soft” on Communism is revealing . Oswald said Cuba was the only real revolutionary country in the world . Oswald's statement was the most revealing was that Cuba was Cuba's only revolutionary country .
 Marina could tell that Lee was in a terrible mood when he returned home that night . Marina was worried that Lee would be in a bad mood when she returned home .
 Fair Play’s national president Vincent Lee had not even answered any of his recent letters . Vincent Lee, Fair Play's national president, had not responded to any of Lee's recent letters, he says .
 Oswald feared the radio debate had so discredited him that his already lackluster organizing efforts might be permanently damaged . Oswald feared that his efforts might also be damaged by the debate .
 He drafted a press release calling for a congressional investigation of Lee Harvey Oswald . Oswald was a confessed Marxist and an alien of Castro in the United States .
 He considered dropping leaflets by plane over New Orleans, but discovered it was illegal . He even considered dropping them over the city .
 Marina noticed a fundamental change in her husband's life after his radio humiliation . Marina noticed that Lee had changed after the humiliation .
 One of the most worrisome developments was that he began to focus on his rifle again . "One of the biggest concerns is that he begins to focus again," he said .
 He brought it out of the closet and at night began taking it onto an unlit screened porch at the front of the apartment . At night, he brought it into his apartment and placed it on the porch .
 Marina saw him sitting in the dark aiming his gun at imaginary targets . Marina also saw him shooting imaginary targets at other times .
 Marina finally confronted him and asked why he was spending so much time with the rifle . Marina eventually confronted him, asking him to stop using the weapon .
 The Militant ran several prominent stories during the 1963 summer about Americans who visited despite the ban and faced imprisonment upon their return . The State Department had banned travel there, and the stories featured prominently .
 Oswald did not worry about the sanctions, because he did not intend to return, and hijacking a plane seemed as convenient and revolutionary as any other means . “His imagination, his fantasy, which was quite unfounded, he was an outstanding man,” said Marina Marina .
 For Marina, it was frighteningly like his preparation for the Walker shooting . Marina: "It's frighteningly similar to my preparation for Walker shooting"
 Marina held the pistol on the passengers and crew . He planned to use it to force the pilot to fly to Cuba while Marina held it on her side . He told her how he intended to use the rifle to force him to fly .
 He trained on his own for days, running about the apartment, clad only in his underwear, practicing leaps and trying to strengthen his legs and arms . He considered these attributes to hijack a plane .
 Mexico City had the nearest Cuban consulate from which he could obtain a visa, and he planned to go there by bus . He swore Marina to secrecy, swearing to secrecy . He planned to travel to Mexico City by bus to obtain the visa .
 Marina would return to Dallas with Ruth Paine when she visited New Orleans around September 20 .
 Oswald promised he would either arrange for Marina to join him, or he might return to Russia and meet her there . After he got to Cuba, Oswald promised to arrange for her to meet him . Oswald also promised he might arrange to meet her in Cuba .
 She knew Cuba was his first choice, but if he failed to get there, she had no doubt he was willing to return to the USSR . Marina had also come to recognize how changeable he was .
 But I am sure that if he had gone there, he would not have liked it there either. But I'm not sure if he would have gone there either . He would have not liked it either .
 He was frustrated by Vincent Lee’s failure to answer his Fair Play letters . He felt that Arnold Johnson was not of a high enough rank to advise him on his new problem .
 He explained that he had lived in the USSR and had tried to become a Soviet citizen . He said that he lived in Russia and tried to be a Russian citizen .
 Oswald’s excuse for his failures had become the attacks of ‘anti-progressives” over his Russian defection . “I should always remain in the … underground” Oswald wrote . ‘I would like to know weather, in your opion, in
 Although he wrote more letters to the Socialist Workers party and The Worker, they were only requests for information and assistance . He wrote many letters to The Worker and Socialist Workers Party .
 Further reports about anti-Castro attacks inside Cuba seemed to strengthen his resolve to go there . However, he did not send him into a fury as sometimes had happened in earlier months .
 His appetite for serious political books from the public library ceased, and instead he devoured science fiction and spy novels . He devoured spy novels and sci-fi novels .
 Francis Martello conducted his own investigation of Fair Play for Cuba for Cuba and Oswald . Martello's investigation was conducted by Martello himself .
 "I contacted our sources for Communist party activity and they were all negative. Then I contacted our . sources for . Communist Party activity," she said . "They were negative," she added .
 In the final report you just say that he does not have connections that call for further investigation . In the report, he was found to have 'no connections' with the FBI .
 Oswald called the Murrets on Labor Day, asked if he and Marina could visit . The Murrets' visit was the first time Oswald had been to see Marina and Oswald's wife .
 It was the first time he had seen his family since the bailout nearly a month before . It was first time they had seen each other since bailout . The bailout was a month ago .
 Oswald refused to teach Marina English, something he still adamantly refused . It was an uneventful afternoon except for when the Murrets pressed Oswald to teach her English .
 That afternoon get-together was the last time the Murrets ever saw or spoke to him . The Murrets never saw him again . He was found dead at the scene of the shooting .
 In the evening, he put on a pair of trousers and sat on the porch, reading one of his library books or tinkering with the rifle . In the evenings, he would sit in his garden and tink with his rifle . He said: "In the evening he would sat on
 Marina, Marina, as well as neighbors, recalled that while he occasionally went to a local candy shop or a nearby Winn-Dixie store for groceries, he was generally at the apartment . Marina: While he occasionally visited a nearby candy shop, neighbors recalled that he was mostly at the
 Jesse Garner, his landlady, dressed only in rubber thongs and bright yellow shorts, stuffed all the garbage cans up and down the block with their refuse, since he was too miserly to buy his own garbage can . Jesse Garner used to watch him, dressed just in rubber
 Marina started to worry that once she returned with Ruth Paine to Texas, she might not see him again . Marina was worried that he might not be able to see her again .
 She begged to be taken along to Mexico, but he said it was impossible because of her pregnancy . He said it would be impossible to take her to Mexico because she was pregnant .
 On September 7, Castro appeared at a Brazilian embassy reception in Havana . Castro submitted to a rare informal interview with Associated Press correspondent Daniel Harker . The interview took place at an embassy reception .
 She spent the weekend, and he lied to her that he intended to look for work in Houston or Philadelphia . He told her that once he found a job, he would be back to fetch Marina .
 The FBI interviewed Jesse Garner's landlady, Jesse Garner, that same day, the FBI interviewed him . Jesse Garner was the target of the Oswalds' assassination . Garner was arrested by the FBI that day .
 At that point, the New Orleans FBI office became chiefly responsible for Oswald's capture . The New Orleans office was responsible for the capture of Oswald .
 Harold Weisberg claimed the first address was a formal-dress shop and the second did not exist . Harold claimed the second address was an address for a formal dress shop and not a formal outfit shop .
 In fact, Weisberg searched the addresses when he helped Jim Garrison in his 1967 investigation . The addresses he searched were addresses he helped Garrison find .
 Review of 1963 records reveals there is no mystery or mixup . Instead, a review of the 1963 records shows there was no mystery . The records were released in 1963 .
 Oswald’s efforts to discover the headquarters of the Cuban exiles . The addresses were part of Oswald's efforts to find the headquarters . Oswald was a member of the Oswald family .
 The Domestics Contact Division interviewed him after the assassination about a nephew who had defected from Cuba to America . He was interviewed about the nephew's defection .
 Bringuier published a right-wing newsletter backed by the CIA-sponsored Crusade to Free Cuba . Summers: Bringuiers also published a newsletter backed of the CIA . Summers says the newsletter was backed by a right wing newspaper .
 The fight was not staged, it was certainly prompted by Oswald, and it was intended to enhance his legitimate pro-Communist credentials . Oswald was a member of the Communist Party in Cuba, Cuba and Cuba .
 A Tulane graduate student, Harold Gordon Alderman, had one of Oswald’s leaflets taped to his front door . Alderman was involved in Fair Play activities elsewhere .
 Another Tulane student, Vereen Alexander, thought she had met Oswald at a party with other pro-Castro students in the summer of 1963, but no one else confirmed her story .
 Oswald told his aunt that he visited a language professor at Tulane . Police and FBI could not uncover any evidence that Oswald visited Tulane. Oswald told aunt he visited language professor .
 He says he witnessed an incoming teletype from FBI headquarters warning of a possible assassination attempt against JFK on either November 22 or 23 . He also asserted that while he was on night duty on November 17, 1963, he witnessed a teletype .
 Walter’s “copy” varied in format and wording from FBI communications . Walter's “Copy” differs in format from FBI communication, FBI says .
 More than fifty other employees of the New Orleans office repudiated his story . More than 50 other employees repudiated the story .
 Walter claimed that his own wife, who also worked in the New Orleans FBI office, would confirm his story . Walter claimed his wife also worked for the FBI in New Orleans .
 None of the other fifty-nine FBI field offices ever received such a teletype, although Walter said it was addressed to all of them . Walter said the teletype was addressed only to the FBI .
 The testimony and evidence show that Bruneau acted, as a personal favor, at the behest of the Murrets . He was later reimbursed by Oswald’s uncle, according to the testimony .
 Steele testified the man volunteered from the unemployment line, the same as he had . The other unemployed helper was never identified . Steele testified that Steele testified he had never identified the man .
 Veciana claimed to have worked for 13 years for a CIA case officer known only to him as “Maurice Bishop’s” He told the House Select Committee that Bishop he saw with Oswald with Oswald .
 Veciana claimed the meeting happened in a busy office building . There are no other witnesses to the meeting, although Veciana claims it happened in the building .
 Some believe Maurice Bishop was actually David Atlee Phillips, a CIA officer who had been in charge of the Agency’s Mexico City station at the time Oswald visited that city later in 1963 .
 David Phillips sued a number of journalists who printed the accusation for libel for libel . Phillips sued the journalists for libel after the accusation was printed on the internet .
 Some of the suits were unsuccessful and others were settled out of court . Some of them were unsuccessful . Others were settled in court .
 There are still doubts not only about Maurice Bishop’s identity, but whether he ever existed . Maurice Bishop's identity is still being questioned .
 Oswald was in New Orleans every day at the time Veciana claimed to have seen him in Dallas . Veciana said he was seen in Dallas, New Orleans, and Dallas, Texas .
 Pena recanted his story both in an FBI interview and before the Warren Commission . What is often not disclosed is that Pena's story was recanted in the FBI interview . Pena said he recanted the story in both FBI and Warren Commission interviews .
 De Brueys and Pena strongly disliked each other, and the postassassination story was evidently Pena’s means of revenge . The story was apparently Pena's way of revenge for the death of the former president .
 Pena faced criminal charges connected to an illegal house of prostitution in the late 1960s . His defense lawyer was leading conspiracy buff Mark Lane, Mark Lane .
 Oswald allegedly praised the wonders of a new drug, LSD, and asked if it was legal to import . For over an hour, Oswald allegedly asked if LSD was allowed to be imported to the U.S. Oswald also allegedly praised LSD's wonders .
 After the man left the office, Gillin never again had contact with him . But over the assassination weekend of November 22, 1963, he identified his visitor as Lee Oswald .
 Since the CIA was experimenting with LSD during the early 1960s, the incident might be evidence of an intelligence link to Oswald .
 The problem is with Gillin's identification, which has been offered as evidence of another eyewitness account of Oswald's suspicious behavior . Gillin’s identification, however, is not evidence of an eyewitness account .
 Gillin had only identified Oswald from the sound of his voice over the television . Gillin was only identified from the voice of Oswald's voice .
 Until 1961, he was a source of information for the CIA’s Domestic Contact Division . He was also a source for information on the CIA .
 He did not know Oswald, did not travel to Mexico with him, and had no other association with the case except for the coincidence that they both applied for Mexican tourist cards . Oswald was found dead in Mexico City, Mexico, in November 1963 .
 Some have suggested it is odd that since he was so anxious to get to Cuba, he did not leave immediately after Marina's departure .
 He had to stay in New Orleans until the morning of Wednesday, September 25, when he could collect his $33 unemployment check . The next to last he was scheduled to receive was a $33 check he was due to receive .
 Oswald’s next-door neighbor Eric Rogers saw him Tuesday, the twenty-fourth, the day after Marina left, running to catch a bus across the street . Oswald was seen running for a bus the next day, Rogers says .
 He was carrying two bags, a small zippered one and a Marine Corps duffel . He asked the bus driver for directions to the Greyhound bus station .
 Oswald was making the same preparations he had in Dallas in April before he moved to New Orleans . Oswald was preparing for the same time he was in Dallas, Texas, in April . Oswald had been making preparations for his move to the city .
 He deposited his bags at the station, not wanting to be burdened with them for the errands he planned for the next morning . He then returned to the Magazine Street apartment to spend his last night in the city .
 Lee left the apartment in the early-morning hours of Wednesday, September 25 . Lee is believed to have been in the apartment for more than a week .
 Oswald mailed a change-ofaddress card, postmarked at 11:00 A.M., listing Ruth Paine’s address in Irving, Texas . Oswald picked up his unemployment-compensation check at Lafayette Square substation .
 At a Winn-Dixie on Magazine Street he cashed his $33 check, and was then ready to leave his native New Orleans .
 Late that night the telephone rang at the Houston home of Estelle and Horace Twiford . Estelle's mother, Horace, was killed by a plane crash in the city of Houston .
 Twiford was not at home when Oswald called, but his wife wrote the message on some scrap paper . Oswald was not home at the time of the call, and his wife recorded the message .
 Oswald was a member of Fair Play for Cuba, according to the letter . Oswald had only a few hours before he left for Mexico, the letter said .
 The usually introverted Oswald was surprisingly talkative to other passengers . Oswald was excited to begin the last leg of his trip, and he felt he had no reason to be secretive any longer .
 Oswald and Lee Oswald slept on the bus, but when they awoke around 6:00 A.M., they engaged in a conversation . Oswald was the only person in the group to engage in conversation with Oswald .
 He told them he was traveling from New Orleans to Cuba via Mexico City, because traveling to Cuba directly from the U.S. was against American law . He said he was going to Cuba by Mexico City .
 Mexican immigration official Helio Tuexi Maydon stamped Oswald’s tourist card . Oswald boarded another bus, no. of the Flecha Roja line, for an overnight trip to Mexico City . Oswald was scheduled to arrive mid-morning Friday, September 27 . Oswald is scheduled to
 At one stop along the route, two young Australian women, Pamela Mumford and Patricia Winston, boarded for the remainder of the trip . Two young Australians boarded the train to Monterrey, Mexico, for the rest of the journey .
 The four seats at the front of the bus were taken by the McFarlands, Oswald, and an elderly Englishman, Albert Osborne, a traveling preacher . The McFarlands, Oswald and Albert Osborne sat on the bus .
 Oswald walked to the rear and began talking to them . Oswald then walked out of the room and began speaking to them again . Oswald was the only person in the room at the time .
 Oswald told them that while he was from Fort Worth, he had been in Japan while in the Marines . Oswald said he was sorry he had never been to Australia . Oswald never introduced himself by name, but told them he had visited Japan .
 He said he had been a student in Russia and showed his passport that had a Russian stamp on it . He didn’t mention his Russian wife at all, he said .
 At the bus stops Oswald ate alone, and they noticed he was lost with the Spanish menus . They noticed he ate alone with the menus .
 He just pointed to something on the menu and had to eat a full meal each stop instead of a snack .
 Oswald dropped his friendly veneer when they arrived at the Mexico City bus station . Oswald quickly left by himself and quickly left the country .
 Lee Dannelly, assistant chief of the administrative division in the Selective Service headquarters in Austin, Texas, was positive that Lee Oswald visited her in the afternoon on Wednesday, September 25 . Lee Oswald was a member of the selective Service's staff at the time .
 She claimed the young man called himself Harvey Oswald, said he was registered in the Selective Service in Florida, had just come from the governor’s office . She claimed he was trying to correct his dishonorable discharge .
 Oswald stopped in for several cups of coffee on the same day he visited Mrs. Oswald . A waitress at a nearby coffee shop, Florence Norman, said Oswald had stopped in .
 Oswald could not be in Austin and also on the bus on its way to Houston, this discrepancy raises the specter of an Oswald imposter . Oswald was not in Austin or Houston, but could have been in Houston, Texas .
 Oswald imposter issue was critical from September 1963 through the assassination . Oswald's imposter issues were critical in September 1963 to September 1963 .
 Scores of people came forward believing they had seen Oswald at places other than where he was . Almost all of them were well intentioned but mistaken .
 Oswald placed himself with Oswald from Hawaii to Florida, from bowling alleys to dance parties . People placed themselves with Oswald in Hawaii, Florida . Oswald was found dead at a Florida hospital on November 11 .
 Oswald had been to the governor’s office, but records show no Oswald in the mandatory registration books or signature that matched Oswald's writing . A records check for a six-month period shows no Oswald was found in the books or any signature matching Oswald's .
 Dannelly claimed another worker had brought Oswald to her desk . But when asked, the other employee, Jesse Skrivanek, did not remember anyone who looked like Oswald or anyone using that name .
 Others in the Austin Selective Service office swore they never saw him or heard him before the assassination . Others said they never heard him or saw him before he was assassinated .
 Actually, there were fifteen Oswalds in the Austin office files, but Dannelly refused to admit she might be mistaken . She said there were 15 Oswalds .
 Dannelly recounted about Oswald in her story were available locally in the media before she told anyone of the alleged visit . She said Oswald's alleged visit was made public before she ever told anyone .
 The FBI discovered that the waitress who claimed she too saw Oswald turned out to have Wednesday, the day of the alleged Oswald appearance, as her day off . The waitress who said she saw Oswald had Wednesday as her own day off, FBI says .
 None of the other employees at the coffee shop recalled ever seeing Oswald or hearing of anyone with that name before the assassination . The other employees recalled never seeing Oswald .
 Witness Sylvia Odio claims to have seen Oswald in Mexico at the time he was traveling to Mexico . Another witness says she saw Oswald in the same time as he was seen in Mexico .
 The men claimed to be members of JURE, the Junta Revolucionaria, an anti-Castro group . Odio had helped form several months earlier in Puerto Rico . Her sister answered the door, and the men were soon gone .
 One of the Cubans said his name was Leopoldo and asked if she was in the underground, she said no . She said she was not underground, and she said she wasn't . The Cubans told her they were going to the underground .
 Leon said very little, “just a few little words in Spanish, trying to be cute … like ‘Hola,’” she said .
 The men said they had just come from New Orleans and were in a rush because they were on their way to either Miami or Puerto Rico . The men say they were traveling to Puerto Rico or Miami . They said they are in a hurry to make it to Miami .
 Odio wrote to her father before the assassination, which she discussed the visit . They also refer to a letter she wrote to Odio's father before her assassination .
 A reexamination of the Odio story, however, casts doubts on its accuracy, as well as of her credibility, casts doubt on her accuracy .
 Annie Odio cannot corroborate key parts of her sister’s story because she did not hear the American introduced as “Leon Oswald” or the telephone conversation from Leopoldo the following day . Annie Odia: "Leon Oswald" was introduced as the American .
 She was not even sure if she mentioned that an American was in the group . She is unsure if she even mentioned that she was American .
 Odio could not positively identify him when shown photos during her Warren Commission testimony . Odio was unable to positively identify the man in the photos she was shown .
 She was certain the men had visited before Tuesday, October 1, because on September 30 she moved to a different apartment . She said the men visited before she moved out of the apartment in September .
 Her sister was living with some American friends and came on the last weekend to help her pack for the move . Her sister is moving to the U.S. and will be moving to a new family home .
 According to Odio, her sister had arrived on either Thursday, September 26, or Friday, the twenty-seventh . Odio says her sister's sister died on September 26 or September 20 .
 It was physically impossible for Oswald to visit Odio in Dallas when she claims he did . Odio claims Oswald visited her in Dallas in 1960s and '60s .
 There is no doubt that three men visited her, as her sister, Annie, confirms . She says she was visited by three men at the time of her death .
 The FBI thought it had solved the Odio mystery in 1964 when it found three men who might have visited her apartment near the end of September . Three men were found in her apartment in September 1964 .
 Loran Hall, a prominent anti-Castroite, bore a marked resemblance to the man Odio described as the leader, Leopoldo. Hall was a member of the anti-Communist movement .
 Hall told the FBI on September 16, 1964, that he was in Dallas soliciting funds during September 1963 . Hall said he had been to the Odio apartment in Dallas, Texas, to solicit funds .
 The three were arrested in Florida in December 1962, as part of the Kennedy administration’s crackdown on anti-Castro paramilitary operations . The three had been arrested in January 1962 .
 Howard looked like the second of the Cubans/Mexicans described by Odio Odio . Howard was the second man described as a second Cuban/Mexican .
 Seymour, who spoke only a few words of Spanish, greatly resembled Oswald . Seymour was born in New York City, New York, and died in 1945 .
 Hall recanted his statement four days later, September 20, 1964, four days after it was released . Hall later recanted the statement . Hall was convicted of murder in 1964 .
 When shown photos of the three, Odio stuck to her story and said she could not identify them . Odio was asked if it was a case of mistaken identity, she said she couldn't identify the three .
 Sylvia Odio herself has to be briefly examined . Odio was a member of the British House of Representatives . She was elected to the Senate of Representatives in 1945 .
 By the time of her Oswald story, she had a history of emotional problems . The Oswald story was published in the Washington Post .
 In Puerto Rico, where she had lived before moving to Dallas in March 1963, she had seen a psychiatrist over her fractious marriage . She had lived in Puerto Rico before moving out of the country in 1963 .
 FBI reports: He decided she was unstable and unable, mentally or physically, to care for her children . According to FBI reports, he decided to kill her because she was mentally and physically unfit .
 A doctor who was called to treat her once for ‘an attack of nerves’ discovered she had made it up to get the attention of her neighbors . The doctor said she was trying to get attention of neighbors .
 In her divorce proceeding in 1963, she lost custody of her four children, because of charges of neglect and abandonment . He described her as a very mixed-up young lady .
 By the time of the assassination, she had been seeing him for more than seven months, at least weekly, sometimes more frequently . She had been dating him for at least seven months before the assassination .
 Odio insists she told at least two people, before the assassination, that three men, including Oswald, had visited her apartment . Odio says she told two people before Oswald's assassination that she had told them three men including Oswald had visited the apartment .
 Connell said Odio only told her about Oswald after the assassination . She then said she knew Oswald, and that he had given talks to groups of Cuban refugees in Dallas . But when the FBI questioned her in 1964, she said she only knew about Oswald .
 Odio contended she told her psychiatrist, Dr. Dr. Michael Odio, before her assassination . Dr. Odio said she told him she was going to see her psychiatrist before the assassination . Odio says she told the psychiatrist she was in danger .
 When interviewed by the Warren Commission, Einspruch said that during the course of psychotherapy, Odio told him she had seen Oswald at several anti-Castro meetings . One of the meetings was held at her house, he said .
 He made no mention of the three supposed visitors to the Odio apartment . The Odio family is believed to have lived in Odio's apartment .
 When questioned in 1978 by the Select Committee, Einspruch did not mention Odio’s story of multiple Oswald sightings . Odio's story was not mentioned in 1978 when questioned by the committee .
 He thought she had told him of the three visitors, but he did not remember hearing the name Leon or about the Leopoldo telephone call before the assassination . Instead, he thought she told him that she'd told him .
 On the day JFK was killed, Odio suffered one of her emotional seizures, passed out, and was hospitalized . Odio was hospitalized after suffering an emotional seizure on JFK's assassination .
 Einspruch spoke to her the day after the assassination, while she was still hospitalized . The day after her assassination, she spoke with her .
 He blamed her divorce and the imprisonment of their parents in Cuba for her emotional collapse . He blamed their parents' imprisonment for their emotional collapse on her .
 Silvia Herrera, her mother-in-law, said Odio was an excellent actress who could intelligently fabricate such an episode if she wished . Odio's mother, Silvia, also said she was a good actress .
 Though she thought she had met the assassin, she never contacted any government or law enforcement agency to tell her story . One of the most unusual aspects of the Odio case is that she never told any government .
 Carlos Bringuier, the New Orleans anti-Castro leader who was arrested in a street fracas with Oswald, had met Odio once . Odio was a leader in New Orleans .
 A neighbor casually told a neighbor, and that neighbor told the FBI, the only reason it came out . The FBI is investigating the case, but it's not clear why .
 It doesn't sound right, and I know from my own personal experience on what I did and how I felt when I realized I had some contact with the man who killed the President of the United States. "It doesn’t sound right," he says .
 Maybe with all the news after the assassination she became confused and put Oswald’s face and name onto the person she actually met, she said . Maybe she put Oswald's name and name on the person who actually met .
 There is an accident with four witnesses and they give four different versions and they all believe they are telling the truth, and could even pass a lie detector . There is no one who believes they could pass the lie detector and pass the test . There are four witnesses in the accident who give
 There is not a single piece of corroborating evidence, however, for her postassassination claim that one of the men was introduced as ‘Leon Oswald’ and that the next day a Cuban called to discuss a Marine sharpshooter and his death threats .
 Oswald had tried to renounce his American citizenship in Moscow in 1959 . Odio thought she had been visited by Oswald in Texas, but he was actually undergoing one of his most important encounters .
 At the Cuban embassy, it was a typical Friday morning for Silvia Duran, a young Mexican woman . She worked as the secretary to the Cuban consul, Eusebio Azcue .
 Duran remembers him as tentative, but once he discovered she spoke English, he seemed more relaxed . Duran: "Once she discovered that he spoke English he became more relaxed" Duran says Duran was tentative at first .
 In a monologue that lasted almost fifteen minutes, he told her he was going to the USSR but that on the way he wanted a transit visa to stop in Cuba, for at least two weeks . In the monologue, he proceeded to tell her he wanted to stop for two weeks
 He then placed documents on her desk, each accompanied with a short explanation . He then began placing documents on the desk, all accompanied by an explanation .
 Duran remembered his Russian work papers, membership cards in the Fair Play for Cuba Committee and the American Communist party . Duran's correspondence with Communist organizations in the U.S. and the Communist Party in the United States .
 He told her he expected to be promptly issued a visa since he “was a friend of the Cuban revolution,” and that he wanted to leave by September 30, only three days later . He said he was "a friend of Cuba's revolution"
 Duran called on Eusebio Azcue to see if he might expedite the process for Oswald . Oswald should have begun filling out a lengthy application, but Duran asked Azcue for help .
 Duran helped him fill out the application, and told him he needed to return with passport-size photographs . Duran also told him to return to the application with passport size photographs .
 When he returned to the Cuban consulate, Duran helped him complete the application . Duran stapled photographs to the original and five carbon copies . The application was approved by the Cuban government .
 Duran "semi-officially" called the Soviet embassy to see whether she could facilitate his application . While he had been gone, Duran called the embassy to ask if she could help him .
 The staff was noncommittal but indicated the process could take four months . The process is expected to take up to four months to complete . The staff said it could take a year to complete the process .
 Oswald began protesting loudly about the extensive paperwork and insisting on his right to get a visa for Cuba immediately . Oswald then insisted on getting a visa to Cuba immediately.
 Consul Azcue walked out of his office to see about the commotion . The consul consul's office was in the middle of the incident .
 Azcue told Oswald he could grant Oswald a fifteen-day visit for Cuba without having to contact the Cuban government . Azcue also told Oswald that if he had a Soviet visa, he could give Oswald a 15-day Cuba visit .
 Without a Soviet visa, Oswald would have to go through the normal procedures, which could take two to three weeks . Azcue reminded Oswald that without a visa, he would need to go to the Soviet visa .
 Duran remembered Oswald looked angry, and became so noisy that the new Cuban consul, Alfredo Mirabal Diaz, also came out of his office to see what was causing the disturbance .
 Oswald quickly walked two short blocks to the Soviet embassy . Oswald left the Cuban compound when he left the compound . Oswald had a brief walk to the embassy in Moscow .
 He approached the sentry at the entrance to the compound and demanded to see someone from the consulate . Once he arrived, he approached a sentry . He demanded to be seen by the consulate.
 It was not every day that a young American who had a rudimentary grasp of Russian, and had lived in the USSR for nearly three years, walked into the embassy .
 Oswald was taken to the consul’s office and joined by a KGB agent . Valeriy Vladimirovich Kostikov was an undercover KGB agent operating under the diplomatic cover of a consul corps officer .
 Kostikov was soon joined by another KGB agent, Oleg Maximovich Nechiporenko . He was a KGB agent in the Soviet Union .
 He told KGB officers that he was desperate to return to Russia . He claimed that the FBI was harassing him because of his leftist politics and his Russian wife . He told the KGB officers .
 Oswald promised that he had interesting information to give them about his time in America . Oswald was trying to impress the Soviets that he was an important political activist .
 He regaled them about his work on behalf of Communism, and his efforts to infiltrate the anti-Castro Cubans and the right wing . He told them of his work in Cuba and his work for Communism .
 He said it was urgent for him to get to Cuba so he could provide information that could help prevent future CIA attacks . He said he would be able to provide information to the CIA .
 Ernesto Rodriguez, a former CIA contract agent, claimed Oswald hinted he had information on U.S. efforts to kill Castro . Oswald hinted that Oswald had information about the CIA's efforts to assassinate Castro .
 The Soviet agents, having had no previous contact with him, did not know what to believe and what to dismiss . They had no idea what was going on when they encountered him .
 The Soviet officers needed to contact headquarters in Moscow to determine whether Oswald was somebody to whom the KGB wanted to grant an immediate visa . The KGB needed to find out if Oswald was someone to whom they wanted a visa to grant .
 Nechiporenko put Oswald off until the next day, he informed Lee that the granting of a visa could take up to four monoths .
 The cable to Moscow about Oswald, from the KGB agents in Mexico City, ended up on the desk of the agent who had first handled the matter in 1959, Yuriy Nosenko . The cable was sent to Moscow from Mexico City in 1959 . It ended up in the desk
 A special cable arrived from the Soviet embassy in Mexico City seeking our advice . Then suddenly suddenly a special cable from the embassy in . Mexico City sought our advice, we said .
 Of course, Oswald didn't know he was being turned away because he was nuts . Oswald didn’t know that he was turned away from the hospital because of his insanity .
 According to Nechiporenko, it appears he first went to the Soviets to see if his visa was ready . According to the original version of this article, it is believed he went to Russia to get a visa .
 He could then take it to the Cubans and get his fifteen-day transit visa . He could also get a 15-day visa to Cuba . He has been in the U.S. since 2001 .
 Vladimir Putin spoke to a KGB captain operating under the cover identity of a consular officer . He spoke briefly to Pavel Antonovich Yatzkov, an undercover KGB captain . The KGB captain was operating under a cover identity as a consul officer .
 When they finally told him they would not issue him a visa, his initial fury turned to depression . He said he was depressed when they refused to issue a visa .
 Oswald left the compound after Oswald left, the three KGB agents discussed their unusual visitor . Oswald was the last KGB agent to leave Oswald's compound .
 Both Azcue and Oswald knew by this time that the Soviets were not going to issue a visa, so Azcue’s reasoning was merely a polite way of rejecting him .
 Oswald visited embassies a week after he visited the embassies, the CIA sent a memo about him to the FBI, the State Department, and the Navy . On October 10, 1963, Oswald visited the U.S. embassies in Washington, D.C. and New York .
 The CIA described the Oswald who contacted the Soviet embassy as “approximately 35 years old, with an athletic build, about six feet tall, with a receding hairline …”86 The description was based upon surreptitious photographs the Agency took of almost everyone who entered the
 The CIA’s Mexico City station had reviewed its surveillance photos and chosen the one it thought was Oswald . Oswald was Oswald's target in the Mexican city of Mexico City .
 Supposedly, when the CIA station chief for Mexico, Winston Scott, died, his safe was cleaned out, including a right-profile photo of Oswald entering the Soviet embassy . The safe was reportedly cleaned out after Scott's death, including the photo .
 Three former CIA employees told the House Select Committee they had seen such a photo . Three former employees said they'd seen such an image . The photo was a photo of a photo taken by the CIA .
 James Angleton personally flew to Mexico after Scott’s death and cleaned out his desk and safe . Angleton was responsible for Nosenko being branded as a KGB plant .
 Angleton is now dead, and if there was such a photo, he was the last to know of its whereabouts . Angleton was last person to know where the photo was taken .
 The CIA does not now have any photos of Oswald entering the embassies . The House Select Committee learned in its investigation, the House learned .
 Agency may have recorded as many as eight conversations it originally thought to be of Oswald . The Agency recorded conversations with the Soviet embassy or during his visits to the embassy . Agency may also have recorded eight conversations with Oswald .
 The CIA’s Winston Scott played part of a poor-quality tape recording that purported to include Oswald, several months after the assassination . W David Slawson, a Warren Commission staff counsel, said part of the tape was played by Scott .
 In 1976, a former chief of CIA operations in Latin America indicated a transcript of an Oswald phone call to the Soviet embassy still existed . The transcript of Oswald's call to Soviet embassy to the embassy still exists, according to reports .
 If we kept everything we recorded, you couldn’t find enough warehouses to store them . If you kept everything you recorded, it would be impossible to store it in a warehouse .
 Once something is transcribed, we don’t need the tape, and it’s reused. So once something is . transcribed . We don't need to use the tape. We need to be able to use it again and again .
 Keeping the tape might be more of an indication that there was a special interest in this fellow . Keeping tape may be a sign of interest in the deceased, says CNN.com .
 Since there isn’t a tape, no one is sure that we recorded the right person . However, since there isn't a tape it's impossible to say who is the person .
 There's a good chance that we might have recorded the same man we photographed, thinking the entire time we had surveillance on Oswald . Just like we made an error in photographing the wrong man, there’s a good possibility that Oswald was the same person .
 Cuban consul Azcue testified before the House Select Committee that the man he argued with for 15 minutes at the Cuban embassy does not look like the photographs of Lee Harvey Oswald . Their argument is bolstered by the testimony of the consul .
 He described the man at the embassy as ten years older, with dark blond hair, and thinner . The man is described as a 10-year-old man with dark hair and thinner, he said .
 Lopez’s report was sealed by the Select Committee, fueling the debate over the issue . Lopez's report is sealed, but it has fueled the debate .
 The real Oswald visited both embassies, but evidence is overwhelming that he visited both . Oswald was the only person to visit both embassies in the U.S. Oswald is believed to have been Oswald .
 Two Cuban employees positively identified the visitor as Oswald . The other employees at the Cuban embassy, Silvia Duran and Alfredo .
 Cuba finally gave the original of Oswald’s visa application to the U.S. government in 1978 . The original of the application was given to the United States government . Oswald's visa application was eventually returned to Cuba .
 Handwriting experts for the House Select Committee verified that the two signatures on the applications belonged to him . The two signatures were found to belong to him, the committee said .
 The six passport-size photographs that Duran told him to have taken, and then stapled to the top of each application, are definitely of Oswald . The passport-sized photographs were taken by Duran, who was in charge of the CIA .
 In the unlikely event an imposter brought back those pictures of the real Oswald, he would have to hope that Duran would not notice he was submitting photos of someone other than himself .
 Oswald argued loudly at the Cuban embassy on at least two occasions after he had brought in his photos, attracting the attention of several employees . Oswald argued loud at the embassy after he brought in photos .
 The man at the Cuban embassy was the same as the man in the visa photos . Alfredo Mirabal Diaz only walked out of his office because of the commotion, and later testified that he was the man .
 An imposter, trying to pass off photos of Oswald as himself, would not create two noisy scenes in which people had a chance to study and remember him . "An imposter" would not have created a noisy scene of his life, he says .
 Cuban evidence is clear that the real Oswald brought the photos and signed the applications . Until recently, there had been no Soviet confirmation regarding the visits to its embassy .
 In 1992, one of the KGB agents who met with Oswald finally broke his silence and helped settle any lingering doubts . However, in 1992, the KGB agent who met Oswald finally told his story .
 Oleg Nechiporenko says he met Oswald on September 27 and 28, 1963, in Mexico City . He said ‘without hesitation’ that it was the same man who was arrested two months later for killing President Kennedy .
 KGB agents Valeriy Kostikov and Pavel Yatzkov also met Oswald in Mexico City . The other KGB agents who met Oswald confirmed they had seen the real Oswald .
 The Warren Commission concluded that since he was dejected and frustrated after his confrontations at the two embassies, he spent the remainder of his time quietly, and alone . The commission concluded that he spent most of his life quietly, alone .
 The Commission relied on the statements of employees in Oswald’s hotel and at nearby restaurants . The Commission used statements from employees in the hotel and nearby restaurants to determine the truth .
 He spent on average between 40c and 48c for each meal . Often refused dessert and coffee because he didn't realize it was part of the set price .
 Oswald’s map of Mexico City, found in his possessions after the assassination, had pen markings on it . The map was found in Oswald's possessions after his assassination .
 Other locations include museums, parks, general sight-seeing landmarks, and even a movie with subtitles .
 He later told Marina about his tourist activities, even claiming he had gone to a bullfight . He later said he had even gone to the bullfight in Spain .
 Silvia Duran, the Cuban embassy employee, admitted to the House Select Committee that she advised Oswald that it would help his visa application if he could get a letter from a Mexican in good standing with the Cuban revolutionary hierarchy .
 He told them his name was Lee Harvey Oswald, the name of a popular cartoon rabbit . Contreras and his friends remembered the name because it was also the name he was also a popular rabbit . He said he told them he was Oswald .
 Contreras adds weight to the imposter Oswald story by claiming the man was at least three inches shorter than the real Oswald . Oswald was five feet six inches at the most, at least 3 inches short of the real man .
 He told Contreras he was dissatisfied with the United States and harassed by the FBI . He said he was hoping to go to Cuba but could not get a visa to get there . He told his friends that he was a painter from Texas .
 Contreras and his associates were strongly pro-Castro and viewed the United States as a great imperialistic power . He had found the right group, as he had found them the right thing .
 They also personally knew consul Azcue, and promised to put in a good word for Oswald . They also promised to help put in good words .
 Contreras spoke to Azcue and a Cuban intelligence agent, he was told to break off contacts with Oswald . The embassy was suspicious he might be a provocation from American intelligence, he says .
 Oswald supposedly came back to Contreras and his friends and even spent the night at their apartment, most likely Sunday, September 29 . Oswald supposedly spent that night at Contreraras' apartment . Oswald is believed to have spent most of the night there .
 When he left in the morning he was still begging for help to get to Cuba . But when he left, he still begged for help getting to Cuba. He was still asking for help the morning .
 Summers wrote that when the CIA received information about Contreras’s claim in 1967, it did not adequately pursue it, allowing leads to grow cold in the subsequent decades . Summers: The CIA was not adequately pursuing the claim in the 1970s .
 The House Select Committee failed to find Contreras, but Summers located him in Tampico, Mexico, and judged him truthful . Summers found him in Mexico .
 When the author tried to interview Contreras in 1992, he refused, dodging telephone calls for several weeks . He refused to talk to the author in 1992 when he asked to interview him .
 The author discovered Summers’s original notes about his September 23, 1978, interview with Contreras . Summers's original notes were found at a Washington, D.C., archive .
 Contreras told Summers that while Oswald said he was from Texas in earlier years, he lived in San Francisco at the time he was visiting Mexico City . The notes disclosed that Contreas told Summers he lived there at time of Oswald's visit .
 Summers needed a translator to speak with Contreras, but Oswald did not speak Spanish and there is no explanation for how they supposedly communicated . Also, there was no explanation why Oswald and Summers didn't speak Spanish .
 Contreras also claimed Oswald told him about his police problems in New Orleans, but those events took place nearly four years after he claimed to have met Oswald . Oswald also claimed that he told him he had problems with New Orleans police in the early 1960s .
 In 1978, Summers lists the date that Contreras met Oswald as 1963, yet he says he was not even living in Mexico City in 1963 when Oswald visited . The date is listed as 1963 .
 Oswald’s activities in Mexico City, in a best-selling book, is instructive about the pitfalls that beset the research on this subject . However, that it was presented as credible and relevant about Oswald's activities in . Mexico City is a city of Mexico City .
 Oswald's trip to Mexico City often passed as true but, upon closer inspection, are also not credible . There are other stories that emerged from Oswald’s trip that often pass as true . Oswald's story is not true, but it's not credible, according to CNN.com
 In an article in the National Enquirer with a byline by Comer Clark, a British reporter said to have claimed that Lee Oswald came to the Cuban embassy in Mexico City twice .
 The Select Committee concluded Calderon’s statement was “braggadocio” and that Oswald did not voice a threat against President Kennedy while at the Cuban embassy . On November 25, 1963, only three days after the assassination, a young Nicaraguan, Gilberto
 He said in September he overheard a conversation among Oswald, a Cuban, and a black man . Oswald was a Cuban and black man, according to U.S. officials . Oswald is believed to have been killed by the Cuban government .
 Alvarado also asserted that he had tried to warn the embassy before the assassination, but was ignored . He said he was ignored by the embassy, and that he tried to get them to stop .
 He said the Mexicans had coerced him to retract . Then, when requestioned by the Americans, he said he had been forced to retract. Then he said the Americans coerced him .
 Later he said he was no longer sure of the date, and the person only resembled Oswald . He later said he no longer knew the date of the person he saw .
 Alvarado is now so discredited that few repeat his story . Ambassador Thomas Mann, the U.S. representative in Mexico at the time, was not convinced the story was completely false .
 When he was later returned to the U.S., he was sentenced to twenty years’ imprisonment . He told the House Select Committee that while in Cuba he had worked in a Cuban intelligence facility .
 The FBI and CIA were unable to substantiate the existence of an ‘Osvaldo-Kennedy’ file . The committee said that although there was independent confirmation of other allegations Ramirez made .
 When he had decided to defect to Russia in 1959, he had obtained a Soviet visa in Helsinki within a few days . When he defected to Russia, he was able to obtain a visa in a matter of days .
 He had fully expected the same thing to happen with the Cubans, especially in light of his extensive political activism . He had expected the death penalty to be dropped in Cuba .
 Returning to America was tantamount to admitting defeat, but with limited funds, he could not stay much longer . Returning to the U.S. would have been a huge mistake, he said .
 Colonel Nechiporenko claims he spoke to him at least once, and Oswald asked if there had been any change about granting him a visa . Oswald asked for a visa, which he claims was granted to him .
 Oswald spent $20.30 on a Transportes del Norte bus from Mexico City to Nuevo Laredo and then by Greyhound into Texas . Oswald then walked the several blocks from his hotel to a travel agency in Chihuahuense .
 Oswald paid his hotel bill through that night . Oswald paid the hotel bill the following day, Tuesday, October 1 . Oswald's hotel bill was paid the next day .
 Other passengers recall that at the border crossing, he was pulled off and questioned about his Mexican tourist papers . Initially the border guards thought his fifteen-day visa had expired . The border guards initially thought his visa was expired .
 Oswald showed his entry stamp to prove he had not been in Mexico past the prescribed time . It was over fifteen days since the visa was issued, but Oswald showed them his visa stamp . Oswald's visa was over 15 days since it was issued but he was allowed to stay in Mexico .
 Other passengers heard him grumbling about the bureaucrats at the border . When it was resolved and he returned to the bus, other passengers heard his grumbling .
 He arrived at Laredo at 3:00 A.M. and did not finish the last leg of his trip until 2:20 in the afternoon on Thursday, October 3 .
 Oswald’s life prior to September 26 happened before it was publicly known that the President would visit Texas. Every event in Oswald's life before that day was public knowledge of the President's visit .
 Even Oswald’s trip to Mexico was planned before the announcement, and if he had gotten a visa to Cuba, Kennedy and Oswald would never have crossed paths in another two months .
 Critics who write about suspicions of a conspiracy before this date never explain how Oswald was supposedly brought into a plot that had no possible sense of time and place, two indispensable ingredients . Critics of the conspiracy never explain why Oswald was supposed to have been brought into the plot .
 He was so nervous about having sat next to the man accused of killing JFK that he denied he had, although the other passengers and his travel documents show he did . He was nervous about sitting next to him, but he denied it, although he did, but his travel records show he
 Osborne told one of the other passengers that Lee told him he had been to Mexico before . Osborne told another passenger that in his conversation with Oswald, Lee said he'd been there before . Lee told Osborne that in Mexico, Lee had visited Mexico before, Osborne said .
 Oswald was talking about his Marine Corps visit to Tijuana or if he was lying about visiting Mexico on other occasions . It is not known if Oswald was referring to his visit .
 Mumford and Winston were in a Las Vegas hotel room when Oswald was shown in the Dallas jail . Mumford was in a hotel room watching the news about the assassination . Winston and Mumford were in the hotel room at the time .
 They immediately identified him, startled that he even had on the same sweater he had worn on the bus . They were shocked that he had even worn the sweater he wore that day .
 Only those instances most often advanced by the critics will be considered in this and the following chapter . The following chapter will focus on some of the most recent examples .
 Odio came from a wealthy and pampered background . He had been a business tycoon before the Castro’s revolution .
 Odio said that the Cubans gave their war names, but she assumed Leon Oswald was a real name for the American . Odio: "Leon Oswald" was the real name .
 Oswald would have been a perfect war name for any anti-Castro Cuban since the name had been in the newspapers, radio, and television, and TV . However, she evidently never considered the possibility that Oswald would be the perfect name for a Cuban Cuban .
 The Soviets had both consular and diplomatic branches in the same building . The Soviets were in the building at the time of the Cold War .
 The Cuban and Soviet embassies will be referred to in this chapter . They will be known as the embassies of Cuba and Soviet Union .
 The author's interpretation of the Cubans’ testimony is that he might have visited them first . He told his wife he first went to the Soviet embassy, but the author’s interpretation is that .
 Two employees at the Cuban embassy claimed that Oswald had one . However, two of the employees at Cuban embassy said he had a gun . Oswald is believed to have been killed by the Cuban government .
 After the assassination, the American Communist party denied that he was ever a member .
 The card may have been counterfeit, made at the same time as his Hidell identifications . It is believed to have been made in the same place as those of the Hidell IDs .
 The CIA refuses to confirm or deny whether it ever recorded a conversation between Oswald and the Soviets made from the Cuban embassy . The CIA has never confirmed or denied whether it recorded the conversation .
 He then hired a Californian, Brian Litman, to represent him, and he began working on a book based on his meeting with Oswald . He hired a California-based lawyer to represent his client .
 Kostikov’s identity has been known since December 1963 . CIA said he was reportedly chief of KGB terrorism squads in the Western Hemisphere . The Warren Commission was concerned about his identity .
 Oswald actually entered through the embassy’s front entrance . He met with the KGB officers in a windowed, nonsecure consul's office . Oswald entered the embassy's front entrance and met with officers in the nonsecure room .
 Oswald made high-profile visits to two Communist embassies so that Oswald’s leftist credentials would be enhanced . In this scenario, an imposter made high profile visits to Communist embassies to boost his leftist credentials . Oswald's leftist credentials were enhanced .
 After the assassination, the CIA discovered it had a photo of him in its Minsk file . The photo was found in the CIA's file .
 In 1961, the Agency’s Domestic Contact Division had made copies of some pictures taken by tourists . The agency's domestic contact division had copies of the pictures .
 The unidentified American was not of interest until the Agency realized, several years later, who he was . The Agency later realized he was an American .
 Even years after the event, the lack of full disclosure is often interpreted as evidence of conspiracy . Because it is so protective of sources and its means of obtaining information, even years after it was revealed .
 CIA’s failure to be forthright is an inherent part of the intelligence trade, but it's not unique to its handling of the Oswald case . The CIA has been criticized for not being forthright about the Oswald investigation .
 The descriptions he gave to the House Select Committee were based on his recall of an event fifteen years earlier . The descriptions of the events he gave were based upon an event 15 years ago .
 Azcue wavered when told by the committee that the visa-application signatures had been verified as belonging to Oswald, Azcue said . But when told that the visas-apparture signatures were verified, he wavered .
 A Mexican author, Elena Garro de Paz, said she saw Oswald at a ‘twist party’ at Duran's brother-in-law’s house . The party took place over the weekend of September 27 .
 Garro claims Oswald had two companions and that she overheard consul Azcue, also at the party, tell another person that there was no alternative but to kill President Kennedy . Garro says the consul consul told another person he had no alternative to kill Kennedy .
 Duran admits there was a twist party at her brother-in-law’s house around this time . She is adamant that Oswald was not there . Duran says Oswald was never there .
 It is highly unlikely that Duran would have invited Oswald and Azcue to the same party after the almost violent fight they had on Saturday, September 28 .
 Former police official Salvador Diaz Verson claimed to have seen Duran and Oswald at a restaurant, Caballo Blanco Parren, on September 28, also remains uncorroborated . Another instance, in which a former police official, Salvador Diaz . Verson, also a former
 The Cuban government later explained that the move had been planned for more than six months . But it said that his replacement, Alfredo Mirabal Diaz, had been there for several months .
 Alvarado story must have contributed to LBJ's early suspicion of LBJ . LBJ’s early suspicion was fueled by the story of the Mexican war hero .
 At first, this seemed an important confirmation of Alvarado’s story, but the Gutierrez claim also crumbled upon subsequent investigation . The Gutierrez claim crumbled after subsequent investigation.
 A CIA source pinpointed a Cuban, Gilberto Lopez, who had contact with the Tampa branch of Fair Play for Cuba, as a conspirator . Then, within days of the Gutierrez allegation, a CIA source pointed out a Cuban . Lopez is a former member of the Florida branch of
 Lopez rushed into Mexico the day after the assassination, went to the Cuban embassy in Mexico City . He was spirited to Havana on a Cubana airlines flight that had waited hours only for him . Lopez was flown to Havana hours after his assassination .
 While the Warren Commission’s investigation of this story was weak, the Select Committee extensively researched it . The Select Committee thoroughly researched the story .
 The Committee was troubled by the CIA’s original handling of the Lopez report . The Committee did not discover any evidence that established a link to the assassination .
 Oswald may have phoned again the following day, Tuesday, October 1 . There is also a possibility that Oswald telephoned again that day . Oswald is believed to have been involved in the assassination of President Richard Nixon .
 Oswald spoke to a guard who told him that only by personally visiting the embassy could he obtain any further information . The guard told Oswald to go to the embassy to obtain further information, the guard said . The CIA may have intercepted one of these conversations .
 Twiford's name, address, and two telephone numbers were found in Oswald’s book after the assassination . Oswald's book was found in his book . Twifords' name and address were found .
 One was a disconnected number, which was still listed in the 1963 Houston phone book . Another was listed in 1963 Houston, Texas, phone book, still listed .
 The second number in his address book was Twiford’s valid one for September 1963 . It was a valid one from September 1963, according to the address book . The address book is a valid number for September .
 Oswald looked up the Twifords in the phone book, and wrote the number in his address book . Oswald arrived in Houston, Houston, Texas, in the early days of the assassination . Oswald was killed by a single bullet shot in the head .
 He had fully expected he would be calling her from Cuba, and he could not bring himself to talk to her that first day . He had expected she would call him from Cuba .
 He went straight to the YMCA, where he had stayed a year earlier when he had moved to Dallas to find work . Instead of looking for work, he went to a Dallas YmCA to stay at home .
 Later that same day he checked in at the Texas Employment Commission, filed a claim for the last of his unemployment checks . He emphasized that he needed to find work quickly . He filed the claim for his unemployment check .
 He listed his address as 2515 West 5th Street in the Dallas suburb of Irving, Texas . Ruth Paine’s house, where Marina was staying, was where she was staying .
 Oswald reviewed the newspaper’s help-wanted ads and applied for work as a typesetter at the Padgett Printing Company . Oswald applied the following day, Friday, October 4, for work at the company . Oswald: "I'm going to be a great guy,
 He made a favorable impression on the plant superintendent, Theodore Gangl, who was prepared to hire him . Gangl: "He made a good impression on him, and he got a good job"
 Oswald called one of Oswald’s references, Jaggars-Chiles-Stovall, and spoke to Robert Stovall . However, before committing himself, he telephoned one of the references . Oswald's references were Jaggar-Jaggars, Ch
 Marina was too tired to send Ruth Paine to pick him up and bring him to the Paine home in Irving, Texas . Ruth had just donated blood at the hospital in case it was necessary during the birth, Marina said, but she was tired .
 He hitchhiked the twelve miles to the Paine’s home and arrived within an hour . The Paine family is proud of their efforts to raise money for charity .
 He began to complain bitterly about his mistreatment by embassies in Mexico City .
 He described how they shuttled him back and forth, each waiting for the other to act first . He denounced the “bureaucrats” and “red tape” that had frustrated his goals .
 She said he never again talked of ‘Uncle Fidel,’ fighting in the Cuban revolution, or of visiting Havana . She says he never talked again of visiting Cuba or visiting the island .
 He told her about the rest of his trip, including the embassies, he said . Once he vented his frustration, she asked him to share his story with her .
 He gave her postcards of bullfights as well as a small silver bracelet inscribed with her name . He claimed he bought the bracelet in Mexico, but probably purchased at a Dallas five-and-dime store .
 Considering his setbacks, he was affectionate and kept saying how much he had missed her . His only real distraction was the concern for finding work .
 Marina asked Ruth to stay with her husband until he found a job and a new apartment . Ruth drove him to the bus station on Monday, October 7, after a relatively quiet weekend . He asked if Marina could stay with him until he finds a new job and apartment .
 He paid the $7 weekly rent in advance, registered under his real name, and moved in that same day . He moved in the same day, paying the rent under the real name .
 He searched daily for work, telephoning and visiting the employment commission and prospective employers, but had no success . He said: "I'm looking for a job, but I can't find it"
 He was angry when he left for Ruth Paine's house, convinced that his landlady’s abrupt rejection meant the FBI was back on his trail and had been asking about him .
 For the second weekend in a row, Marina and Lee did not argue, perhaps because the baby was due any day . The couple's baby is expected to be born any day soon .
 They were concerned that since Lee was so cruel to Marina, he might be violent toward them as well . They were worried that since he might have been violent to Marina they might also be violent to them . Lee was the father of one of the children .
 Marina was the only one who knew about Lee’s Mexico City trip, but she misunderstood how that affected him . Marina was only one of the only ones to know about Lee's Mexico trip, she said .
 She viewed his apparent withdrawal from political action as a turn for the good . She said it was a good move for the country .
 To Ruth and Michael Paine, he now seemed just like someone who was trying hard to support his family and find work . Ruth Paine: "To Ruth, it's just like a person trying to support her family"
 Even when the commission sent him for low-paying jobs like a clerk-trainee at Burton-Dixie, at $1.25 per hour, he was not hired . Even when he was sent to work, he didn't get a job .
 Oswald feared that he was losing some job opportunities because he could not drive and could only work at places reached by public transportation . According to Ruth, Ruth feared that Oswald would lose some jobs because he couldn't drive .
 On Monday, October 14, Ruth, who had errands in Dallas, drove him into the city . Ruth says he's a good Samaritan, but he's never been to Dallas .
 Later that day, while having coffee with some neighbors, she had a conversation that would have a profound impact on future events . The conversation led her to think about the future of her life .
 Ruth, Marina, Dorothy Roberts and Linnie Mae Randle were discussing Lee’s difficulty in obtaining work . Ruth and Marina were talking about Lee's difficulty in finding work .
 Roberts and Randle were also young mothers, and they empathized with Oswald's predicament . Marina’s second child was about to be born, and she was pregnant again .
 Linnie Mae Randle recalled that Wesley Buell Frazier, her younger brother, “had just looked for a job, and I had helped him try to find one.” Randle helped him find a job . Randle: “I had helped my brother try
 Buell had applied for jobs at Manor Bakery and Texas Gypsum Company, but both involved driving a truck . Randle said that both jobs were not practical for Lee, but he wanted to continue working .
 Roy Truly: "You don’t know who I am but I have a neighbor whose brother works for you. The phone was taken to Mr Truly … and I talked with him ...” Truly .
 Except for weekend visits to his wife, they later reported he never went out at night or had a single visitor . Except for weekends visits, they said he never had a night out or had any visitors .
 Johnson says he stayed inside his room “95 percent of the time,” and the remainder silently in front of the communal television “with the other men renters and he wouldn’t speak to them. Instead, Johnson says, he stayed in his room 95 percent of
 "I would say, ‘Good afternoon,’ and he would just … give me a dirty look and keep walking and go on to his room," she says .
 Oswald went to Dealey Plaza, in downtown Dallas, on October 15, 1963 . Oswald was killed in Dallas, Texas, following the assassination of President Kennedy .
 He told him he had just been honorably discharged from the Marines, where he had office duties . He said he was honorably discharged from the Marines .
 One position was in a storage warehouse some distance from Dealey Plaza . The position was located in storage warehouse in a parking lot . One position in the warehouse was in the storage warehouse .
 Truly decided he seemed earnest enough to hire him as a clerk at the main building, to fill book orders, at $1.25 per hour . Truly decided to work at the library at the end of the day .
 Truly told him to report to work the following morning, October 16, which was the start of a new pay period . Truly said he was told to report the next day . Truly told the reporter to report back to work .
 He told her it was good to be working with books, and the work would not tire him . He said it would be good to work with books .
 His primary responsibility was to fill textbook orders, by finding the books in the Depository and then bringing them to the first floor, where the orders were processed .
 The work atmosphere was a relaxed one, and people left Lee alone, which he liked, he said . Lee said: 'People were left alone, and he liked. People left him alone'
 Oswald sat in recreation room where workers ate lunch and sometimes played dominoes . Oswald sat by himself, reading day-old newspapers in the recreation room . Oswald was one of the most famous men in American history .
 Buell Frazier, Linnie Mae Randle’s brother, was the first person to talk to Randle . Frazier was Randle's brother . Frazier: Randle is "a good guy, a good guy and a good person"
 Oswald’s wife was staying at the Paines’ house in Irving, Irving, when Frazier discovered they were neighbors . Oswald lived only a block from Frazier, who lived just a block away from the Paine .
 When he arrived at the Paines’, he was startled by a small surprise birthday party . Ruth and Marina had planned a small birthday party for him .
 Marina remembered that Lee was so touched that he had tears in his eyes . Marina said Lee was touched by the touching gesture . Lee was moved to tears of his own .
 He was emotional the remainder of the evening, crying and apologizing to Marina for what he had put her through . The actor was emotional throughout the evening .
 Marina gave birth to her first child on Sunday evening . The baby is expected to be born on Sunday .
 Ruth drove her to Parkland Hospital, while Lee baby-sat with the household’s three children . Ruth drove to the hospital around 9:00 P.M. while Lee was baby-sittering the children .
 Oswald was in the guest bedroom with a light on, but he did not come out to ask any questions . Ruth returned after checking Marina into Parkland, and Oswald returned to check Marina .
 Ruth stayed up, telephoning the hospital until she heard before midnight that Marina had given birth to a second daughter . Ruth stayed in touch with Marina and her family at the hospital in New York City .
 Ruth told Lee Lee the following morning before he left with Frazier for work . Ruth later told Lee the next morning that Frazier had been a good friend . Ruth said Lee that Frazier was a good guy .
 Frazier drove Oswald to the Depository on Monday, October 21, and then took him back to Irving that evening . Frazier took Oswald to Irving, Texas, the day before he was killed .
 Ruth was surprised that he did not want to go to Parkland until she discovered he feared he feared that if the hospital knew he had a job, he would have to pay for Marina’s stay . Ruth feared he would be forced to go back to work if he knew he
 Ruth had already told the hospital the previous evening that he was employed, and she assured him that his salary was so low that his maternity care was still free . Ruth told him that the hospital had already paid for his wife's maternity care .
 He had promised Marina that he would never again try to kill Walker . But now that he had returned to Dallas, he could not escape thinking about the right-wing general .
 Walker was more active than ever in politics; he was talking of again running for political office, and the failed assassination attempt had even created a backlash of sympathy for him . Walker was speaking of running for office again .
 Oswald attended a right-wing rally at which Walker addressed 1,300 people . Oswald attended the rally on Wednesday . Walker addressed the rally .
 Oswald had stalked Oswald for nearly two months before first trying to kill him . It is not known if Oswald was stalking him that night, as he had been for two months .
 Oswald's fears about the growth of the political right were exacerbated by the incident . Oswald's fear of the right was compounded by the media coverage of the shooting . Oswald feared the rise of right-wing extremism in the United States .
 The Walker surveillance was news that would have greatly upset Marina, but he did not tell her . He did tell her he was under surveillance .
 He did not report his activities to Arnold Johnson of the American Communist party . He did, however, report him to Johnson .
 Oswald and Michael Paine had a long political discussion on Friday, October 25, at Ruth’s house for the weekend . Oswald and Paine met at Ruth's house to discuss their political differences .
 "He was definitely not a proponent of nonviolent change, the Gandhi method," he says . "He definitely was not a supporter of the nonviolent change," he adds .
 Paine told him that he had attended a John Birch meeting that same night . Paine said he attended the meeting that night . The meeting took place at the same time as the meeting of John Birch .
 Paine visited in the hope of opening a dialogue between left and right . Paine hopes to open a dialogue with the left and the right .
 He told the group about his visit to the Walker meeting at which a John Birch spokesman had made anti-Semitic and anti-Catholic attacks .
 Krystinik almost got into a fight with Oswald when he attacked the free enterprise system, but the older man won Lee over with some kind words about Cuba . The two men met in New York City, New York, at the White House .
 Oswald told Michael he thought the older man was a Communist, since he talked favorably about Cuba . Oswald later told Michael that he thought he thought his friend was a communist .
 Michael and Ruth noticed that Lee’s more convivial attitude that existed since his return to Dallas was disappearing . Michael noticed that the convivivial atmosphere that existed with Lee was disappearing.
 He snapped at Marina for failing to get him iced tea or to iron his shirts correctly . Marina had been trying to get the man to get his ice tea .
 If he finished eating ahead of the others, he often just left the table, without saying a word, and watched television in the living room .
 Never did he offer the Paines any money toward Marina’s or his daughters’ upkeep . The Paines never received any money from his estate .
 Lee was the same Lee they had come to know, and dislike, a year earlier . Lee was Lee's successor to President Barack Obama . Lee is now the president of the United States .
 Oswald was not aware that the FBI had taken a renewed interest in him because of his Mexico City trip . Oswald settled back into Dallas, Texas, in the first three weeks of his new life . Oswald had not been aware of the FBI interest .
 Oswald was in contact with the Soviet embassy in Mexico City in the early part of October . Oswald was now possibly an espionage case . Oswald attended the ACLU meeting the same day he attended the meeting .
 Oswald had filed a change of address from his Magazine Street apartment to Irving, Texas . The New Orleans office notified the Dallas FBI that Oswald might have moved there . Oswald had moved from Magazine Street to Irving .
 Hosty was assigned the case, and he first had to determine whether Oswald had actually moved to Texas . Hosty is assigned to investigate whether Oswald actually moved in to Texas.
 Hosty asked a neighbor of the Paines some questions on October 29 . Hosty went to Irving, Texas, to find out what happened to the family .
 He learned that a Russian-born, Russian-speaking woman was living with Ruth Paine . Paine learned that she was living in a home with Paine's daughter .
 On Thursday, October 31, Hosty ran a credit check on the Paines and conducted some more interviews with those who knew them . Hosty also conducted interviews with friends and family members .
 Since he did not consider Ruth Paine “a hostile witness,” he didn't bring along another agent for the interview . He did not bring along a second agent .
 Hosty parked in front of a neighboring house and knocked on the Paines’ front door . Hosty says he hopes to find out if he will be able to find them again .
 After telling her the FBI was not a witch-hunting organization, he slowly turned the conversation to Cuba . The FBI is not witch-harped, he said, but the FBI is a good organization .
 Marina told Hosty, with Ruth translating, “Oh, don’t worry about him.” Hosty . When he said he knew of her husband’s Fair Play for Cuba work in New Orleans, Marina told him, ‘Oh, Don’
 Frazier dropped Oswald off at the Paines’ only a few hours after Hosty had left . Oswald was found dead in front of Hosty’s house . Oswald had been with Hosty for more than a decade .
 He became nervous and agitated, and demanded to know everything that was said . He became agitated and agitated. He became very agitated.
 Ruth gave him the number and address for Hosty and noticed Lee sat quietly through dinner . Ruth gave Lee the address and noticed he sat quietly throughout the meal .
 Marina was told to write down the make, color, and license number of the FBI agent's car if they visited again . Marina's car was the car used by the FBI, the agent said .
 The White House instructed the Secret Service to examine three potential luncheon sites for November 22, the date chosen for the President’s Dallas visit . The following Monday, November 4, was instructed by the White House .
 One site, the Women’s Building at the State Fairgrounds, lacked the necessary food-handling capacity . The Market Hall was already booked for that date, and the Market Hall had already been booked .
 Special agent in charge of Dallas office convinced that special precautions could protect the President . That left the Trade Mart, and though it presented additional security problems, Forrest Sorrels was convinced that the president could be protected .
 Hosty had received a report from his New Orleans counterpart, Milton Kaack, and immediately saw that Oswald’s New Orleans FBI interview was filled with lies . Hosty later saw the New Orleans report was a cover-up and said Hosty believed Oswald was lying .
 Gary S Wilson, an agent just out of training school, returns for the second time . This time he was accompanied by Gary S. Wilson, a new agent from training school .
 She went around the side of the house and memorized Hosty’s license-plate number . She could not determine the car’�s make since she could not read English . Hosty's license plate number was memorized, but she couldn’t read English
 Marina may not have been upset by Hosty’s second visit, Ruth feared that Lee would indeed be . Ruth feared Lee would be upset by the second visit .
 Oswald called each day that week and asked if the FBI had visited again, Marina said no . Oswald called the next day each day to check on Marina's whereabouts . Marina told Oswald that the FBI never visited again .
 Oswald returned to the Paines’ house Friday, November 8, after Marina told him . Marina told Oswald when Oswald returned she was pregnant with a baby girl . Oswald returned home Friday, Nov. 8, to Marina's house, she said . Marina's husband, Oswald, was
 He was “seriously bothered by their having come out and inquired about him.” He said he’s “seriously bothered” that they have come out .
 Ruth, Marina, and the children went to the State Driver’s License Examining Station in Oak Cliff .
 Ruth had forgotten it was a local election day and it was closed . However, Ruth forgot it was an election day so it closed .
 They then spent some time at a local five-and-dime store before returning to Irving, Texas .
 On Sunday, Lee wrote a handwritten note to Marina and Marina . Lee had been working on the note the day before . Marina saw the note in the living room .
 The FBI is not now interested in my activities …”68 She knew that was not true . Although she had noticed it on Saturday, on this day it was folded so that she could see it .
 Since there was no address, she did not know where the letter was going to be sent . Since there is no address in the letter, she does not know if the letter is being sent .
 I had not planned to contact the Mexican City Embassy at all so of course they were unprepared for me . I had planned to call the embassy in Mexico City, Mexico, but it was a surprise .
 She was not only confused about why he would write such a note but also upset that he would do it in her home . She said she was shocked to find out that he had written a note to her .
 Marina noticed he was anxious, putting the letter through the typewriter twice before he had it in decent condition . Marina noticed the letter was anxious and put it through twice before it was ready to be sent .
 Marina found him withdrawn and he spent much of his time alone in the backyard . On his Monday holiday, when he was not working on the letter, he was withdrawn . Marina said he spent most of his holiday holiday alone .
 Oswald was with Marina and Ruth from Friday the eighth until he left with Buell Frazier to drive to work on Tuesday morning . Oswald was in the care of Ruth and Marina and Marina from Friday to Tuesday .
 Some claimed he had been at the Sports Drome Rifle Range that weekend practicing with his Carcano . However, after the assassination, some claimed he was practicing with the weapon .
 Witnesses say they saw him in the same place the following weekend . Other witnesses came forward and said they had also seen him there .
 Critics again raised the issue of an imposter, claiming that someone tried to frame him by sending a sharpshooter, with a similar weapon, to the range so people could later testify that Oswald was a good shot . Oswald's time was accounted for, but his time on the
 A review of the witness statements shows an honest mistake in identification . The witness statements were made in a false identification of the victim .
 There was no Oswald in the sign-up sheets at the range . An imposter certainly would have printed his name in the register to substantiate the frame .
 Four witnesses who originally thought it was Oswald could not later identify him when shown photographs . Four witnesses initially thought Oswald was Oswald were unable to identify him after being shown photos .
 Others said the ‘imposter’ had a new and brightly polished rifle and a Tasco scope . They described the rifle as having the wrong type of wooden stock and a barrel that was too long .
 “Oswald” drove a 1940 or 1941 Ford truck, or an old-model Chevrolet, or a Ford Hardtop . Depending on the witness, “Swald’s” car was either a 1941 or 1940 Ford truck .
 Garland Slack, one of the practice-range witnesses, said that “Oswald” had long hair and big ears . Slack: “The man with long hair, big ears, had long ears and big hair"
 It is likely that on the same day Oswald sent the letter to the Soviet embassy in Washington, he also walked into the FBI office at 1114 Commerce Street, near the Depository, and asked if Agent Hosty was in . Slack admitted, ‘You see, you read the
 Hosty confronted Oswald in jail, and Oswald, upon hearing Hosty’s name, became very excited and started yelling, was it confirmed that the note was from Lee . Only after the assassination, when he confronted Oswald, he was able to confirm it was Oswald . Hosty
 Hosty says Shanklin first demanded to know why he had a note from Oswald . Hosty: Shanklin asked why he'd been given the note, and then demanded to see it .
 Hosty was called into Shanklin’s office two days after Oswald had been killed by Jack Ruby . Hosty again was called in two days later after Oswald was killed by Ruby .
 Hosty: "Oswald is dead now. There, his chief produced the note" Hosty says the note was delivered to Hosty's chief . Hosty claims the note said, "I'm dead now"
 Shanklin said he never knew about the note until 1975, Hosty is more credible . Shanklin testified before the Senate Intelligence Committee . Hosty was more credible than Shanklin .
 Some agents said they had even shown it to Shanklin . Shanklin is a former FBI agent .
 Hosty returned more than $1,000 of his salary that had been withheld from him in 1964 . Hosty was transferred to Kansas City from Dallas, Kansas City, in 1979 .
 The destruction of Oswald's note was against FBI regulations and is one of the Bureau’s worst breaches of trust in the case . The destruction was against the FBI regulations, according to the FBI .
 It allowed skeptics to question the FBI’s overall role and relationship to him . The FBI's role in the FBI's handling of the case was questioned .
 The FBI hid the existence of the note from the Warren Commission . To compound the problem, the FBI hid its existence from the commission .
 Hosty never mentioned it, claiming later that he had never been asked . Despite extensive testimony before the Commission, Hosty said he was never asked about it . Hosty later said he had not been asked about the question .
 It is evidence, at least in this instance, of the FBI’s negligence and impropriety . The FBI is accused of failing to properly investigate the death of Michael Shaifani .
 Bill Alexander, the assistant district attorney who drew up the murder indictments against Oswald and later prosecuted Jack Ruby, told the author . Alexander: "I worked with those fellows at the FBI over many years"
 Hoover was already convinced that Oswald was guilty of Oswald's murder . Oswald was killed in Oswald's assassination . Hoover was convinced Oswald was not guilty of the crime .
 They were afraid the note would be seen as something they were derelict in following up on it . The police were afraid they would not follow up on the note .
 Oswald was dead, so they figured, ‘What the hell, we don’t need it anymore,’ and they destroyed it, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Oswald drafted letter Oswald drafted for the Soviet embassy . Oswald had drafted the letter for the embassy in Moscow, Russia . Oswald's wife showed him the letter to the Soviet Embassy .
 She wanted to know what to do, especially if she should contact Hosty before his next visit . Hosty says she's not sure if she'll contact him again before he visits .
 Oswald mistakenly thought the salutation “Dear Sirs” was ‘Dear Lisa” and thought Oswald was merely writing to a friend . Oswald thought he was writing for a friend, Oswald thought it was merely for a letter .
 Ruth, discouraged, put the letter aside and decided not to call Hosty but instead wait for his next visit . Ruth decided to wait for Hosty to return to visit .
 The Secret Service was directed to determine a motorcade route that would allow forty-five minutes for the President to travel from Love Field airport to the Trade Mart .
 On that same day, agents Forrest Sorrels and Winston Lawson drove over a possible route . The agents drove over the possible route on the same day .
 The Dallas Times Herald announced the Trade Mart selection on November 15, and the following day listed Main Street as the parade’s primary artery . They then met with Dallas police who reviewed the route the next day .
 On November 18, Secret Service and Dallas police again drove the route and confirmed its selection . The route was selected by the Secret Service .
 Michael was staying that weekend to celebrate his daughter’s birthday, and Lee might have worn out his welcome with the three-day holiday weekend just past .
 Marina sensed some resentment from Ruth toward Lee, but did not know that Ruth had found a draft of the letter to the Soviet embassy . Marina also sensed that Ruth was angry at Lee .
 When he later telephoned Marina over the weekend, he told her that he had returned to the driver's license bureau to get his learner’s permit, but the line had been too long and he left . He told her he had gone back to the bureau but the
 Gladys Johnson, his landlady, said that except for a single walk, Oswald did not leave the house and only made calls to Marina .
 At Marina’s request, on Sunday, November 17, Ruth telephoned the number at North Beckley . At Marina's request, she called the number on November 17 . Ruth said: ‘At Marina's behalf, I'm happy to be able to speak to her
 Marina asked him where he had been the previous night, and he told her he was using a different name because of the FBI, but also became angry with her for calling the rooming house . Ruth said, “I was in the kitchen where the phone is while Marina talked with
 Their relationship is strained at times since his return from Mexico but better than it had been in New Orleans .
 Oswald did not call Marina on either Tuesday or Wednesday, the nineteenth and twentieth . Oswald called Marina on both Tuesday and Wednesday, but not Wednesday .
 The others at the rooming house noticed he sulked and did not use the phone . He sulked, didn't use phone and didn't talk to them, the others noticed .
 Oswald was simmering alone and did not want any contact with people, even his family . Oswald wanted no contact with anyone, including his family, even though Oswald was alone . Oswald was found dead at the scene of the shooting .
 The Dallas Times Herald detailed the exact route of the presidential motorcade . That Tuesday, the Dallas newspaper detailed the route .
 The left turn onto Elm Street meant the cars would pass directly in front of the Depository . The Depository was located on Elm Street at the time .
 There was no change in the route, and there was no doubt about the Elm Street crossing . The Dallas Morning News provided the same exacting details .
 Oswald, who thought his contribution to his revolutionary cause would be the death of Walker, was suddenly faced with the possibility of having a much greater impact on history and the machinery of government . Oswald thought he would be able to contribute to his revolution, but Walker died .
 Failed in his attempts to find happiness in Russia or the U.S., rejected by the Cubans, barely able to make a living in America, frustrated in his marriage, and hounded by the FBI, he says .
 Lee and other Communist leaders to acknowledge his efforts and letters . Lee wrote to Lee to thank him for his efforts in China . Lee was one of the leaders of the Chinese Communist Party .
 Lee Oswald always thought he was smarter and better than other people . Lee Oswald was angered that others failed to recognize the stature he thought he deserved . Oswald was angry that others didn't recognize him as a genius .
 By chance, by chance, he had an opportunity that he knew would only happen once in his lifetime . Now, he knew that he had a chance to get the chance to do so .
 Oswald broke his routine of eating a meager breakfast at the rooming house on Thursday, November 21 . Oswald's routine was a routine of waking up to eat a meager meal at his room .
 He treated himself to a special breakfast at Dobbs House restaurant . Instead of a traditional breakfast, he enjoyed a special treat .
 Before 10:00 that morning, he approached Buell Frazier and asked if he could have a ride to Irving that evening as he needed to “get some curtain rods’s curtain rods . Frazier said he was going to get a ride from Irving to Irving . Frazier was
 It was likely later that day that he used brown paper and tape at the Depository to fashion a three-foot-long bag .
 Marina saw Frazier’s car stop near the Paine home that afternoon near 5:00, and Lee stepped out . Marina saw his car stop and he stepped out of the car . Marina says she saw him in the car and he was arrested .
 He had not called in advance as usual as usual to ask permission before coming to Irving, Texas .
 It was the first time he had ever broken his routine and arrived on a Thursday instead of a Friday . It was also the first . He arrived at the airport on a Friday instead of Saturday .
 "He tried to start a conversation with me several times, but I would not answer," she said . He tried to talk to her several times but she wouldn't answer .
 One final time, while on the front lawn, he begged her to join him in Dallas . "I love you, you love you," he said to her .
 Marina apologized to Ruth that Lee had appeared without any warning, but Ruth said not to worry, that it was his way of making up for their quarrel . Marina apologizes to Ruth, saying that Lee's appearance was a mistake .
 "During the rest of the evening the atmosphere in the house was cordial. And he said, ‘Ah, yes,’ and walked into the kitchen …”109
 Ruth did not notice there was any special tension between Marina and Lee . Ruth did notice there were any special tensions between the two women .
 Marina remembered that after her last refusal to join him in Dallas, Lee mostly stopped talking . Marina remembers that after she last refused to join her husband, Lee finally stopped talking about her . She remembered that Lee had stopped talking after she refused to see him again .
 During dinner, Marina asked him about the President’s visit, assuming that talking about politics, his favorite subject, might improve the atmosphere .
 At 9:00, he looked into the kitchen, where Marina was washing the dishes . He looked at Marina, who was washing dishes, as he looked in the kitchen .
 Marina thinks his tension finally gave way to sleep, but not until nearly 5:00 A.M. The following morning when the alarm sounded, it was Marina, half-asleep, who urged him to get up .
 Usually, Marina prepared breakfast for him, but that morning she remained in bed . Usually, she would prepare him for breakfast, but she stayed there .
 He walked out of the door without kissing her, something he always did before leaving . "He walked out the door before kissing her," he said .
 Marina went to the kitchen, but he was gone and the coffeepot was cold . When Marina fully awoke, she went for the kitchen . He was gone .
 Returning to the bedroom, she was startled to see that he had left $170 on top of their bureau . She was stunned to find that he'd left the money on the bureau .
 It was a remarkable sum for the Oswalds, and she knew it must be almost all their savings . The Oswalds' daughter says it was almost all the savings they had saved .
 On the bureau, in a hand-painted demitasse cup that had belonged to her grandmother, Lee had placed his wedding ring . Lee's wedding ring was placed on the bureau in the hand-paint cup that belonged to his grandmother .
 No motorcade route had been proposed by the date Oswald was hired at the Depository . That argument ignores the fact that no motorcade had even been proposed before Oswald's hire .
 Linnie Mae Randle, who suggested the Depository, and Ruth Paine, who told Oswald about it, were part of the conspiracy . Roy Truly, Roy Truly and the Texas employers who rejected Oswald for jobs earlier in the week were also in the conspiracy, it says .
 Even Robert Stovall, Oswald’s former employer, who scuttled his hiring at Padgett by a poor recommendation, would have to be part of the plot .
 He still maintained subscriptions to journals he thought important, The Militant, The Worker, Time, and some Russian periodicals .
 Michael was tempted to look inside the blanket tied with string, but never did . Michael, an absolute believer in the privacy of the individual, was tempted .
 Oswald was not an FBI informer, but the FBI worked to find out where Oswald was living at any given time . Oswald was the subject of numerous investigations into the assassination of President Lincoln Lincoln in 1917 . Oswald died in August 1918 .
 If he had been an informer, the FBI would not have needed several weeks to find where he was . The FBI would have been able to find him between his departure from New Orleans and arrival in Dallas .
 Oswald's address page with Hosty's number became controversial after the assassination . Oswald’s address page was also controversial for another reason . Hosty was the only person Oswald had ever been photographed with Oswald .
 The FBI gave the Warren Commission copies of Oswald’s address book, typed by the FBI, omitted any references to Hosty . Hosty. Hosty was a prominent figure in the events of the Second World War II .
 It turned out the person who typed it only concentrated on ‘leads,” and assumed since Hosty was not a lead, the information was unnecessary .
 Most critics mistakenly conclude it was a deliberate cover-up, even though the original address book was available for inspection at the National Archives .
 Oswald could not be the real Oswald since he was occupied with Marina and Ruth in Irving that entire day . Oswald was in Irving, Irving, Texas, the day before the assassination .
 Bogard said he had written Oswald’s name on a business card, which he had thrown away . Bogard also claimed to introduce Oswald to his manager, who could not remember such a meeting .
 Bogard’s story was not supported by his fellow workers, but one did remember a five-foot-tall “Oswald,” not a very good imposter . Bogard's story is not a good story .
 Once rejected by the Soviet and Cuban embassies, he had no intention of staying in Mexico . But he wanted to make the Soviets believe he had a more exotic reason for not staying . He wanted to impress the Soviets with his story .
 At the Irving Barber Shop, the barber remembered cutting the hair, five or six times, of a man who wore coveralls, had black hair and hairy arms, came with a 14-year-old boy, and drove a black Ford .
 “Oswald” drove up in a blue-and-white Ford and came in with Marina and two children, looking for the nearest gun store . Marina and Marina were looking for a gun store, two employees said .
 Marina was taken to the furniture store by the Warren Commission and flatly denied ever having been there . Marina was later taken to a furniture store where she was taken by the commission and denied having visited the store .
 The story that “Oswald” sent a money order from Western Union was discredited when the sole witness was contradicted by his co-workers . He was himself unable to identify the man he saw as Oswald, and said he could not remember the name used .
 A clerk claimed to have found a tag with the name Oswald, indicating he had a telescopic sight drilled onto his gun . Irving Sports Shop clerk said he found the tag in a sports shop .
 The owners of the shop checked their records and found they had never worked on a Carcano . The owners said they were shocked to find out they hadn't worked on the car .
 The clerk, apparently an attention-seeker, had made anonymous calls about Oswald and his gun to the local media . Subsequent investigation found that the clerk made the anonymous calls . Oswald's gun tag was in his handwriting, not in Oswald's .
 The receptionist, Nanny Fenner, believes it was the first business day after the holiday .
 The receptionist, Fenner, later claimed that she was able to see the note because it slipped out of the unsealed envelope before she gave it to Hosty . Fenner later claimed she saw the letter because she gave Hosty the note .
 According to her, it was a much more explicit threat, “Let this be a warning,” she said . She said it was more explicit than a threat .
 I will blow up the FBI and the Dallas Police Department if you don’t stop bothering my wife. I’m not afraid to do so. I will. I'm going to blow up . I'm not afraid of doing so, I'm angry with you. I
 Hosty says the way the note was folded, it would have been impossible for Fenner to see, and if it had made an explicit threat, he would have followed up on it that same day . Hosty: If the note had made a threat, Hosty would follow up
 Oswald's letter was so general that he tossed it into his mail tray and forgot about it until he saw Oswald at the jail . Oswald was in jail at the time of the assassination . Oswald had been in jail for more than a year .
 If this was just propagated by Hollywood, it could be dismissed as irrelevant. If this were just propagating by Hollywood it could have been ignored as irrelevant . If this is just a Hollywood movie, it would have been irrelevant.
 In this speculative scenario, Oswald is actually a hero who vainly tried to thwart the impending disaster . In this case, Oswald tried to prevent the disaster from happening . Oswald is a hero .
 Oswald was armed with the most important information of his life, a plot to kill JFK . It also requires the leap of faith that Oswald merely dropped it off in an unsealed envelope to Hosty, and then failed to follow up with a telephone call or another visit .
 Oswald sat in the Dallas police station and denied his guilt . Instead of telling police and the FBI that he had actually tried to warn them ten days before the assassination, Oswald tried to kill himself . Oswald was arrested and charged with the crime .
 Oswald testified to the Warren Commission that once he determined Oswald “was not employed in a sensitive industry,” he did not take a priority over the other twenty-five to forty cases assigned to him at any one time . Oswald later testified that he didn't take priority over other
 Marina Marina says he wanted to “determine the nature of his contact with the Soviet embassy” before taking the next step . Marina: “He wanted to wait until New Orleans forwarded the necessary papers to me”
 Oswald met with Kostikov, a known KGB agent, while at the Soviet embassy . Hosty currently complains that he was never notified that Oswald had met with the KGB agent at the embassy .
 Dealey's parallel streets converge at one end of Dealey under a railroad bridge dubbed the Triple Underpass . Dealey is located under the bridge .
 The opposite side of the plaza from the underpass is ringed by office buildings . None of the buildings are taller than eight stories tall .
 Two small pergolas are on each side of the plaza, situated between the buildings and the underpass . The plaza is located between buildings and an underpass on the side of one of the buildings .
 In front of that fence is a patch of grass that gently declines to the curb of Elm Street . "It's a great place to live, but it's also a bad place to die," says the mayor .
 The grassy knoll, including the corner of the fence, is part of the grassed knoll . That section of the knoll is known as the grass on the edge of a fence .
 Oswald's supporters say the motorcade route was altered to allow Oswald to get a clear shot . They say those responsible for the route altered it at the last moment so Oswald could get the shot .
 The only access from Main Street onto the Stemmons Freeway was to turn right from Houston Street onto Houston Street, then proceed one block to Elm, where a left turn would put the car less than a thousand feet from the entrance to the Trade Mart .
 If the motorcade proceeded straight along Main Street, it would be forced to cross a concrete divider in order to enter Stemmons . The motorcade would have to cross the divider if it continued straight along the street .
 Main and Elm are parallel roads that run through Dealey Plaza . Main is Elm, Main is Main, Elm is Elm .
 Elm Street provides direct-line shot, while Main Street provides a longer cross-shot . Elm Street is located on Elm Street and Main Street in New York City .
 Doctors told the Commission that if Marina had treated Oswald with kindness that night, it might have changed his mind about the assassination . The panel of doctors told the commission that .
 Cameron: "I think what Marina had a chance to do unconsciously that night was to veto his plan without ever knowing of its existence, but she didn't" Cameron said .
 The Commission stayed away from the psychiatric conclusions in its final report . The report was published by the Commission of Psychiatrists .
 She saw Oswald walk across the street toward her house carrying a long package parallel to his body . Oswald was carrying the package . The package was parallel to her body .
 He held one end of the brown-paper-wrapped object tucked under his armpit . The other end did not quite touch the ground .
 He went to Buell’s car, opened the right rear door, and laid the package across the backseat . The package was placed in the back seat of the car .
 He stared at Linnie Mae until she called out to her brother that he was waiting for his ride . Then he walked to the kitchen window and stared at her until she told her brother he was on his way .
 Oswald quickly left the car and walked ahead of his brother . Usually, they went in together, but on that morning, they were early . Oswald often went in with Oswald .
 Frazier watched him enter the Depository, carrying the package next to his body . Frazier: "I watched him carry the package in front of me" Frazier says he watched the man carry out the act of self-defense .
 Later that morning, between 9:30 and 10:00, he was staring out a first-floor window toward Dealey Plaza, when a co-worker, James "Junior" Jarman, approached him . Jarman says he was approached by a colleague at the time of
 Oswald asked why crowds were gathering outside, and Jarman told him the President was due by in a couple of hours . Oswald was told by Jarman that the President would arrive in a few hours later .
 Jarman said the cars were expected to pass directly in front of the Depository . When asked if he knew which direction the motorcade would take, Jarman replied, "Yes"
 On the sixth floor of the Depository, five men were laying a plywood floor . Five men lay plywood on the floor . The Depository's sixth floor is located in New York City .
 The sixth floor was a 96-foot-by-96-foot open storage space, only broken by support posts and stacks of books scattered about . The sixth-floor storage space was 96 feet by 96 feet .
 Seven large double windows looked directly over Elm Street and Dealey Plaza . On the south side of the floor, seven large double window windows looked over Elm St. and Plaza .
 On the opposite north end, there were two adjoining elevators and a staircase .
 At 11:40 one of the workers, Bonnie Ray Williams, spotted Oswald on the east side of that floor, near the windows overlooking Dealey Plaza . Oswald was found on the second floor of the building .
 When I got back upstairs, he was on the sixth floor … in that vicinity … toward the window up front where the shots were fired from. "When I got . back upstairs ... he was in that area," says police officer .
 Oswald had enough time to assemble the Carcano and move cartons of books to form a sniper’s nest in the southeast corner of the room . Oswald was alone in the room when he assembled his Carcano .
 The cars could be seen as they entered Dealey Plaza on Main Street, turned right onto Houston Street, and headed toward the Depository . The cars can be seen on Houston Street .
 In front of the building, the motorcade turned left, providing a clear view from the window . The motorcade moved toward the Stemmons Freeway entrance .
 Workers had moved many of the book cartons, weighing up to fifty pounds each, to the sides of the room . Because of the laying of the new floor, workers had moved some of the cartons to the side .
 It protected the sniper from being observed by anyone who wandered onto the sixth floor . The sniper was shot by a sniper sniper on the roof of the building .
 Boxes were arranged as a brace upon which the rifle would rest when shot . Boxes of boxes were also arranged to make the rifle easier to shoot . Boxed boxes were used as brace for the rifle .
 FBI agent in his first attempt to put the Carcano together, using only a dime as a tool, in less than six minutes, and in under two minutes with a screwdriver . An FBI agent, in his second attempt, put the carcano together using a dime .
 Many have tried hard to prove Oswald was not on the sixth floor at this time, relying on his protestations, after his arrest and during his police interrogation, that he had been in the first-floor lunch room with “Junior” Jarman .
 Carolyn Arnold, a secretary to the Depository’s vice-president, waited fifteen years before telling Anthony Summers in 1978 that at 12:15 she entered the second-floor lunch room and saw Oswald sitting in the booths .
 Her interview with Summers was the first time she ever publicly told the story about seeing Oswald in the lunch room . Summers says she saw Oswald in a lunch room at the time .
 Arnold gave two different FBI statements shortly after the assassination . Arnold had given two different statements to the FBI . Arnold's statements had been published in the U.S. House of Representatives .
 In one statement, she said she "could not be sure" but might have caught a fleeting glimpse of Oswald in the first-floor hallway . The second statement said she did not see Oswald at all in the hallway .
 Four other women worked with Arnold and watched the motorcade with her that day . Arnold's motorcade included four other women who worked with her .
 They support her original statements and not the story she told fifteen years later . The original statements were made by her family and friends . They say they support the original statements .
 Virgie Rachley and Betty Dragoo accompanied her when she left the second floor at 12:15. Virgie left the building at 12.15. She was accompanied by Virgie .
 Oswald was in both lunch rooms at the time of the assassination . Oswald was not in either lunch room or lunch room, according to sources close to him . Other sources say he was in neither .
 Junior Jarman, with whom Oswald claimed to have had lunch, denied even seeing him during his lunch break . Junior . Jarman denies even seeing Oswald even though he said he had lunch with him .
 Troy West was inside the first-floor domino room eating lunch from 12:00 to nearly 12:30 . West did not see Oswald during that half-hour .
 Danny Arce and Jack Dougherty ate in the first-floor room up to 12:15 and said there was no sign of him . The two men say he was last seen at 12:30 p.m.
 Carolyn Arnold claimed Oswald was there at 12:15, but neither saw him . Robert Reid and Robert Reid both ate in the second-floor lunch room .
 Billy Lovelady went to both lunch rooms after 12:00 and did not see him either . Billy went to the lunch rooms at 12:30:30 and didn't see him .
 Nineteen-year-old Bonnie Ray Williams returned to the sixth floor to eat his lunch and see whether any other workers had gathered to watch the motorcade .
 The books in the southeast corner were “stacked so high” that he “could not possibly see anything …”29 The day after the assassination he told the FBI he left by 12:05 and went to the fifth floor, where he found two friends .
 Witnesses in Dealey Plaza also confirmed there was a man in the sniper’s-nest window . Oswald was alone on the sixth floor of the Depository by noon .
 Some witnesses say they saw one, and sometimes two, men before the shooting who did not look like Oswald . There is some confusion, however, about Oswald's identity .
 Summers points out that one of them had dark hair and complexion and might have been Mexican . Summers says one of the men was Mexican and may have been dark .
 Summers does not inform the reader that in her FBI statement, Henderson said the men could have been “Mexican, but could have be Negro,” and she was not certain of what floor they were on . Summers says the men were Mexican, but not Negro, and she
 On the fifth floor, three young black men were looking out the windows of Oswald's sniper’s nest . They were looking into the view of the sniper's nest .
 FBI statement indicates Henderson saw two of those three young men on a high floor . Henderson says she saw two young men in the stairwell . Henderson's statement indicates she saw the men on the floor .
 Witnesses say they saw two men either in the Depository or in Dealey Plaza . Other witnesses say they also saw men with a rifle .
 Julia Ann Mercer said she was caught in a traffic jam at Dealey on the morning of the motorcade . Mercer noticed two men in a green Ford pickup in the morning . Mercer: "I noticed two people in green Ford pickups"
 One person took a gun case from the rear of the truck and then disappeared into the grassy knoll . The incident happened in the early hours of Monday morning .
 She later identified the truck’s driver as Jack Ruby, and said Oswald was the man with the rifle . Ruby later identified Jack Ruby as the driver of the truck . Oswald was also the man who had the rifle, she said .
 The truck, which had stalled, belonged to a local construction company . It had three men inside, and they did take tools from the rear of the truck to fix it . However, subsequent investigation revealed that the truck had stalled .
 The men were under constant surveillance by three Dallas policemen . All of them left when another truck arrived to push the stalled vehicle away .
 It was the hospital ward and it also contained an overflow of mental patients . It was also the overflow of a mental hospital ward .
 The gunman was reportedly standing at military parade rest with a high-powered rifle across his chest . The gunman reportedly stood at parade rest in a position with a rifle across chest .
 Rowland claimed to see an “elderly Negro” man on the same floor, this time on the other side of the building, in the sniper’s nest . Rowland claims to have seen the man in sniper's nest on the opposite side of building .
 Rowland had previously given seven statements to Dallas police and FBI and never mentioned the black man . Rowland never mentioned a black man in his statements to police or FBI .
 Rowland’s wife, who was with him at the time of the assassination, did not see either man, nor did he tell her that he had seen a black man . Rowland did not tell her he saw a man in the White House .
 Turner and Secret Service agent Forrest Sorrels said he saw a single young white male, with brown hair, holding a rifle . Turner said Turner saw the man with a rifle, and that he saw him holding a gun . Turner was the first person to report seeing the man holding a
 Rowland claimed that there were women and children on the nearby Triple Underpass . He claimed that the crowds started to laugh after the first shot . According to his wife, Rowland lied under oath about a series of small but telling issues, ranging from graduating from high school, to his
 Walther limited her sighting to the third, fourth, or fifth floor but “positively, not the sixth floor” Walther says . Walther: "positively’s sighting was of the third or fourth floor, but positively not sixth"
 She claimed one man had his arms extended and was holding a machine gun outside the window, for all to see . She claimed the man was holding the gun outside of the window .
 Walther also said a second man, with another gun, stood directly behind the first one . Walther said a man with a gun was also in the frame of the shooting .
 Carolyn Walther was not alone when she watched the motorcade from her vantage point . The motorcade was not the first time Walther had seen the parade . Walther says she was watching from a vantage point at the time .
 Robert Edwards and Ronald Fischer, a college student and a county auditor respectively, were at the corner of Houston and Elm, directly in front of the Depository . The two men were killed in the shooting .
 Edwards saw a man in the southeast corner of the sixth floor of the building . Edwards glanced at the building before the motorcade arrived and saw the man .
 Suspicion arose that the seizure was a staged distraction that allowed a team of assassins to take their positions unnoticed by the crowd . He never registered at Parkland, and as a result of the seizure, the suspicion arose .
 Jerry Belknap, an epileptic who had suffered seizures since childhood, had evidence he had paid the $12.50 ambulance charge . He had evidence that he'd paid the ambulance charge and had evidence of having paid the bill . He has been charged with paying the ambulance bill .
 He left Parkland without registering because he felt better when given water and aspirin . He realized there was such a rush of people at the emergency room, he said .
 After Belknap was removed from Dealey, the police cleared away a small knot of people that had formed around the scene . The crowd returned to its festive waiting for the arrival of the President .
 The Hertz sign on top of the Depository showed 12:29 when the first car of the presidential motorcade made the turn from Main Street onto Houston and proceeded toward the depository . The first car was the President's motorcade .
 Dallas police chief Jesse Curry, Sheriff Bill Decker, and the local chief of the Secret Service, Forrest Sorrels . The security car was a security car and included Dallas police, sheriff and Secret Service chiefs .
 The driver was the oldest man in the White House security detail, William Greer . Greer is the driver of the security detail .
 Secret Service agent Roy Kellerman sat in the front seat of the car . The Secret Service agents were in the car at the time of the crash .
 In the car’s fold-down jump seats were Texas governor John Connally and his wife, Nellie . The car was driven by the late Texas governor and wife of the day .
 In the rear bench seat were President Kennedy and the First Lady, Jacqueline . President Kennedy sat in the rear seat of the plane .
 The plastic bubble top was off, leaving the car as an open convertible . No Secret Service men rode on the running boards attached to the rear of the car .
 The motorcycle escort was limited to four, and kept at a comfortable distance from the limousine . The motorcyclist was accompanied by a police escort .
 A 1956 Cadillac convertible filled with Secret Service agents and presidential aides followed JFK’s car . A Secret Service agent and a presidential aide were also in the car .
 Johnson, Texas senator Ralph Yarborough, and some Secret Service agents, were next in line . Johnson, Yarborough and others were also in line for the honor .
 The remainder of the motorcade included local dignitaries, some press cars, and finally two buses, one for VIPs and one for additional press .
 Agent Forrest Sorrels, in the car ahead of the President, looked at his watch at his time . The President is expected to make a speech at the White House .
 In the car behind the President, Agent Emory Roberts independently radioed the Trade Mart, “Halfback to Base.” The Trade Mart was in the President’s car .
 Jackie Kennedy, dressed in a pink wool two-piece suit, with a pillbox hat, was hot .
 Some thought it was a firecracker or a backfire from a police motorcycle . Some thought the backfire was from a backfired motorcycle . Police say it was from the back of a motorcycle .
 By the second shot, many realized it was too loud to be anything but gunfire . The second shot was too much of a gunfight, many said .
 The President’s arms jerked up into a locked position level with his neck . The President's arms were locked in a lock position with the neck .
 Governor Connally pushed back into his jump seat and then fell over into his wife’s arms . Gov. Connally fell over in his wife's arms and fell into her arms .
 The President, strapped into a brace for his bad back, remained propped upright, his head lolling slightly to the left . The President remained upright, propping up his head, and his back was strapped to a brace .
 Jacqueline Kennedy leaned toward her husband, looking at him quizzically, looking like he was looking at her . The Kennedy family was traveling to Washington, D.C. for dinner .
 Greer, sensing something was wrong in the back of the car, slowed the vehicle to almost a standstill and turned in his seat to see what had happened . Incredibly, Greer was able to pull over at the end of the ride .
 As he turned, there was a stomach-wrenching sound, as if a grapefruit had been struck with a baseball bat . The sound of the grapefruit hit with a golf bat was heard by the victim .
 The final bullet tore off the right side of the President’s head, sending a red mist of blood, brain tissue, and skull fragments upward and to the front . The President was hit by the final bullet .
 Jacqueline began climbing out the rear and onto the trunk of the car . Jacqueline's husband fell partially across the backseat and toward the floor . He fell out of the vehicle, falling to the floor, and Jacqueline climbed out .
 Secret Service agent Clint Hill, riding in the backup car, mounts the rear bumper and pushes her back inside . Secret Service agents mount the bumper and push the woman back inside the car .
 At that moment Greer slammed on the accelerator, and the President’s car sped out of Dealey Plaza . Greer's car was driven by the President to the White House .
 Some threw themselves on the ground to avoid the gunfire; others screamed or ran . Some screamed or began running; others ran away from the gunfire .
 Many in the crowd followed him, running into the area where the gunman might be instead of away from danger . Many of the crowd ran to the gunman's location, but then ran away .
 Dealey Plaza produced a mass of contradictory statements from scores of witnesses . Because of the ensuing bedlam, the resulting statements from witnesses were contradictory .
 In even the simplest auto accident, eyewitnesses almost invariably present different, and sometimes completely conflicting, accounts . Witnesses almost always present different accounts of what happened .
 The crowds had concentrated on the presidential motorcade . The motorcade was a mesmerizing event for many .
 They were not expecting rifle shots over a few seconds, and to complicate matters, the plaza is an echo chamber . The plaza is not expected to be used as a venue for mass shootings .
 Witnesses standing next to each other often heard and saw things differently . Witnessing events in the chaos is little wonder that witnesses often heard different things . Witness: "Witnesses stand by each other and see things differently"
 The statements can be sifted for internal inconsistencies and judged for credibility . However, the statements can also be judged for their credibility .
 Testimony closer to the event must be given greater weight than changes or additions made years later . Witness’s own memory is often muddied or influenced by television programs, films, books, and discussions with others .
 We all read a lot of things, and sometimes inadvertently adopt things we hear from others . We all adopt things from others, and often adopt them from others' stories, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 On this issue, there was more agreement than on any other post-assassination matter. However, on this issue there was no agreement on any of the other issues .
 Of the nearly two hundred witnesses who expressed an opinion on the number of shots whose testimony or statements are in the National Archives or the twenty-six Warren Commission volumes, over 88 percent heard three shots . Over 88 percent of those who expressed a view of hearing three shots heard three .
 Conspiracy theorists rarely disclose that fewer than one in twenty witnesses heard that many shots . Almost every conspiracy theory relies on there having been four or more shots, the writers say .
 The echo patterns in Dealey make locating the direction of the shots more difficult, and the witness statements reflect that . While the consistency of opinion on the number of shots is persuasive .
 Only four witnesses, 2 percent, thought they came from more than one location . And only four witnesses thought they were from multiple locations . Only 4 percent of witnesses thought the victims came from multiple places .
 Most of the shots came from the rear, but even these writers acknowledge that most of them came from behind . Most of these writers say most of these shots were from the back .
 Conspiracy critics often manipulate witness statements to make the Depository seem a less popular choice . The Depository was the site of the largest shooting of all time .
 The author reviewed Thompson’s work witness by witness and discovered substantive errors . The author found substantive errors in the work of Thompson .
 In his “Master List of Assassination Witnesses, Thompson puts witnesses such as Amos Euins, Mrs. Mrs. Thompson . Thompson: "I'm sure you can’t wait to see if you’ve heard from the witness list"
 The undecided or grassy knoll columnists are featured in either of the undecideds or grass-kills-knoll column . They include Roy Kellerman, James Underwood, Emmet Hudson and Emma Hudson .
 Thompson does not remind the reader that the building at that corner is the Depository . Thompson doesn't remind the readers that the government building is at the corner of that corner .
 Thompson: Unless the witness named the Depository, Thompson does not place him in that category . Thompson: "I'm not sure if I'm going to be a witness in this case."
 The worst confluence of echoes affected those witnesses close to the grassy knoll . The worst echo of the crash occurred close to a grassed knoll in the area .
 Abraham Zapruder, the Dallas dressmaker who took the home movie of the assassination, stood atop a concrete divider wall on top of the knoll . The film was shot in Dallas, Texas, at the time of the shooting .
 He had worked in that area for more than ten years and knew that echo patterns made it impossible to pinpoint the direction of sounds .
 Oswald’s supervisor, Roy Truly, was standing across the street from the Depository, but said the echo confused him . Truly said he believed the gunfire originated from the grassy knoll . Truly was Oswald's supervisor .
 The committee agreed there were three shots from the rear . Two of those struck President Kennedy and Governor Connally . The committee also agreed that two shots struck Connally and Kennedy .
 Channel One was for normal police business, and Channel Two for traffic concerned with the motorcade . Channel Two was for traffic concerns with the police motorcade.
 A police motorcycle had its radio switch stuck in the “on’s position for over five minutes around the time of the assassination . The switch was in the "on" position for more than five minutes .
 All the sounds within the range of that open microphone were inadvertently recorded . The sound of the open microphone was inadvertently recorded.
 Committee speculated that if the open mike was in Dealey Plaza, it might have recorded the shots . Committee: If the mike had been there, it could have recorded them . Committee members speculate that the mikes might have been in Dealy Plaza .
 The absence of any sounds of gunshots seemed to show the mike was not in Dealey Plaza* Sound experts searched for inaudible “impulse patterns” that could indicate gunfire . They found several unusual ones .
 An “acoustical reconstruction” was done at Dealey on August 20, 1978, with a Carcano fired from both the Depository and the grassy knoll . Then an ‘acoustic reconstruction’ was done in Dealey .
 The “impulses” created at the reenactment were then compared to those on the original dictabelt recording . The ‘impulsion’ was then compared with those created by the original recording .
 The Select Committee’s first experts concluded there was a 50 percent chance of a fourth shot . Bolt, Beranek and Newman: There is a 50 per cent chance of the fourth shot, acoustically located at the grassy knoll .
 The committee then turned the dictabelt and sound reenactment over to Mark Weiss and Ernest Aschkenasy, of Queens College .
 All that was needed to wrap up the scientific breakthrough was “proof” that the open mike was in Dealey Plaza . All that is needed is ‘proof’ that the mike is in the open .
 McLain testified that his mike was often stuck in the open position, but he did not know if it got stuck that day . McLain was riding to the left rear of Vice-President Johnson’s car in Dallas .
 McLain’s cycle had the open mike, the final report concluded . McLain's cycle was enough for the report to conclude that McLain had the mike .
 Select Committee’s rushed work began unraveling after the report was issued . However, it was not long after it was issued that the Select Committee's rushed work was unraveling .
 McLain finally heard a copy of the dictabelt recording . McLain returned to Dallas, Texas, when he returned to Texas, he finally heard it .
 "They knew that if I heard that tape I wouldn't testify for them, because I would immediately know that wasn't my cycle," she says . "I wouldn’t testify," she adds .
 The sirens on Dallas police cycles were footactivated . The faster the cycle traveled, the louder the siren was . The police cycle cycle was footactivated by foot activation .
 On dictabelt recording there are no sirens, except nearly two minutes after the supposed shooting, when a siren approaches the vehicle with the open mike and then passes it . Yet on the dictabel recording there is no siren approaching the vehicle .
 If the open mike had been on McLain’s cycle, a siren should be heard on the recording from almost immediately after the shots until the arrival at Parkland . A siren would be heard in the recording of the shooting .
 Committee suggests McLain might have sat in Dealey Plaza for two minutes after the shots, forgot to turn on his siren . Committee then suggested he might have raced to catch up with the motorcade, but then fallen back . Committee also suggested McLain may have been sitting in De
 McLain's actions do not fit the photographic or eyewitness testimony about McLain’s actions . McLain is accused of shooting a woman in the head, killing her and injuring her husband .
 People kept running forward, and we had to run the bikes toward them to push them back . We had to push people back, and then run bikes toward the bikes to push it back .
 When McLain’s cycle was speeding toward Parkland, the dictabelt recording reveals the engine on the cycle in question is idling, not racing . Finally, when McLain was speeding, the recording shows the cycle was idling . McLain's cycle was not racing
 Dallas sheriff Jim Bowles has been relentless in pursuing many of the questions unresolved by the Select Committee . He determined the open mike was on a motorcycle stationed at the Trade Mart, where the President’s luncheon was scheduled .
 The House Select Committee concluded that acoustics is not the best sound quality in the world . However, even worse news was due the committee's conclusion . The committee also concluded that the House of Representatives should not have made the decision .
 In July 1979, Steve Barber, a rock drummer living in a small Ohio town, purchased an adult magazine, Gallery, which included a plastic insert recording of the dictabelt evidence . Barber purchased the magazine which included an insert recording . Barber was arrested in July 1979 .
 Barber heard the barely audible words “Hold everything secure” at the time of the shooting . That matched with the words ‘Hold everything . secure until the homicide and other investigators can get there …” He heard the words from Sheriff Bill Decker in the motorcade car .
 Decker spoke nearly one minute after the assassination, when he was instructing his officers what to do at Dealey Plaza . Decker spoke those words nearly one hour after the shooting . Decker: "I don't think it's a mistake"
 If the cross-talk Barber discovered was correct, it meant the Select Committee’s experts had picked up sound impulses of “bullet shots” one minute after the actual assassination . Barber: "The sound of the sound of ‘bullets’ was picked up
 The National Academy of Sciences appointed a distinguished panel of twelve scientists to study the Select Committee’s acoustics work . The panel of 12 scientists will study the acoustic work .
 The Ramsey Panel concluded in 1982 that the committee’s work was ‘seriously flawed’ and that Barber’�s analysis was correct . Dubbed the Ramsey Panel, after its chairman, Professor Norman Ramsey of Harvard, it concluded that Barber's analysis was right .
 The Ramsey Panel blasted the Select Committee’s conclusions about a grassy-knoll shooter and a fourth shot . The panel said there were “serious errors” in its work and there “was no acoustic basis” for such a claim .
 Oswald’s young co-workers Bonnie Ray Williams, Junior Jarman, and Harold Norman were critical witnesses . Three critical ear-witnesses were Bonnie Ray . Williams, Jr. Jarman and Norman . Norman was Oswald's co-worker .
 During the assassination, they were on the southeast corner of the fifth floor, under the sniper’s nest . They were shot in the head by a sniper sniper .
 Since the flooring was being replaced on the sixth floor, there was only a thin plywood covering, with cracks in the planks allowing some light between the floors . Since the floors were being replaced, only the plywood was covered .
 They were watching the motorcade below from three separate windows, they heard the first rifle shot . They heard the shooting from a window in their apartment .
 Bonnie Ray Williams said the shots were “loud.… sounded like it was right in the building … it even shook the building, the side we were on. Bonnie Ray . Williams: The shots were "loud"
 Harold Norman, directly under the sniper’s nest, heard the most important sounds . Harold Norman was directly under sniper's nest, Harold Norman said . Norman heard the sounds of gunfire being fired by the sniper's sniper .
 Norman had correctly described a bolt-action rifle being fired directly over his head . Oswald’s Carcano was found on the sixth floor of the hotel . Norman correctly described Oswald's Carcano .
 They noticed two of the young black men on the fifth floor straining to look at the window above . They saw two of them straining their eyes to the view of the window .
 The final piece of the acoustical puzzle over the number of shots fired at Dealey Plaza is available now in the confirmation of a story that has long been rumored in Dallas . It is the confirmation that the shots were fired at the iconic Dallas landmark .
 Since the assassination, local media gossip had it that a journalist had recorded the sounds of Dealey on November 22 and that later the recording was accidentally erased . Local media gossip has it that Dealey was recorded by a journalist .
 The author finally located the reporter, Travis Linn, now a professor of journalism . Linn is now a journalism professor at the University of Columbia .
 The only sound recording known to have been made of the assassination is a recording of the last moments . The recording was made in the assassination of George Kennedy III in 1963 .
 Kennedy’s death had been announced, and I caught a ride up to Dealey . Finally, we shut down after we shut up after Kennedy's death . Kennedy's funeral was held in Dealey's honor .
 "I remembered that I had asked L’Hoste to set up the recorder, but he was gone," he said . "He was gone. I remembered that he had asked for it to be recorded."
 "I looked around and found the tape on top of one of those pedestals," he says . "And I looked around ... and found it," he adds .
 You couldn't really even see it, as the pedestals are tall, the tape recorder is pretty small, and you would have to look for it . You couldn’t really even even even see the .
 It was an early version of the cassette recorder, which had to be rewound manually with a crank . It was the first version of a cassette recorder with a cassette cassette recorder .
 In order to play it on the air, it had to be transferred to a reel-to-reel tape machine . The tape machine was used to play the show on air .
 While I was in the process of dubbing it, I was called by my news director to go out, with a TV guy, to Lee Harvey Oswald’s apartment .
 The way it worked was you got the cassettes, and after you dubbed out of those little cartridges, you then bulk-erased the cartridges and went on to another assignment . The way you dubbed was you dubbed your cassettes out of these little cartridges .
 When asked if he heard the sounds of shots on the tape when he first played it back, Linn had no hesitation . Linn said he did not hesitate to play back the tape .
 I can tell you without any doubt that there were three shots and they were rifle shots . "I can tell the truth that there was three shots," she said .
 "There was no time to think about it. In those days after the assassination, the stories were coming in so quick, just bang, bang . There were stories coming in from the assassination that were so quick that there was no thought about it .
 You just don’t have time to do thumbsuckers and think of what might have been. You just have to think of the future. That's not the future, but the future .
 Robert Jackson, a Dallas Times Herald photographer, was riding in the motorcade in an open convertible . He was riding with four other reporters .
 During the time the shots were being fired, Jackson and the other reporters began looking around the Plaza for the source, and he glanced up to the top of the Depository . Jackson and other reporters were looking for a source .
 James Crawford, a deputy district court clerk, was standing on the corner across the street from the Depository and not far from Jackson and Couch’s car . He was standing near the scene of the shooting .
 Earle Cabell, the wife of the Dallas mayor, was four cars behind the President’s in an open convertible . The President's wife, Earle, was also four cars back in the convertible .
 The first shot was loud and sounded like it came from over his head, instinctively making him raise his head and look over his body at a ninety-degree angle . It was the first shot that made him instinctively look at his body, instinctively .
 Amos Lee Euins, 15, had a clear view of the sniper’s nest . The sniper's nest was captured on the night of the shooting . The suspect was killed in the attack .
 Someone lifted him atop a concrete pedestal by the reflecting pool across the street from the Depository . He was small for his age, and someone lifted him up .
 He ran to a policeman and told him what he saw . While he could not describe the shooter, he ran to the police and told them .
 Construction worker Howard Brennan saw more that day in Dealey Plaza than any other witness . Brennan was a construction worker who saw more than any others that day . Brennan says he saw a lot of the things he saw that day, including the shooting . Brennan: "It's a miracle that
 The first time he noticed a man in the southeast corner of the sixth floor was several minutes later . He said he noticed the man in a southeast corner in the east end of the building . The man was found dead at the scene .
 He guessed he was five feet eight to five feet ten inches tall, white, slender, with dark-brown hair, and between twenty-five and thirty-five years of age .
 Poised in the corner window of the sixth floor was the same young man I had noticed several times before the motorcade arrived . The young man was seen in the window of a sixth floor window . The motorcade arrives at the end of the day .
 The President's car was driven by a man holding a rifle in his hands, pointing toward the Presidential car . The man pointed the rifle at the President, pointing to the car, pointing it toward him .
 He steadied the rifle against the cornice and while he moved quickly, he didn’t seem to be in any kind of panic . The man seemed to be moving quickly, but he was not in any of the panic .
 Brennan's eyes locked on the solitary figure steadying his rifle for the final shot . Brennan’s eyes locked in on the final moment of his life . Brennan: "I’m looking forward to the last shot"
 There was no particular emotion visible on his face except for a slight smirk .
 Dallas police inspector Herbert Sawyer returns with police inspector . The policeman left for a few minutes and returned with a Dallas police officer .
 Brennan repeated his story, and Sawyer walked to a nearby car and reported the first description of the suspect . Brennan repeated the story, Sawyer reported the suspect to police . Sawyer said the suspect was in a car at the time of the incident .
 Brennan could have picked Oswald from the lineup, but did not do so because he feared others might be involved in the assassination . Brennan feared that word leaked that he was the only one who could identify the trigger man, his life would be in danger .
 The FBI had already given him a twenty-four-hour guard, heightening his concern . The FBI has already given the FBI a 24-hour security guard .
 He said he saw the assassin as well as the three men on the fifth floor . He identified them as they came out of the Depository within a half hour of the assassination .
 Brennan's eyesight is the last point on which critics try to disparage Brennan’s credibility is his eyesight, Brennan says . Brennan's credibility is the reason for his credibility, he says .
 Brennan said his eyesight for anything at a distance was “extraordinary,” allowing him when in a car to read license plates of other cars from a couple of hundred feet . Brennan said he was able to see license plates from a few hundred feet from a distance .
 Some reported “some commotion,” or “a puff of smoke” near the grassy knoll . Not one witness gave a contemporaneous statement about a second gunman at Dealey .
 New witnesses have stepped forward, sometimes years later, claiming to have seen the real assassin . However, since that day, new witnesses have come forward, often years later .
 Some people have actually confessed to being the phantom grassy-knoll shooter .
 While many reports can be dismissed out of hand, the major witnesses for a conspiracy deserve scrutiny . The major witnesses to a conspiracy need scrutiny .
 Jean Hill was standing on the southern side of Elm Street as President Kennedy’s car passed . Hill stood on the south side of the road as the President Kennedy's car passed. Hill was on Elm Street at the time .
 She was with her friend Mary Moorman, who snapped a Polaroid of the rear of the car almost at the moment of the fatal head shot .
 Hill is a frequent television guest and speaker at assassination symposia . Hill is the author of her own book, The Last Dissenting Witness . Hill has appeared on television, radio and radio .
 On the day of the assassination, she gave a statement to the sheriff’s office and signed it as correct . She gave the sheriff's office a statement, and it was correct .
 In her November 22 statement, she also said the President looked at her when he was first shot, but then changed that to say she jumped to the edge of the street and yelled, “Hey, we want to take your picture,” and that is why JFK looked over
 Zapruder home movie shows Hill never moved or said a word as the President passed . Hill was not even looking at him when he was first shot . Hill never looked at him as he died, and she was even not even talking .
 Hill claimed she scrutinized the car’s passengers, but she did not know Mrs. Hill . Hill claimed to have done so, but Hill said she didn’t know Mrs Hill .
 Hill testified that the first three shots were from a bolt-action, and the remainder might have been from an automatic . She testified that there were two shots, then a pause, and “three or four more shots rang out …”133. According to Hill, there were
 On the day of the assassination, she told the sheriff’s department that she saw “some men in plain clothes shooting back …” No one returned gunfire . On the assassination day, she said she saw some men in “plain clothes” shooting back .
 In her original written statement, she saw a “man running toward the monument” on the other side of the plaza, and started running after him, she said . She said she saw the man running to the monument, and then ran after him .
 Later, she told a reporter that the man looked like Jack Ruby, but backed off the identification because “quite a few people,” including her husband, made fun of her testimony .
 She told the Warren Commission, “When I ran across the street, the first motorcycle that was right behind nearly hit me.” She explained how she dashed across the road, past the motorcade traffic, to chase the stranger .
 Hill had run across the road, dodging between the cars while the motorcade was still going by . Summers writes, “Hill had run impetuously across the . road” Summers writes .
 In one version, Hill claims she lost sight of the man as he ran over the railroad tracks . She was "ahead of the field in the parking lot," she says .
 Another Dealey witness, Wilma Bond, was behind and to the east of Hill, and took a series of still photographs that day .
 Just minutes after the shooting, Jean Hill is still either sitting or standing next to Mary Moorman . While a crowd climbs the small incline leading to the fence on the grassy knoll, just minutes after they were shot, they show Jean Hill .
 In one of the photos, the rear of a large bus at the tail end of the motorcade is passing under the Triple Underpass . The rear of the bus is seen at the end of a motorcade passing under a triple bypass .
 Most of the motorcade had left Dealey Plaza, yet Hill was still in her original position . Hill had not yet taken a step to cross the road to chase the character as she described . Hill was in her position in the middle of the scene .
 Hill said when she got to the grassy knoll, the police were turning people back, so she returned to Mary Moorman . Hill said in her original statement, Hill said police turned people back so she went back to the knoll .
 She told Jim Marrs, “I was looking around but I couldn’t see anything, when these two guys came up behind me.” She said she was looking but couldn't see anything .
 One of them said ‘You’re coming with us,’ and I replied, ‘Oh, no I’m not.’ One of the players said, “You”re coming . with us. One of us said, 'You
 "They began hustling me past the front of the Depository. But then then the other guy put a grip on my other shoulder," he says . "I'm not sure what happened to me, but I'm glad to be here," he adds .
 Hill was interviewed within half an hour of the assassination by a local Dallas television crew . Hill was later interviewed by a Dallas TV crew after the assassination .
 Her story changed to include a grassy-knoll shooter . However, over the years she changed her story to include the shooter .
 By 1986, she told Jim Marrs, “I saw a man fire from behind the wooden fence.” She said she saw a fireman from behind a wooden fence .
 Jesse Price is a witness who is used by the critics to support the claim of a grassy-knoll shooter . Jesse Price was also a witness in the case, but was not a witness .
 He was on the roof of the Union Terminal Annex, on the southern end of the plaza . He was in the area when the incident occurred .
 Price would lose credibility if the reader knew he thought there was a final shot five minutes after the first . Marrs just omitted the offending language .
 In conclusion, “Price was never called to testify to the Warren Commission,” implying that the Commission wanted to avoid such a witness because it was not seeking the truth .
 Price's affidavit says he was not called to the scene of the shooting . Price says the reason he wasn't called is obvious . He says he's not sure why he didn't call .
 He had a clear view of the parking lot and the back of the fence from which the supposed second gunman fired . The alleged gunman fired from the fence, police say .
 Three cars drove into the parking lot between noon and the assassination, looking for a space but, seeing it filled, left . Three cars came in looking for parking space but left, leaving the lot empty .
 Bowers also noted two men behind the fence, some fifteen feet apart, who apparently did not know each other . Bowers: Two men behind fence were 15 feet apart .
 Critics believe a second gunman fired at the Triple Underpass . They were standing near the point where the fence met the triple underpass, some fifty feet from where critics believe the shooting occurred .
 Anyone behind the fence becomes a focus of suspicion . Bowers testified that at least one person was still there when the police arrived after the assassination .
 There has also been import attached to Bowers’s statement that at the time of the assassination “there was some commotion” near the parking area . Bowers' statement was also attached to his statement that “some commotion was in the area”
 He told the Warren Commission, “There was a shot, a report, I don’t know whether it was a . shot.” He said there was a ‘shot,’ he said .
 In an affidavit taken the day of the assassination, he was confused about several issues . In his affidavit, he said he thought that Mrs. Kennedy had been shot dead .
 The other three, who were all on the overpass with Holland, do not support the proposition that the smoke resulted from gunfire . Holland, who was on the bridge, says he was not shot at .
 There was a stiff wind blowing north to south, gusting up to twenty miles an hour . Moreover, on the day of the assassination, there was a strong wind .
 A puff of smoke would not rise from a rifle and sit stagnantly in the air when the winds were so stiff, the wind would not allow it to rise from the air . The winds were stiff enough to allow the rifle's smoke to rise .
 In 1963, there was a steam pipe along the wooden fence near the edge of the Triple Underpass . Finally, in 1963, the steam pipe was installed along the fence .
 A Dallas policeman burned his hands on that pipe when searching there immediately after the shots . Seymour Weitzman, a Dallas police officer, burned his hand on the pipe . Seymour
 If there was smoke, it was most likely that it was either exhaust fumes or steam from the pipe . The smoke is most likely to be from the exhaust pipe or exhaust fumes from the pipes .
 Gordon Arnold identified himself as a twenty-two-year-old soldier home on leave on November 22 . Arnold was a soldier from the U.S. Army . Arnold is a member of the Army National Guard . Arnold identifies himself as Gordon Arnold .
 According to his story, he ran into men with CIA identifications behind the grassy knoll before the assassination . He says he was confronted by CIA men behind the knoll . The man was killed by a CIA agent .
 A bullet whizzed past his left ear during the shooting . He was standing only feet in front of the picket fence when the bullet hit him .
 He knew it was live ammunition being fired directly behind him, and he hit the ground . He hit the floor . He knew he was hit by live ammunition, and it was not his fault .
 Arnold, who claimed he had a camera, said that after the assassination two men in police uniforms approached him . Arnold said he was approached by police officers in uniform after the incident . Arnold claimed to have a camera but said he had no camera .
 One kicked him while another, brandishing a shotgun and crying, confiscated his film . One man was kicked while another was kicked by police officers .
 He soon became a main figure in a documentary that claimed Kennedy was killed by a team of Corsican mercenaries . His story is repeated in recent books, including recent books .
 Arnold was not even at Dealey Plaza on the day of the assassination, it appears . Arnold appears to have been there at the time of the shooting .
 Arnold says he was on a grassy knoll near where he says he died . People on the knoll are clearly visible in the pictures taken of the area . Arnold says the incident happened in the early hours of Monday morning .
 Arnold claims he is not visible because he is lying flat on the ground, photo enhancements show no such person . Arnold says he was lying flat, but photo enhancement shows no such thing . Arnold: "I'm not lying flat. I'm not sure what I'm doing, I'm
 Unaware that shots had been fired, he claimed to see a man in a suit and tie in the railyard behind the grassy knoll . Unaware of shots, he said he saw the man behind the knoll in a man's suit and a tie .
 The gunman tossed the rifle to a man disguised as a railyard worker . The second man disassembled the rifle, put it into a sack, and walked away . The gunman then tossed the gun to a second man, who disassembled it .
 Hoffman contacted the FBI in 1967, three and a half years after the assassination, and told a less sensational version . Hoffman did not go public until 1978, but he had contacted FBI three years earlier .
 Dallas policeman says there was no civilian on the overpass above Stemmons Freeway . Dallas policeman Earle Brown says he was stationed as security on a railroad overpass .
 Three other policemen on three-wheel traffic cycles were near where Hoffman claimed to be . Hoffman is believed to have been in the area .
 Photographs and independent testimony reveal there were four large railway freight cars over the tunnel that day, effectively obstructing any view from Stemmons into the grassy knoll .
 In 1963, a large Cutty Sark billboard also filled some of the space between the freeway and the railroad tracks . The billboard was also filled with a large billboard .
 There are other eyewitnesses sometimes used to establish a second gunman at Dealey, but each has even greater credibility problems than the primary witnesses discussed above . Hoffman is almost impossible to have seen what he described .
 Malcolm Summers, who was at Dealey, now says he ran into a man wielding a machine pistol . Summers says he saw the man wielding the gun on the grassy knoll . Summers: The man was armed with a gun that looked like a machine gun .
 Summers said he stayed at Dealey for twenty minutes after the shooting, but did not mention confronting anyone with a gun . Summers said in an affidavit he stayed there for 20 minutes, but didn't say confronting anyone . Summers: "I'm not sure what happened to me, but I
 A deputy sheriff, Roger Craig, said he saw a green Nash Rambler with a luggage rack, with suspicious men inside, drive away from the Depository soon after the assassination . The car was seen leaving the Texas school soon after .
 Craig said he entered the room where Captain Will Fritz was questioning Oswald and mentioned the station wagon . Craig said that back at police headquarters, he entered a room where he entered .
 Tilson, who was off duty on the day of the assassination, was in his own car with his daughter, Judy . Tilson was in the car at the time of the shooting with Judy, his daughter .
 He says he was near Dealey Plaza when he heard about the shooting on his police monitor . He said he heard it on his monitor when he was in the area .
 A man walks away from the railroad tracks behind the grassy knoll, throw a package into the backseat of a black car, and drive away . Then he sees a man walk away and throw the package into a car, he says .
 Tilson says he caught up to him when he stopped for a red light . Tilson followed him at normal speeds over city streets, onto the DallasFort Worth Turnpike. Tilson caught up with him when the man stopped for red light, and then followed him on the turn
 Tilson claims his daughter copied down the black car’s license plate number . Tilson turned off the freeway to call the information into the homicide detectives . Eventually, Tilson says his daughter took down the number .
 A photograph taken by Mel McIntire, snapped at almost the precise moment Tilson says he spotted the fleeing man, reveals no car, black or otherwise, in the location Tilson pinpointed . The photograph was taken almost the exact time Tilson said he saw the man fleeing, but
 Dallas police radio logs for the day do not show any alert for such a car as Tilson described . There is no record that Tilson gave a license number or made any such call to homicide detectives .
 Tilson acknowledges that his daughter, his only witness, no longer confirms his story . Tilson himself acknowledges that he has never been able to confirm his story. Tilson's daughter is no longer the daughter of Tilson .
 He claims to have lost the number of his daughter's license, which he says she didn't remember writing it down . He says she "doesn't recall” writing down the license number .
 Some early eyewitness evidence used to support a conspiracy has been quietly abandoned by the critics and is now discredited . Some of the evidence used in support of a conspiracy was quietly abandoned .
 On the day of the assassination, a man near the presidential motorcade opened and closed a black umbrella as the shots rang out . The umbrella was used to protect the president from the assassination .
 The umbrella contained a poisoned flechette that shot into the President’s throat and neutralized him so a team of five assassins could finish the job . Some, such as Robert Cutler, the publisher of the Grassy Knoll Gazette, said the umbrella contained .
 Oliver Stone and Jim Marrs believe the ‘umbrella man’ gave a signal to the team of assassins waiting in ambush . Oliver Stone believes the “umbrella’s” signal was the signal to kill the assassin . The film is set to be released in
 House Select Committee located umbrella man in 1978 after publishing a drawing made from photographs taken that day and asking for public assistance in finding him .
 Louie Witt still had the same umbrella, and explained he had gone to Dealey to heckle the President with it . Witt did not even know he was the subject of such controversy . Witt said he still has the umbrella he used to carry .
 Photographs taken at Dealey Plaza also showed a man standing next to Witt . Those who said he appeared to be Cuban and that he seemed to occasionally speak into a walkie-talkie .
 Witt himself said the man was black, and he never had anything that could be remotely confused with a walkie-talkie . Witt: "He was black. He was black." Witt said he was never confused with the walkie talkie .
 Across the street from Witt was a stocky woman in a long coat and with a scarf tied around her head . Witt was in the middle of the street when he was arrested . Witt's arrest was the first of its kind in New York City's history .
 Dubbed by conspiracy buffs as the “babushka lady,” she can be seen in other photos taking her own home movie of the motorcade . Dubbed the ‘babustka lady’s home movie, she can also be seen taking her
 Oliver also said she saw David Ferrie at Ruby’s Carousel Club so often that she thought he was the assistant manager . Oliver said she also saw Ferrie so often she thought she was the manager .
 The House Select Committee interviewed her in executive session and decided not to use her as a witness . She was interviewed by the committee in an executive session . The committee also interviewed her about the allegations .
 Jim Marrs devoted substantial space to her story and seemed to accept her claim of being the babushka lady . Still, Jim Marrrs .
 Photo taken by Associated Press photographer Jim Altgens shows the presidential car just as JFK and Governor Connally reacted to their wounds .
 In the doorway of the Depository is a crowd of people, and one looks like Oswald . Oswald was a member of the Texas militia who was killed in Dallas, Texas .
 The real question is why, when the original evidence is considered, this ever became such an important issue . Yet the real question asks is why it ever became so important .
 Billy Lovelady, a worker at the Depository, immediately identified himself as the man in the doorway . Billy lovelady testified before the Warren Commission, testifying before the commission .
 Other co-workers testified they were on the Depository’s steps with Lovelady . Other witnesses said they saw him on the steps of the building .
 When shown the same photograph, Danny Arce, Buell Frazier, Harold Norman, Mrs. Norman and Mrs. Arce said they were shocked to see the same photo .
 Donald Baker, and William Shelley all, without hesitation, identified the man as Lovelady . William Shelley, Donald Baker and William Baker all identified him .
 The House Select Committee finally undertook an anthropological photo study and concluded the man in the doorway was indeed Lovelady . Despite the implausibility that it was Oswald, that issue survived .
 In the Terminal Annex building on the southern end of Dealey Plaza was the United States Post Office . The terminal Annex building was located on the south end of the Plaza .
 The first and second floors were parcel post, the third mail processing, the fourth letter mail, and the fifth was both the cafeteria and the postal inspectors’ offices . The first floor was parcel post and the second floor was mail processing .
 No one, apparently, including the Dallas police or the FBI, ever interviewed the employees there to discover what they saw . The Dallas police and FBI never interviewed the Dallas employees .
 Most are now retired, some deceased, and their memories nearly three decades after the event are not what they would have been within days of the shooting . Most of the survivors are retired and some are now deceased .
 Six interviewed for this book each remembered hearing three distinct shots, and most important, three of them watched the assassination with binoculars .
 Because of the angle of their building, they looked at the President’s car directly in line with the grassy knoll . The President's car was on the edge of the knoll at the time .
 One employee, Francine Burrows, had gone to Dealey Plaza to watch the motorcade . Burrows: "It's been a long time since I got here"
 In the Zapruder film, she is seen in a beige raincoat, running toward the limousine near the point of the fatal head shot . She has never been identified until now .
 Burrows was within twenty-five feet of JFK when he was shot and was also looking directly toward the grassy knoll . Burrows says he was within 25 feet of the president when JFK was shot .
 "I was very close to him when he got shot," she says . She remembers three shots, and says she was "very close" to her son .
 Initially, Randle said the package was approximately 27 inches long, Frazier estimated a little over two feet . Frazier estimates the package is about two feet long .
 Randle and Frazier said it looked like the same one Oswald carried that morning . Frazier and Randle said it was the same gun that Oswald carried .
 Oswald claimed to have curtain rods in the bag, but none were found at the Depository . Oswald claimed he had curtain rods, but no curtain rods were found .
 The corner enclosure had a door with a glass window, so anyone coming up the stairs would see the sniper . However, the corner enclosure was closed in with a door .
 The windowsills on the seventh floor are considerably higher than on the sixth, making it difficult to fire a rifle from a seated position . Moreover, the windowsills of the seventh-floor apartment are higher than the sixth .
 The sixth floor ledge partially obstructs the line of sight from the seventh floor . Also, the sixth-floor ledge partially blocks the view from the sixth floor .
 Two rooms were used by warehouse workers in the warehouse . One was the first-floor domino room, where the warehouse workers ate . The other was the second-floor room used by office personnel .
 Shelley later admitted he saw him at 11:45 A.M. before others noticed him on the sixth floor . Shelley said he saw the man in the early hours of the morning . Shelley later said he did not see him until after others saw him .
 Piper thought he saw Oswald at noon filling orders on the first floor, but he was mistaken . Five witnesses had placed Oswald on an upper floor, left behind by the elevators by that time .
 Mark Lane began his book Rush to Judgment with an excerpt from Mercer’s statement . Lane: ‘Rush to Judgment’ is a new book by Mark Lane .
 At the angle from which Rowland looked at the building, it is impossible to see inside the sniper’s nest because of the right wall . The right wall also prevents anyone more than a few feet behind the window .
 Critics interpret shadows on the film as evidence of two men, one in and one adjacent to the sniper’s nest .
 The films were independently enhanced by the Itek Corporation for CBS, by the House Select Committee on Assassinations, and by public television’s Frontline program .
 He admitted to the police that he had changed his shirt when he returned to his rooming house after the assassination . But he admitted to police he did not change his shirt after the attack .
 8mm color film followed the President’s car from the moment it made the turn from Houston onto Elm and stayed with it through the entire assassination . Shot by Dallas dressmaker Abraham Zapruder .
 Zapruder had an almost unobstructed view of the motorcade . Perched on a concrete divider on top of the grassy knoll, he had a view of a motorcade of the day .
 There were nearly seven hundred people on lifeboats watching the Titanic go down in 1912 . A vivid example of the pitfall of relying exclusively on eyewitness testimony is that when the Titanic sank in 1912, there were nearly 7 hundred people watching it go down .
 The ship was almost nine hundred feet long, three football fields in size . Survivors split as to whether it sank in one or two pieces . The survivors were split on whether the ship sank in a single or two parts .
 The author disagrees with Thompson’s reading of several witnesses, and also with his omission of one . Thompson's reading of the book is wrong, and Thompson's omission of a witness .
 The bullet that missed the motorcade never struck any of the spectators directly in its flight path, nor was an extra bullet ever found at Dealey Plaza . In 1991, the Today show showed a version of the Zapruder home movie of the assassination .
 Today never informed its audience that the four bullet sounds were re-created in a studio and dubbed onto the recording . Today never told its audience about the fact that the sound was dubbed onto a recording .
 There was a replica of the Liberty Bell at the Trade Mart . Passersby frequently gave it a rap .
 Others question why they could hear the bolt action and shells hit the floor but not hear the assassin run across the floor after the shooting . Others, like Mark Lane, question why there was no sound of the assassin running across the room .
 There is also a question of why the three moved to the opposite corner of the building after the shooting . Also, there is the question of whether they moved to opposite corner .
 At first he followed those running toward the grassy knoll, but he soon ran to the nearest building, the Depository . At first, he followed them to the grass-covered knoll . He soon ran for the nearest thing, the next building, The Depository.
 There, he ran into a young man leaving the building and asked, in great agitation, for the telephones, and the man pointed . The man pointed him to the phone, and he pointed out the phone .
 Oswald later told police that as he left the Depository, a young Secret Service agent with a blond crewcut asked him for the telephones . Oswald later said he was asked for the phones by the Secret Service agents .
 There were no Secret Service agents at Dealey immediately after the assassination . The Secret Service was at the scene of the shooting in Dallas, Texas .
 Oswald confused the press badge on his jacket as a Secret Service identification . MacNeil had short blond hair, and Oswald must have confused the badge with the Secret Service .
 Ron Reiland was the only reporter who got inside the Texas Theater when Oswald was arrested . According to Linn, another journalist missed a coup . Linn: "Ron Reiland is the only journalist to have missed the coup"
 He mistakenly shot the arrest, but mistakenly shot it with a filter over the lens, and nothing developed .
 When Reiland walked outside, he pulled the filter off and all those photographs, of the crowd spitting and kicking at Oswald, were overexposed . Reiland: "When Reiland pulled out of the filter, all the photographs were overextended. When Reundel walked outside
 Some use testimony of Senator Ralph Yarborough to suggest a shot was fired closer to the grassy knoll . Senator Yarborough said he smelled gunpowder as he drove through Dealey Plaza .
 Yarborough was in the Vice-President’s car, two behind the President, and was right in front of the Depository as the shooting began . Yarborough says he was in Yarborough's car at the time of the shooting and was in his car .
 The Commission settled the issue, despite the best efforts of some to obfuscate it . But the Commission did settle it, despite efforts to obscure it .
 SO Brennan could not have given him the description broadcast at 12:45 . Sorrels did not return to Dealey until nearly 1:00 P.M. after the assassination . After the assassination he did not arrive at Dealey's headquarters until nearly 2:30 p.m
 The author stood at the very spot where a grassy-knoll shooter is supposed to have fired at the President . The author stands at the same spot where the President was supposed to be shot .
 The shooter was purportedly standing on a car bumper, in order to aim over a five-foot fence, he would have been completely exposed at the rear, making it impossible to fire from that location without being seen .
 Three witnesses were only a few feet in front of the fence, and they never saw anyone behind the fence . More than a dozen who could have seen such a shooter could have been a witness .
 There is some doubt as to whether Bowers saw anything during the assassination . There is also some doubt that Bowers did not see anything .
 He admitted that thirteen railroad tracks converged on his station, and not only was busy at the time of the assassination, but immediately after hearing the final shot, he had to throw a “red-on-red” signal .
 Yarborough has since clarified that he was referring to Bill Newman, who was at the foot of the grassy knoll with his family and threw himself, his wife, and their two children onto the grass . Yarborough said Newman threw himself and his family onto the knoll .
 Even without the billboard and railroad cars, the foliage between the freeway and the railyard makes it difficult to see very much .
 The picture does not show Craig in the inner office where Oswald was kept, but instead in a separate outer office . The picture was taken at the time of the assassination .
 He had to decide how to slip the gun into the Depository and where to take a sniper’s position . He decided to slip gun into Depository, then take sniper position .
 His lack of preparation is evident by the fact he only had four bullets with him, though the rifle’s clip could hold six . The rifle's clip can hold six bullets .
 They were all he had left from his last practice session, and he evidently did not have time to buy more . They were the only things left from Thursday's practice session that he had to do .
 Oswald had never before seen a presidential motorcade . Oswald knew it would be a far more difficult task than taking aim at the retired General Walker . Oswald had little idea of what to expect for security, but knew it was more difficult .
 He could not be sure whether the President would have the bubble top on the car,* or if Secret Service agents would ride on the rear of the limousine partially blocking his view .
 Lookouts might be posted in tall buildings, perhaps even in the Depository . He could not be certain of finding a deserted floor or area from which to shoot . He was not sure if he could find it .
 Oswald also wanted to escape, although he probably had not planned much beyond getting away from the Depository before the police sealed the area . Oswald was not likely to be able to escape from the scene .
 After firing the final shot, he slipped through the narrow gap he had created between the cartons of books .
 Oswald rapidly descended the stairs until he heard the sound of footsteps running up . Oswald then heard the footsteps of footsteps coming up from the stairs . Oswald had been in the house at the time .
 He ducked off at the second floor, and dashed into the adjoining lunch room . He darted off at 2:30 p.m. and darted into the adjacent lunch room.
 A Dallas man was shot in the head by a Dallas police officer . He says he was attacked by a police officer in the early hours of the attack .
 He yelled for directions to the stairs or elevator, and the building manager, Roy Truly, rushed him through a pair of swinging doors to the closest elevator . Mr Truly was rushed to the nearest elevator by the building's manager .
 Truly and Baker sprinted to the nearest staircase, that in the rear of the building, and started up, with Baker behind Truly . Truly sprinted up the stairs to the end of the staircase .
 When Baker reached the second floor, “I was kind of scanning the rooms,” he recalled . Baker: “When I got there, I kind of scanned the rooms’s rooms.”
 I don't know how come I saw him, but I had a glimpse of him coming down there. I don’t know how . I had to see him come down there, he said .
 Baker recalled that Oswald was moving as fast as he was and was “hurrying” through a second door, which would have let him enter the office and conference area where Baker could not have seen him . Baker said Oswald was "hurrying" through the second door to enter
 It was not until he went to police headquarters later that afternoon that he realized he had encountered the suspect within minutes of the last shot, he said .
 He went to the soda machine and purchased a Coke as he decided how to leave the Depository . He bought a Coke from the machine as he walked out of the building .
 He could return to the staircase Baker had just run up and leave from the rear of the building . Or he could continue from the lunch room, past the offices, and down another staircase out the front of the Depository .
 Two construction workers, George Rackley and James Romack, volunteered to help the police by keeping a watch on the rear exit of the building .
 During the five minutes they were there, before they were replaced by police units, no one left from that exit . Police units replaced them with police units .
 The building’s front was not covered for at least ten minutes, and possibly longer . The front of the building was covered for several minutes .
 Oswald ran into another Depository worker, Mrs. Mrs. Oswald . Oswald ran past the second-floor offices of the Depository .
 She panicked after the shots and ran into the building to her office . She had panicked after she had panicked and ran inside the building .
 Reid returned to the office area in just under two minutes, which would dovetail perfectly with Baker and Truly’s encounter with Oswald thirty seconds earlier . In her own reconstruction of her actions after the assassination, Reid says she returned to her office in just two minutes .
 She saw Oswald just after he left the lunch room where Officer Baker had confronted him . Oswald was walking toward the front stairs when she saw him, she says .
 Reid noticed the full bottle of Coke, and thought Oswald seemed calm . “I didn’t pay any attention to what he said,” he said .
 She considered it “a little strange” that he should be wandering in the second-floor offices just moments after the assassination . She soon forgot about him .
 He was outside the Depository less than three minutes after he fired the final shot . For the first time he saw the pandemonium he had created, he said .
 After his arrest, he maintained that when he learned of the shooting, his immediate thought was there would be no more work for the day, so he simply went home . He maintained that he thought he was going to work until he learned he had to go home .
 He was not interested, apparently, in whether the President had been hit or if the assassin had been caught . Although politics was his favorite subject, he did not want to know if the President was hit .
 Oswald could have taken either of two buses, one that would drop him off right at his address, the Beckley line, or the Marsalis line . One of the buses would let him off several blocks away .
 Waiting for a bus at Dealey Plaza was too risky, so he began walking east on Elm Street, away from the Depository, to find a bus . Waiting for the bus would be too risky for him, he decided to walk east .
 Oswald remembered because he pounded on the door in the middle of the block in order to board . Oswald's driver, Cecil McWatters, remembered Oswald because of the door pounding on it . Oswald died in November 1945 .
 Landlady Mary Bledsoe rented a room to him for one week and then refused to allow him to stay further . In remarkable coincidence, one of the five was the landlady who refused to let him stay further in the town .
 Just after he boarded, the traffic became heavy, and the number of incoming sirens increased . The man boarded the plane at the time .
 Oswald stood up, asked for a transfer, and got off the bus . Oswald stood down and walked out of the bus at the end of the ride . Oswald was the first black person to leave the bus for a bus .
 Housekeeper Earlene Roberts was trying to adjust the reception on the television after a neighbor told her the President had been shot .
 Though it was too warm for a jacket, he took one to hide the revolver he had tucked into the waistband of his pants . It was too late for him to wear a jacket .
 He zipped the jacket as he rushed out of the house a couple of minutes later . He rushed to the hospital after the incident .
 Some witnesses later claimed they ran into Secret Service agents outside the Depository . Witnesses say they saw Secret Service officers .
 Different groups of law enforcement officials spread out in Dealey after the assassination . They included Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms agents, postal inspectors and postal inspectors .
 By 12:45, the building was sealed and a floor-to-floor search had begun . The building was closed and the search began at 12:30 .
 Carl Day, chief of the Dallas Police crime scene search unit, photographed the three bullet shells in their original position . Carl Day said the three shell shells were found in the original position of each one .
 Ballistics tests later determined they were fired from Oswald’s rifle, to the exclusion of any other gun . The tests were carried out to exclude any other weapon .
 As he leaned his hand there, the oil or moisture in his hand left a very clear, unsmudged print . He might have been a little nervous .
 Usually, you can’t get a print that good from cardboard, but he had been sitting there long enough to leave a real fine one . The print was printed on cardboard, and it was a good print .
 Day could immediately estimate the chances for recovery of prints, and it was poor . Day could only estimate the chance of recovery from prints . Day said the chances of recovery were poor .
 "I knew there could be no fingerprints on that strap, so I picked the gun up by that. I picked up the gun by that," she said . "There were no fingerprints in that strap," she added .
 The stock was pretty porous and weather-worn, so there was little chance of any prints there . The stock of the prints was pretty thin, and there were no prints of any .
 Before pulling the bolt back, I satisfied myself there were no prints on the little metal lever . Before pulling it back, he satisfied himself that the bolt had been removed .
 Captain Fritz pulled the bolt, and a live round fell out of the gun . Then he held the gun while he pulled it out, and it fell out . Captain Fritz then pulled out the bolt and the round was fired .
 Because of its shape, Day immediately thought it might be the bag used to carry the rifle . The bag is believed to have been used to transport the rifle, Day said .
 Oswald’s fingerprint and palm print were the only ones on the bag . The FBI subjected the bag to silver nitrate and found Oswald's prints on it . Oswald's fingerprint was the only one found in the bag, the FBI says .
 The palm print was of Oswald’s right hand and was near the bottom of the bag . It concurred with how Buell Frazier and his sister, Linnie Mae Randle, testified he carried the package . Oswald's right hand was in the bag, which concurred
 Oswald's clipboard was not found on the sixth floor, near the stairwell, until December 2 . Not everything was available that day .
 The three orders attached to the clipboard were all dated November 22, the day of the assassination . The orders were all signed on that day .
 By the time Day left for the lab, the police, with Roy Truly, had gathered every one of the Depository’s employees on the first floor .
 The police are not sure whether the assassin merely used the Depository or whether he was an employee . The police were not sure if the assassin was a store employee .
 As a result, while they searched there, they also continued to look around Dealey Plaza .
 Over an hour after the assassination, three men were found inside a railway car several blocks away . Three men found inside the railway car after the attack .
 Later dubbed “the three tramps,” they became a mainstay of conspiracy speculation . Later dubbed "the tramps," they were later dubbed ‘The Three Tramps’
 It was suspicious the police did not take their names, and the men seemed too well dressed to be hoboes . The men were not taken into custody, but police were suspicious they were not named .
 Everything from computer enhancements to anthropological studies were used to find out who they were . Over the years, everything from computer technology to anthropology were used .
 Some labeled Watergate burglars Frank Sturgis and E Howard Hunt as two of the tramps . Hunt was a member of the Watergate burglary ring . Hunt is a former FBI agent who worked for the Watergate team . Hunt worked for a federal government investigating the Watergate scandal .
 Charles Harrelson, a convicted contract murderer, was identified as the tallest man in the country . The tallest one of the tallest men in the U.S. is a convicted murderer . He was convicted of contract murder in 2007 .
 Some self-proclaimed adventurers, like Chauncey Holt, have confessed to being one of the tramps . Some have spun tales about their purported roles in the assassination .
 Records identify the suspects as Harold Doyle, Gus Abrams, and John Gedney . The records identified the suspects .
 Two of the men, Gedney and Doyle, were still sleeping in the train car when the police arrested them . They were real tramps who had been sleeping there the night before the assassination .
 The men had no connection to the events at Dealey, and the conspiracy press suddenly and quietly abandoned the issue . The men did not have any connection to Dealey .
 Oswald had left his rooming house while the hunt for the assassin was under way at Dealey . Oswald was found dead at the scene of the Dallas shooting . Oswald had not been found by police .
 When Earlene Roberts last saw him, he was at a bus stop across the street, she said . He was last seen at the bus stop .
 Oswald was ordered to drive into Oak Cliff at 12:45 from his outlying area . Tippit saw Oswald walking briskly ahead of him, east along Tenth Street . Oswald had been ordered to go to Oak Cliff .
 He pulled his patrol car to the curb behind Oswald and called him over . Oswald was the first officer to pull over and ask him to come over .
 He leaned close toward the passenger side, exchanging some words through the open vent window . The passenger side of the car was also exchanging words through an open window .
 Whatever he said did not satisfy Tippit, he then got out of the car and started to walk around the front toward Oswald . Oswald was shot dead in November 1963 . Oswald had been shot by a White House agent .
 Tippit did not first call in on his radio that he had stopped someone, nor did he draw his gun upon exiting the car . He did not call in first to say he stopped someone on radio, nor to draw gun upon exit .
 Dallas police say he was merely suspicious, but not positive he had found a suspect . According to Dallas police procedures, this indicated that he was just suspicious . Police procedures indicate that this indicated he was not positive of finding a suspect, police say .
 Oswald whipped out his revolver and began shooting . Tippit reached the front left tire, Oswald opened fire on him . Oswald shot at the tire .
 Oswald then began running back toward Patton Avenue, emptying shells from the revolver along the way . Oswald then ran back to Patton Avenue . Oswald had emptied shells from his revolver .
 After the shots, Oswald trotted back toward her and she began screaming . Oswald was shot in the head by Oswald, but she was not hurt .
 Oswald came across the corner of their lawn, pulling and shaking shells from his gun . Oswald was seen pulling shells from the gun, shaking his gun and shaking his hand . Oswald's family was shocked to see him shaking shells and shaking the gun .
 William Scoggins, a Dallas taxi driver, was eating his lunch in his cab, parked less than half a block away . He was eating in his taxi, parked in his parked car, parked just a block from the scene of the shooting .
 He hid behind the rear of his taxi as Oswald ran toward him . After he heard the shots, he looked up in time to see Tippit fall, and then hid .
 Domingo Benavides was driving a pickup truck when he was shot . He was the closest witness to the shooting . The shooting happened in the early hours of Sunday morning .
 He estimated he was only fifteen feet from Tippit’s car when the officer was shot . The officer was only 15 feet from the car when he was shot, he said .
 He saw Tippit fall over after the first shots and then watched Oswald leave the scene emptying his gun . He saw Oswald fall over and then watch Oswald leave empty gun . Oswald was the only witness to the shooting .
 Seven people either came outside or to the windows when they heard the shots . There, seven people were either inside or outside of the scene .
 Warren Reynolds was on the far side of Jefferson Avenue in a car lot he owned and had an excellent view from the porch of his office . Reynolds' office was located on the other side of the street .
 Reynolds saw a man coming down the street with a gun in his hand, swinging it just like he was running, he said . Reynolds says he saw the man swinging the gun in the street .
 Jack R Tatum was driving through the intersection of Patton and East Tenth Street when the shooting took place . The shooting occurred at the intersection .
 Oswald did not make himself available to Dallas Police . He had “no question whatsoever” that it was Oswald, he said . Oswald had ‘very good look’ at the killer .
 Tatum told his story for the first time to investigators for the House Select Committee on Assassinations . Tatum tells his story to investigators on the committee .
 A high-ranking Dallas police official who was a member of the force in 1963 told the author there was another witness who had positively identified Oswald as the shooter but was never publicly identified . The official said the witness was never identified .
 The man was married and had been at a house in Oak Cliff visiting his mistress for an afternoon tryst . Evidently, the man was at a home in Dallas with his mistress . The man is married .
 The police decided not to use him as they had enough other solid evidence of the murder . The man pleaded that they not involve him, to avoid embarrassing publicity .
 Dashing through the gas station across from Reynolds’s car lot, he dropped his light-beige jacket . Dashing across the gas .
 All of the Tippit murder eyewitnesses described the shooter with a jacket, and when arrested before 2:00, Oswald had no jacket . Oswald was arrested before he was arrested for the murder of Tippits .
 All who were asked identified the jacket when it was shown to them during their Warren Commission testimony, each remembered it slightly differently .
 Markham, Scoggins, and Barbara Davis thought the jacket was a little too light . Barbara Davis said it was a light jacket .
 William Smith, Virginia Davis, Virginia . Davis, Benavides, and Guinyard said the Commission exhibit was exactly like the one they saw in the rear of the gas station .
 She thought he had worn it to the Paines’ house the night before the assassination . She thought it was the night he was assassinated .
 Oswald had emptied four shells from his gun during his escape . Benavides and Virginia and Barbara Davis found four shells that Oswald emptied .
 Oswald’s revolver, which he had with him when captured just blocks away, was matched to the gun . Oswald had shells matched, to the exclusion of any other gun, to Oswald's revolver . Oswald was captured in the early hours of September 4, 1918 .
 His pistol was a .38 caliber, rechambambered, to handle .38 special ammunition, a better bullet than .38 regular ammo . The pistol was purchased by the company he purchased it from .
 The four slugs recovered from Tippit’s body presented unique problems for ballistics experts . Ballistics experts were unable to match the slugs found in his body to match them .
 Ballistics expert says bullet wobbles a little bit as it goes down the barrel . Ballistic expert: Bullet wobbles, instead of touching on all surfaces as it hits all surfaces .
 A fourth bullet had enough unique characteristics that it was matched to his revolver to the exclusion of all others . However, a fourth bullet was matched with his revolver . The bullet was the only bullet to be matched with the revolver .
 They instead delve into Tippit’s personal life and charge he was having an affair with a married woman and insinuate the murder was connected to that . They also insinuate that murder was linked to that.
 After running through the gas station, he headed west on Jefferson Avenue . Police say he was hit by a car at a gas station in the early hours .
 Police squad cars were speeding east on Jefferson toward the site of the Tippit murder . Within a few minutes, police squad cars had been speeding to the site .
 Oswald heard the sirens and ducked into the foyer of Hardy’s Shoe Store . Oswald heard sirens . Oswald was in the store at the time .
 Brewer looked at him because “his hair was sort of messed up and looked like had been running, and he looked scared,” she says . Brewer: “He looked funny. He looked scared. And he looked funny” Brewer says .
 Oswald stopped near the front of the Texas Theater . Oswald was just over fifty yards from the shoe store . Oswald shot at the theater .
 She turned around, expecting to see Oswald, but then realized he had sneaked inside when she was distracted . Oswald sneaked into the room, snooping in when she turned her back .
 Brewer quickly checked both exits and found they were still locked, meaning Oswald was in the theater . Brewer checked the exits, finding Oswald was still locked . Oswald is believed to be inside the theater.
 Brewer: "I don't know if this is the man they want in there, but he is running from them for some reason" Postal heard a radio report about the President’s assassination .
 Brewer was asked if he could spot the suspect, but quickly realized quickly he was not . Brewer says he was mistaken for the suspect . Brewer: "I'm not a suspect. I'm a victim of crime"
 The arresting officers took him into the office of Captain Will Fritz, the chief of homicide . He was taken into custody and taken to the police station .
 It was nearly 3:00 when Ruth Paine heard heavy knocking at the front door of her home . “And with that, we relinquished our prisoner to the homicide and robbery bureau …”79 It was almost 3,00 when Paine was released .
 Lee Oswald in custody . Lee Oswald was taken into custody at the time of the assassination . Oswald had been shot in the head by a White House agent .
 Ruth had no thought that Lee was involved, but instead was excited that he worked at the same building from which the shots came, and that he probably could give them a ‘first-hand’ account of the day’s events . Ruth said he had no idea that
 Marina was horrified at the news, and feared that Lee might be involved . Marina feared Lee might have been involved in the murder of her friend .
 At her first opportunity away from Ruth, she sneaked into the garage and found the blanket in which Oswald kept the rifle wrapped . Oswald kept it wrapped in an East German blanket .
 When she saw it lying on the floor, she was relieved, believing the rifle was still inside . She was relieved when she saw the rifle still inside, believing it was still there .
 She watched television with Ruth until the announcement came that the President had died . Ruth watched television until the news of the President's death .
 Marina did not cry but sat silently on the sofa, still concerned about Lee . Marina sat silently and sat silently, still worried about Lee's fate .
 The police did not have a warrant, but Ruth allowed them to enter the house . Ruth allowed the police to enter her home, but they had no warrants .
 Carl Day had found partial prints near the trigger guard and at the main barrel of the rifle . Carl Day found prints in the rifle's barrel and on the trigger .
 "It wasn’t a great print. I kept looking at it as it did not stand out real good," he says .
 Day prepared to take pictures of the stock using reflected light and time exposures . Day then prepared to use reflected light to take the pictures .
 The FBI is sending an agent to collect the rifle and take it to FBI headquarters in Washington for further tests .
 The gun had our powder all over it by then, and I know I wouldn’t have liked to receive it in that condition once somebody else had started their work on it . The gun's powder had been all over the gun by then .
 Dallas police crime lab detectives saw the palm print before it was sent to the FBI . The public did not know that Oswald’s print had been found on the rifle until Dallas district attorney Henry Wade told a reporter in a press conference on November 24 . The FBI then examined Day�
 The print was important, because it was the first piece of direct physical evidence that placed Oswald's rifle in Oswald’s hands . The print is important because it is the first physical evidence of Oswald's ownership of the rifle .
 The failure of the FBI to find a print in its initial examination has led to accusations that the Dallas police must have concocted the evidence in order to close the case against Oswald .
 Oliver Stone, in JFK, created a scene that showed an unidentified man placing the gun into Oswald’s dead hand to obtain a print . Oliver Stone created the scene .
 FBI agent Drain claimed that Day never told him about the print when he picked up the gun . Drain also claimed that he was never told by the FBI agent that the print had been printed .
 J Edgar Hoover was furious that his vaunted FBI laboratory failed to pick up any trace of one of the most critical prints in the case . Hoover was angry that the FBI lab failed to find a trace of the key prints .
 "People who claim there was a planted print don’t know anything about fingerprinting," says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter says fingerprinting is a sign of human error .
 You can't even place a print on something from a card, and that’s all we had on the first night, when I lifted that print. You can’t even place the print on a card. That was all that we had. That's all that I
 After lifting the palm print, I could still see traces on the stock with my reflective light . The palm print is still visible in the light of the reflective light on the surface .
 They either overlooked it or it wasn’t good enough to see by the time that gun arrived there, police say . The gun was either overlooked or it was not good enough for the shooter to see .
 Livingston’s book included significant new evidence, which he had in his personal possession, and which had never been seen by the FBI, the Warren Commission, or the House Select Committee on Assassinations . Livingston's book included new evidence .
 The MannlicherCarcano’s trigger guard was found with partial fingerprints on the trigger guard . Some of the most important material was four photographs of the partial fingerprints .
 Public Television’s Frontline program had fingerprint experts examine the newly discovered evidence . Since the Livingston photos were different from the ones previously used by investigators for comparison, several fingerprint experts examined them .
 Captain Jerry Powdrill, of the Monroe, Louisiana, police department, focused on the clearest of the four photos . Livingston’s photo was taken by a helicopter over a road in the town .
 Law enforcement requires between six and ten matching points . That was not enough for a positive identification .
 A former FBI fingerprint expert studied the Livingston photos and agreed with Powdrill that they were inconclusive . The Livingston photos are inconclusive.
 Vincent Scalice made a breakthrough using photo enhancements . Scalice used photo enhancements to make the breakthrough . The breakthrough was made by Scalice's team of experts .
 Scalice, who had been the fingerprint expert for the House Select Committee on Assassinations, made his own photos of the Livingston prints . Scalice used different exposures ranging from light to medium to dark to dark .
 Scalice identified eighteen matching points between the trigger guard prints and Oswald’s fingerprint card . Scalice studied the varying degrees of contrast between the photos and Oswald's prints .
 Styles and Adams did not arrive on the first floor until at least four to five minutes after the third shot, Adams says . Styles, Adams say they thought they came down quickly, but they actually did not .
 Victoria Adams said that when she got to the first floor, she saw Billy Lovelady and William Shelley . The critical testimony is from Victoria Adams, who said she saw them in the first place .
 A Secret Service agent, John Howlett, also completed Oswald’s route in the necessary time . Howlett completed Oswald's route in necessary time.
 Oswald had left the sixth floor he could only descend one staircase, the rear one . Oswald had to descend the rear staircase to get to the bottom of the staircase . Oswald could not descend the other staircase .
 Oswald had little choice, since to catch the bus beyond the Depository would have had to walk a longer distance and through Dealey Plaza . Oswald's bus would have taken him a longer way to catch a bus to the Dallas area .
 Every Dallas bus driver has a distinctive paper punch that marks the approximate time of issuance . The punch marks the time of the punch being used by the driver .
 Oswald's bus transfer was retrieved by the police . Police quickly knew not only the bus driver but also the time Oswald had taken the bus . Oswald was found dead in a car crash on Sunday morning .
 Such an extraordinary departure from normal routine also indicates he was in flight . Such a departure of normal routine indicates he may have been in flight, he says .
 Before the taxi left the station, an elderly woman approached and asked Whaley to call her another cab . Whaley says the elderly woman asked her to call another cab after the incident .
 Oswald offered her that cab, apparently in the belief that it would be easier for him just to take another one than wait for Whaley to help the woman . Oswald offered the woman that cab in the hope that Whaley would be able to help her .
 At the last moment, she must have decided it was also easier just to find another taxi, and she left the cab to Oswald . At the end of the trip, she decided to give Oswald a second taxi .
 Critics say the unidentified car was passing a prearranged signal to Oswald . Critics say it was a pre-planned signal . She did not recognize the car .
 Journalist Hugh Aynesworth interviewed Roberts four times, once on the afternoon of the assassination, and three times during the subsequent months .
 In the first two interviews Roberts did not tell of any incident with a police car . Roberts has been charged with multiple counts of assault on a police officer .
 Aynesworth says during the last two interviews she “changed her story dramatically,” recalling different numbers on the supposed police car each time she was questioned . She says she has been repeatedly questioned by police officers .
 Dallas police records show no car was in her neighborhood at the time she described . Police records show that no vehicle was in the neighborhood when she described the incident .
 Any of those law enforcement officials could have been confused with Secret Service, agents, agents . The Secret Service is not a law enforcement agency .
 Photographs and testimony indicate shells were found in a random pattern . But the photographs and Mooney’s testimony indicate the shells are found in random patterns .
 Another shell is indented on the rim, raising doubts that it could have been fired from a rifle in that condition . Another shell was indented in the rim .
 Oswald’s Carcano was later swapped for the murder weapon, police said . Speculation that a different gun was found on the sixth floor led to speculation a different weapon was found .
 There are considerable similarities between a bolt-action Mauser and a Carcano . There are some similarities between the two weapons .
 Warren Commission counsel David Belin had a plausible explanation that was in the draft of the Warren Report but did not make it into the final publication . No one can be certain, but no one can't be certain .
 A Greyhound was scheduled to leave at 3:30. That would have taken him to a point on Lancaster Road where he was waiting for a Greyhound . The dog was found dead in the early hours .
 The southbound Greyhound would have, with connections, gone to Monterrey, Mexico . It would have been headed to Mexico .
 A reconstruction of the time that elapsed since he left the Depository shows it is more than possible . A reconstruction shows that it is possible that the time has elapsed since his departure .
 He then took another two minutes before reaching the bus station and Whaley’s cab . Whaley then took two more minutes to reach the bus .
 Whaley, who had thirty-seven years of taxi experience, claimed he knew every shortcut in the city . Whaley: "I'm a taxi driver who knows every shortcut"
 No one is sure if Oswald, who knew the area, had a shortcut to his room . Those who were timed in the reconstruction followed the streets . No one knows if Oswald knew a shortcut .
 In any case, he arrived at the rooming house about 12:55 to 12:56, and left again before 1:00. He arrived at 12:00 to 12.55, according to the time of arrival .
 Tippit’s car was found in the back seat of a police officer's car . Bowley and Domingo Benavides, ran to the car and called it in over his radio .
 Markham identified Oswald by his clothing and not his face, according to investigators . Markham was excitable and sometimes hysterical, Markham said Oswald was not Oswald .
 When asked if she picked Oswald out of the lineup because of his clothes or face, she said, “Mostly from his face.” But she said she didn’t pick Oswald because he was wearing the same outfit .
 CBS newsman Walter Cronkite later asked him whether there was any doubt that Oswald was the shooter . He said there was "no doubt" Oswald was Oswald .
 He fully recovered and testified to the Warren Commission six months later . He was fully recovered from his injuries and fully recovered .
 The police suspected the perpetrator was actually a Reynolds acquaintance and rival Darrell Garner . Garner was Reynolds' longtime rival, Darrell Garner, who is thought to be Reynolds' rival .
 Some critics suggest that the shooting was connected to the Kennedy case, but no one has given a good explanation for why Reynolds was singled out . More than ten other witnesses who saw and testified to the same thing as he did were left unharmed .
 Some witnesses must be questioned for their truthfulness in saying they were even in the neighborhood on that day . Such statements, usually made years after the shooting, have internal inconsistencies which are so great .
 There is no credible eyewitness testimony that undercuts the evidence that Oswald was the shooter, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 The FBI was unable to find a local dry cleaner that used that mark, raising the possibility that Oswald had purchased the jacket secondhand . Oswald's jacket had the laundry mark already in it from another city, the FBI says .
 Of the four bullets removed from Tippit's body, three were Winchester-Western and only one was Remington-Peters . Only one of the bullets were Remington Peters . The autopsy was conducted by the coroner .
 Oswald likely fired five shots and one missed Tippit, leaving an undiscovered Remington-Peters bullet and a Winchester-Western shell . Oswald's shooting spree left a shell and a bullet that was undiscovered, according to a new report .
 Eddie Kinsley, an ambulance attendant who took Tippit to the hospital, said that upon unloading the body, he kicked a loose bullet onto the parking lot . The bullet apparently struck a button on the uniform of the victim, which had evidently struck a . button on T
 Oswald had six bullets in his revolver and five loose ones in his pocket when he was arrested . Oswald was arrested at the time of his arrest in Dallas, Texas, in August .
 A dozen witnesses saw Oswald kill Tippit, then Brewer followed him into the theater . That was before witnesses saw him kill Oswald, and then Brewer .
 He wrote that while police scanned the theater, “a man sitting near the front spoke up quietly.” He said a man sitting nearby the front of the theater spoke up .
 Anson never informed the reader that the man he found so suspicious was actually Johnny Calvin Brewer . Brewer is Brewer, the man Anson found suspicious . Brewer was Brewer's real name .
 Pepper Jenkins had lunch in the dining room at Parkland Hospital with several people from his anesthesiology department . Pepper Jenkins was joined by several other doctors at the hospital .
 Jenkins left to retrieve an anesthesia machine, while the chief nurse, Audrey Bell, went to prepare trauma room one .
 The President’s limousine screeches into the rear of Parkland, stopping near the Emergency entrance .
 Governor Connally appeared unconscious in the middle seat, lying across his wife . His shirt and suit jacket was heavily stained with blood . Governor was lying across the wife, his shirt and jacket stained with bloody blood .
 Only President Kennedy’s torso was visible as Jacqueline cradled his head in her lap . Jacqueline was cradling the president's head when he was killed .
 Secret Service agent Clint Hill seemed dazed as he slid off the trunk . Hill had barely clung on to the rear of the car during the high-speed dash to Parkland .
 "Because I could not carry on the conversation with my patient, I drew a stretcher and went out to find what was going on," she said . "I could not keep talking to my patient. Because I drew the stretcher, I went out and went to find out what
 "I honestly thought I was not long for this world. There were any number of very serious people standing around with submachine guns," he says .
 Jackie Kennedy sat up and I knew right away there was terrible trouble. Then one of the Secret Service men grabbed the other end of the carriage and hustled me toward this big black car, she says .
 Connally suddenly became semiconscious as the car stopped and, with a great show of determination, helped himself from the car . Connally collapsed into the arms of hospital attendants .
 "I never saw anyone with a head wound like that, with the amount of brain matter scattered about, that survived," he says . "It's never been seen anyone with that brain matter that survived that survived"
 "We put the President on the gurney and wheeled him into emergency room one. We put the president on a gurny," says White House aide . "We wheeled the President out of the hospital"
 She went in with us as the gurney was rolled into the hospital, walking right beside him, holding his hand . She walked in with him as he lay on a gurny .
 'Absolutely not. One of the nurses offered to clean off her clothing, and she said, ‘Absolutely not’ She refused to clean up her clothing . She said: ‘I’m not going to wash my clothes off. She’s very upset that
 "But the only doctor there when I arrived was Carrico, and Drs. Jenkins,” she says . “but the only doctors there were there were Carricos and Dr. Jenkins," Jenkins says .
 He was blue-white, had fixed, dilated pupils and slow, spasmodic breathing . He was also had fixed pupils and had fixed and slow eyesight .
 Two nurses, Diana Bowron and Margaret Henchliffe, cut away the President’s clothes and his back brace, which was wrapped with Ace bandages .
 Carrico placed his hands under the President’s back and felt for any other major wound . The President was shot in the head in the early hours of Saturday morning . Carricos said he was not sure if he had any major wounds .
 Carrico inserted a breathing tube into the President’s mouth and down his throat . An automatic respirator was hooked up to the tube . The President was rushed to a critical condition .
 Jenkins had taken the traditional anesthesiologist position at the head of the table . Jenkins had been in charge of the team at the start of the session .
 He had a shock of hair, a big shock, and he was lying with his head back against me, and by this time we had the EKG hooked up to him, and it showed a dying heart pattern .
 Malcolm Perry started a tracheotomy, an operation in which an artificial airway is created by cutting into the throat and inserting a tube directly into the windpipe . The operation is known as trachotomy .
 Dr. Carrico was trying to get the endotracheal tube in, he saw blood in the trachea,” he said . “He saw blood. He saw blood,’ he said. “It was blood. It was blood .
 The President's throat was obliterated by Dr. Donald Trump's surgical procedure . That surgical procedure cut directly over the exit wound on the throat, and therefore, within minutes of the President’s arrival, that wound is obliterated .
 Baxter, Peters, and McClelland inserted a tube into the chest cavity to drain any blood or fluid . The tube was inserted to drain the fluid from the chest .
 Charles Baxter’s pulse, “which we had gotten to an erratic level near 100, started to decline,” says Dr. Charles Baxter . Charles Baxter's pulse, which had been erratic, began to drop, he says .
 Jackie Kennedy continued to stand on the side, staring blankly at the frantic efforts to revive her husband . Jackie continued to stare blankly as the frantic activities were carried out .
 Several times, a nurse or Secret Service agent led her outside, suggesting it was better if she did not remain in the trauma room . Several times times, she was led out of the room by an agent or nurse .
 Lady Bird Johnson walked around a bend in a corridor, and “suddenly I found myself face to face with Jackie in a small hall,” she says .
 She nudged me with her elbow. And on one of her trips back into the room, she nudged him with an elbow . She said, "I'm not going to get back in the room. I'm going to be in the middle of the conversation."
 The doctors spoke about cutting open the President’s chest and massaging the heart muscle . The President's heart muscle was massaged by the doctors .
 Jenkins, standing at the head of the table, noticed a priest, Father Oscar Huber, had appeared at the room’s swinging doors . Father Huber was a priest at the scene .
 President Barack Obama was in the middle of a meeting at the White House in Washington, D.C. on Monday night . The White House has been criticized for its handling of the budget crisis .
 Kemp Clark, the only neurosurgeon in the room, quickly inspects the head wound . Kemp Clark was the only surgeon in the hospital . Clark: "It's a good thing that you have to be very careful"
 "I almost laid across his chest and said no. Somebody was poised with a knife ready to do open-chest massage," she says . She says she almost laid on him and said 'no'
 Mrs. Jacqueline was taken to the hospital by a family member . The hospital chief of the emergency room walked over to Jacqueline, and quietly said, "‘Mrs. Baxter,” she said, “” Mrs. Baxter’
 She had a look in her eyes, on her face, of terror, disbelief, and bewilderment, she said . She said: "She was terrified, shocked and bewildered. She had no idea what happened."
 "We were not about to start examining the wounds or turning the body over," says CNN.com's John Sutter . "We're not going to turn over the body," says Sutter.
 "Everyone backed off from that body with the reverence, with the grief, with all the emotions you could imagine," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 "I wanted to leave, too, but I couldn’t get out of the room because I was hemmed in by the priest and Mrs. Mrs. . I wanted to get out, too," she said . "I couldn”t get away from the room,"
 Some nurses and residents wrapped the President in white sheets, a plastic mattress cover, and some pillowcases . The President's casket is expected to arrive in the next few days .
 The attending doctors had decided to fix the time of death as 1:00 P.M. and, since the cause of death was the massive head wound, decided that Dr. Dr. James was the only person to die from a head wound .
 Mac Kilduff, a Kennedy aide, went to a side room, where Vice-President Johnson was under heavy Secret Service guard . Vice President Johnson was in the room at the time of the assassination .
 LBJ told him to wait until his party was away from the hospital . He informed Johnson that he wanted to announce Kennedy's death, but LBJ said he would wait .
 No one is sure who killed the President or if it was a conspiracy that targeted other members of the government . No one was sure who had killed President Obama .
 There was a tremendous rush into the hospital corridors by newsmen hurrying to get the word over the wire .
 Governor John Connally faced a life-and-death battle with President Kennedy . Connally was killed in Texas in March 1968 . Governor Connally died of a heart attack .
 He had bullet wounds in his right rear shoulder, under his right nipple, right wrist, and left thigh . He also had wounds under his nipple, under the nipple, and under his left thigh, among others .
 Robert Shaw, a thoracic surgeon, took over the Governor’s care at 12:45. Shaw is the first surgeon to take over .
 Shaw had moved Connally to surgery and for nearly two hours sutured the Governor’s damaged lung and muscles . Connally was moved to surgery on his damaged lung, muscles .
 The empty stretcher was placed into an elevator by an orderly and then moved into a hospital hallway . That empty stretchered was placed in an elevator, then moved out of the hospital .
 Darrell Tomlinson, the hospital’s senior engineer, bumped into it, and when he did, a 6.5mm bullet rolled onto the floor . The bullet rolled into the floor, killing the hospital's senior engineer .
 Vice-President Johnson was determined not to leave the state without the President’s body . But unknown to the Texan authorities, he was determined to leave without the body .
 Kennedy would not leave the hospital without the President’s body, he said . Kennedy urged again that we go ahead and take Air Force One and return to Washington, he added .
 "I said so, but I agreed we would board the airplane and wait until Mrs. Mrs. Smith was ready to board . I said so . I agreed to board the plane .
 Theron Ward, a Dallas justice of the peace, was at the hospital but was weak in asserting Texas law . Ward: "I'm not sure what happened to me, but I'm sure I'm not going to let it happen"
 Charles Crenshaw, claimed that Secret Service agents drew their weapons and physically forced their way out of the hospital, stealing the bronze coffin from Texas jurisdiction . Charles Crenshaw claimed that the Secret Service .
 Charles Baxter, chief of the emergency rooms, authorized the body’s removal . Charles Baxter had authorized the removal .
 Baxter told the author, “and I got involved in it, my thinking was twofold.” Baxter said . Baxter: “I got involved with it, and I got into it, ‘and I . got involved, and it was a two-fold.
 "I did not want him to do that autopsy. And second, Earl was sort of a sensationalist, somebody always on the fringes," he says . "I didn't want him doing that autopsy."
 Instead of immediately departing, Lyndon Johnson waited for a local judge to swear him in as President . They arrived at Love Field in ten minutes and loaded the casket onto the rear of Air Force One .
 Jacqueline Kennedy looked on in shock as a bloodstained Jackie Kennedy was killed . That brief and somber ceremony took place in the front of the plane at 2:37 .
 After the ceremony, she returned to the rear of the plane, where she stayed with the casket for the remainder of the trip . She stayed there for the rest of the flight .
 His theory relies on an elaborate shell game involving rapid exchanges of coffins, a decoy ambulance, and a switched body shroud .
 He contends that once the body was stolen from Air Force One, a covert team of surgeons surgically altered the corpse before the autopsy later that day . The autopsy was performed at Bethesda, Maryland, the next day .
 Lifton tries hard to devise a theory of “medical forgery” to exonerate Oswald . Lifton: JFK was struck by shots from behind, Lifton says . Yet since the medical evidence only supports the conclusion that JFK was hit by a shot from behind .
 Lifton's theory involves a massive plot of scores of conspirators in the Navy, Secret Service, and LBJ’s inner circle, none of whom he identifies . None of the conspirators he identifies are identified .
 He asserts the conspirators also made the mistake of forgetting to put the President back in the same bronze coffin . He claims a simple gray metal one arrived at Bethesda at Bethesda .
 Even the President’s brain was missing, as the conspirators had to hide it, but another one showed up during the autopsy . The President's brain was also missing, and another one was missing .
 The remark was an offhand comment by an attending physician at the autopsy and was misconstrued by the two nonmedical FBI men . The FBI says the remark was offhand and that it was meant to be a joke .
 Forensic pathologist: “Lifton just doesn’t know what he is talking about.”
 He thinks he sees signs of surgery in some of the autopsy photos, but he doesn't know how to read those pictures . He says he doesn’t know if autopsy photos show surgery .
 He's not a doctor and it's clear by his work that he doesn't understand what really happened . He’s not a . doctor .
 He doesn’t even take into account rigor mortis, which starts two hours after death, which begins two hours later . He doesn't even take account rigors mortis .
 Surgery done on a corpse would look different than one on a living person . Surgery done in the same way as one done in a corpse .
 Cyril Wecht, the most vocal medical critic of the Warren Commission’s conclusions, dismisses Lifton out of hand . Wecht: Lifton is not a medical expert and should be careful of his views . He says Lifton's views on the commission's conclusions are
 Lifton says he could assemble a whole team of the best surgeons in the country and still not be able to accomplish in a day what he says was done in a few hours . Lifton: "I could assemble the best surgeon in the world but still not have the ability to accomplish
 In a seven-hundred-page book, Lifton spends only two pages on this essential issue . Lifton's book is published by Lifton in New York, New York .
 General Godfrey McHugh stayed with the casket after it was loaded onto the plane . Fulfilling the military duty that a high-ranking officer should remain as an honor guard with the body of a slain Commander in Chief until the burial .
 He went to the cockpit to check on the plane’s departure only when Mrs. Mrs. was flying, he said .
 During LBJ’s swearing-in ceremony, McHugh remained with the casket . McHugh was in the front of the crowd at LBJ's inauguration in 1945 .
 President Obama was President of the United States and was Commander in Chief of the Military . However, he felt that it should be a military hospital, in that he had been President .
 The casket they lowered was the same bronze one that JFK was placed into at Parkland and which was loaded onto Air Force One in Dallas . JFK's casket is the same one that was placed in Parkland at the time .
 There was no sign of the simple gray casket that Lofton charged contained Kennedy’s body on the arrival at Bethesda . Kennedy's body was found in a casket at Bethesda, Maryland .
 Sibert and O’Neill helped take the casket inside, and there, waiting for the President’s body, were Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Sibert . The casket was taken to the White House, where he was buried .
 Humes, a thirty-nine-year-old Navy commander, was director of labs of the Naval Medical School in Bethesda, Maryland . Humes is a former commander of the Navy . He is the son of a Navy captain .
 Boswell, also a commander, was forty-one, and chief of pathology at the Navy hospital . Boswell was also commander, and Chief of pathology, at the time of his death .
 Humes was notified at 5:15, when he was at home, that he should return to the hospital . Humes had been told by the hospital to return to his home at 5.15 .
 Admiral Ed Kenney, the Navy’s surgeon general, told Humes “to be prepared to do an autopsy” on JFK . Humes chose Boswell to be his assistant .
 Autopsies had performed several autopsies involving gunshots before . They did not have extensive experience with bullet wounds before .
 The Armed Forces Institute of Pathology asked for a pathologist with experience in gunshot deaths . Bruce Smith is the deputy director of the Armed Forces institute of pathology . Smith is a former pathologist for the Army and Navy .
 Ballistics expert had reviewed records of U.S. military personnel who had died of gunshot wounds for nearly ten years . He had never done an autopsy involving a gunshot wound . He was a ballistics expert .
 Humes and Boswell, with help from FBI agents O’Neill and Sibert, removed the body from the scene . The FBI and Secret Service removed the remains from the site .
 O’Neill took responsibility for security, ensuring that no unauthorized personnel entered the area or had access to the body . No unauthorized personnel were allowed to enter the area .
 There is an oft-repeated story of an FBI photographer, without any prior autopsy experience, who allegedly took the photographs . There is also a story of FBI photographer without prior autopsy .
 The President was shot by two bullets from the rear, there have been attempts to cast doubt on their authenticity . Because they support the conclusion that the . conclusion that . the President was . shot by . two bullets, there has been attempts . to cast doubts on the authenticity .
 Robert Groden and Harrison Livingstone conclude the X rays are fakes . They raise doubts about some of the photos . High Treason is based on a book written by Harrison Livingston .
 They ignore the extensive work of the House Select Committee in examining that very issue . However, they ignore the fact that the House has examined the issue very closely .
 John Stringer, who took the photographs, viewed them at the National Archives on November 1, 1966, and verified that the pictures were the ones he had taken . Stringer took the pictures in 1966 . The photos were taken at the time of the shooting .
 Human bone structure varies uniquely from one individual to another and can be as good a means of identification as fingerprints . Bone structure can be used to identify a person with a unique bone structure .
 Twenty-two earlier X rays of John Kennedy were compared to those taken at Bethesda . John Kennedy's X rays were taken at the same time .
 Bethesda was a teaching hospital, and its morgue had an amphitheater filled with almost forty people . Bethesda's morgue was filled with nearly forty people, including a morgue .
 Humes recalls that autopsy doctors did not allow the crowd to bother them . Humes recalled that though they were dealing with the President, the autopsy doctors didn't let the crowd bother them.
 The three pathologists found two wounds caused by high-velocity missiles . “We were unfazed by the commotion,” says one of the pathologists . ‘We were unharmed,’ he says .
 The Kennedys were willing to let the doctors determine the cause of death but not to let them conduct an extensive autopsy . The family did not want to conduct an autopsy, but wanted to know the cause .
 Michael Baden says a proper examination of the President “could have taken two or three days,” but they only spent a few hours on the autopsy and the rest of the time working with the funeral director .
 A lot of things weren’t done, such as inspecting the spine, dissecting the neck organs, tracing out the bullet tracks, and inspecting the clothing . The coroner’s office says it was too late to inspect the spine .
 In 1968, a four-member medical panel appointed by attorney general Ramsey Clark concluded the President was struck by two shots from behind . The panel reaffirmed the original autopsy report . The autopsy report was published in 1968 .
 In 1975, the Commission on CIA Activities Within the U.S. reviewed the case . The Warren Commission confirmed the autopsy results and the Warren Commission conclusions .
 In the late 1970s, the House Select Committee appointed a nine-member medical panel of experts with vast experience in gunshot wounds . The panel was appointed by the House of Representatives in the 1970s .
 Forensic scientists and medical examiners were the first forensic scientists to have complete access to all the photographs and X rays, as well as financial support to conduct the latest scientific tests, including neutron activation .
 The Select Committee panel found faults with the autopsy, but confirmed its findings . It held that JFK was struck only by two bullets from behind . The panel also found faults in the autopsy .
 The autopsy doctors were unable to figure out the path for the bullet that had entered at the rear base of the President’s neck .
 The bullet might have penetrated the back for only a few inches and then fallen out during the emergency treatment in Dallas, Texas . The bullet was found in the back of a man's back, but no exit could be found .
 JFK's shirt collar was hit by a bullet that exited through the front of his neck . JFK's clothes had not been examined because they had not examined the President’s clothes .
 It was not until Dr. Perry at Parkland had obliterated the neck wound . The wound had to be surgically removed from his neck .
 Humes spoke with Perry over the phone the following day that he realized what had happened . Humes said Perry was a good friend and that he was shocked to discover he was in trouble .
 Of all the doctors involved in treating the President at Parkland, only five saw the front neck wound in its original condition before the tracheotomy .
 At a press conference following the announcement of the President’s death, Dr. Donald Trump said, “I am saddened by the loss of my life,” he said .
 I did say it looked like an entrance wound since it was small, but I qualified it by saying that I did not know where the bullets came from . I didn't say where the wound came from, but said it looked small . The wound was a small entrance wound, but it
 It was a small wound, slightly ragged at the edges, and could have been an exit or entrance . The wound was small but ragged and could've been a small entrance or exit .
 "I handed out a written statement to the press and took no questions," he says . "By Sunday, after working on Oswald, I had learned my lesson," he adds .
 No one at Parkland ever turned the President over, so they did not see the even smaller hole on his back that was in direct line with the one in the throat . The President was shot to death in the head at the school .
 Jones told the author, “The neck wound could have been either an entrance or an exit.” Jones said . Jones said the neck wound was either a entrance or a exit .
 Carrico and Baxter also agreed the wound could have been either an entrance or an exit . Baxter: The wound was either a door or an entrance .
 Pepper Jenkins, recalls, “Even at that time, I was convinced it was a wound of exit because it was bigger than an entrance wound should be.”
 Entrance wounds, as you look at them, are small and round, and may have a halo around them, black, from the bullet . Entrance wound wounds are small, round and round .
 The exit wound remained small and tight if the bullet exited near the collar band of the shirt, where the buttoned collar and the knotted tie firmly pushed the neck muscles together . In reconstructions of the shot, with 6.5mm ammo, Lattimer discovered the exit wound
 As Lattimer moved the shots farther away from the collar band, even by fractions of an inch, the exit wounds became larger . As the shots were moved further away, the wounds were larger .
 The House Select Committee reviewed the autopsy X rays and photographs . It also examined JFK’s clothing, which confirmed the direction of the neck shot . The panel also looked at JFK's clothing .
 The X rays confirmed there was internal injury, a stress fracture to the first thoracic vertebra . The stress fracture was caused by the trauma of the bullet passing so close to the spine .
 The Select Committee’s medical panel unanimously determined that the neck wound was caused by a rear shot . A rear shot was also caused by the rear shot, the panel said .
 Autopsy: The fatal shot entered the rear of the President’s skull and exploded out the right side of his head . The autopsy physicians concluded the fatal shot .
 Seventy percent of the right hemisphere of the President’s brain was blown out, leaving a nearly six-inch hole on the right side of his head . The hole was nearly six inches deep and nearly six feet wide .
 The entry on the back of the head was small, not much larger than the 6.5mm bullet that did the damage . The entry was not much bigger than the bullet that struck .
 Examination of the inside of the skull indicated the edges of the hole were beveled inward, confirming the entry point . The hole was found in the skull of a young man in the early 20th century . It is thought to have been the largest hole in the world's history of
 Fragments of the parietal bone missing from the right side of the President’s head, found in Dealey Plaza, later confirmed outward beveling, indicating that was the exit point . The bone fragments were found in the President's skull, which was later found to have
 Less than 1mm of metallic dust particles was evident on the X ray of the President’s brain . The bullet followed the path of the bullet, leading directly to the exit on the right side .
 Three fragments were found, one at the entrance point and two near JFK’s right eye . The fragments are further evidence of the path of the bullet that hit JFK .
 There was no photographic, X ray, or personal observation of any other exit on the head except for the large hole on the right side of the head . The hole was found in the head of a man who died in 2008 .
 President was probably shot from the front, with a large exit hole in the rear of the head . If true, this contradicts the findings of the autopsy team . This not only contradicted the findings, but was evidence that the President was shot in the front .
 Parkland doctors also thought they saw cerebellum, tissue from the base of the brain, on the stretcher or in the operating room . Parkland doctor says he thought he saw the tissue on a stretcher and in operating room.
 If the Parkland descriptions of the cerebellum were true, this raised legitimate questions over the authenticity of the photographs of JFK’s brain, which showed no such damage . JFK's brain was not damaged, according to Parkland photos .
 Robert Groden and Harrison Livingstone, in their book High Treason, devote more than thirty pages to highlighting this conflict between the Parkland and Bethesda descriptions of the head wound .
 Parkland doctors admit they did not examine the wound in detail . However, it is questionable to rely on them for any assertion about the head wound .
 Kemp Clark looked at the wound to determine whether the President could be revived . It was the first time it had been examined by Kemp Clark, the President's aide . Kemp Clark examined the wound in the hope of saving the President .
 Baxter recalls, “none of us had the heart to go and examine the head wound while Mrs. Baxter was there’s no heart to examine the wound .
 Autopsy shows something was missed by the treating doctors at the hospital . A third of the time, an autopsy shows something is missed by doctors .
 In unnatural deaths, it is common for the treating physicians to mix up stab wounds and gun shots . They are wrong half the time about exit or entrance, doctors are wrong about exit .
 The Parkland doctors did not clean Kennedy off the wound, since it was covered with blood and tissue . Kennedy's wound was not cleaned off, and it's not a real guess about what happened .
 If they say they saw cerebellum, they are just wrong because it was perfect . If they said they saw it, they're just wrong, they were just wrong .
 If they say there was a large hole in the rear of the head, they don’t know what they are talking about since there is nothing there but the entry injury in the cowlick . The injury was not a large injury, but the injury was a minor injury .
 The mistakes in judgments from Parkland are exactly why we have autopsies . Parkland school shooting victims were killed by a school shooting, authorities say .
 It’s very clear on the enhanced frames that there is a wound over the right ear, but the back of the head is clean . The back is clean, but it's clear that the wound is not over the ear .
 Dr. High Treason asserts that some doctors examined the wound with a flashlight . Dr. Treason says that Dr. Dr. Trude was attacked by some of the doctors for using a flashlight to examine the wound . The wound was discovered by a doctor at the hospital .
 Jenkins picked the head up from the stretcher to show other doctors the extent of the rear wound . Jenkins picked up the head from a stretcher and showed them to the doctors at the hospital .
 The eight principal doctors who attended to JFK on that day all told the author that such reports were false . The author was told by the principal doctors at JFK that such claims were false.
 Groden and Livingstone cite early interviews and some testimony before the Warren Commission to support their hypothesis . They say Parkland doctors saw a different head wound than the one described at Bethesda .
 Doctors insist that the differences in the wound descriptions between them and the Bethesda doctors have been exploited by conspiracy writers who created a controversy where none exists .
 Some admitted that their early statements about the wounds, which they now consider mistaken, may have contributed to the confusion . Some of the wounded say they are not sure what happened .
 Bill Midgett, who helped wheel the President from the limousine into trauma room one, says, “The President had quite thick hair, and there was a lot of blood and tissue.” Bill Midgetst says .
 The President was lying on his back and shoulders, and you could see the hole, with scalp and brain tissue hanging back down his head, and it covered most of the occipital portion of his head . The reason I say that is that the President . was lying . on his
 Giesecke also admits an error in his original testimony when he described the wound as more occipital . GiesECke also admitted to an error when he said the wound was more occlipital .
 "Lifton spent six hours with me trying to get me to say the wounds were like he wanted them," he says . "But, for instance, Lifton spent 6 hours trying to ... get me saying that he wanted it to happen," he adds . Lifton: "
 The truth is there was a massive head wound, with brain tissue and blood around it, police say . "There was a huge head wound," police chief says . "The truth is that the head wound was in a massive brain wound," he says .
 It is definitely pressed down and that would be the damage I referred to in 1964. It would have caused the damage in 1964, he said . It was 'pressed down', he said. 'That would have happened'
 Autopsy photo shows the rear of the head intact and a protrusion in the parietal region . The autopsy photo is the way I remember it from the autopsy .
 The occipital and parietal bone join each other, so we are only talking a centimeter or so in difference . It is only a centimetre or so small .
 President's hair was bloody and matted, and it was difficult to tell where that wound started or finished . The President had a lot of hair, and . it was bloody, matted . And you must remember the President had to . remember that .
 I have been misquoted enough on this, some saying I claimed the whole back of his head was blown away . I have a history of misquoting . Some people have said I claimed he had his head blown away, others have said he had the back blown off .
 He drew a sketch in 1967 for Josiah Thompson’s book Six Seconds in Dallas . The sketch showed a gaping wound in the rear of the head .
 In 1988, photos showed the President’s brain was crenelated from the trauma, and it resembled cerebellum, but it was not cerebellar tissue . The photos were taken at the National Archives .
 Crenshaw wrote a book in 1992 in which he claimed he examined the wound, that the hole was in the rear of the head, and that the cerebellum was lacerated . He claimed to have examined it, that he examined it and that he saw the hole in
 He was in no position to make the judgments he sensationally proclaimed in his book . He was not in the right place to make such a decision, he said .
 Most of the other doctors do not even remember him as a doctor . His role was so minor that most of them do not remember him .
 He has to know that what he said is false, and he knows the rest of us know that . The rest of the world knows that, as well as the president .
 His story is filled with halftruths and insinuations, and those of us who know him know he is desperate . Those of us know him is desperate. He is desperate, and his story is full of lies, and he's desperate, we say .
 Almost all the Parkland doctors who treated JFK support the findings of the autopsy team . Their confirmation may not be as important as the studies conducted by subsequent panels of experts .
 The Clark and Rockefeller commissions, as well as the House Select Committee’s medical panel, affirm the original autopsy conclusions . JFK's head wound was the result of a gunshot wound to the head .
 Forensic pathologists agree that the beveling of the skull and the damage to the brain meant the small hole in the President’s head was an entrance wound . All nine forensic pathologists agreed that the small rear hole was the entrance wound.
 To most lay people, the rapid backward movement at the moment of the head shot means the President was struck from the front of the shot . To most people, this is not the first time the President has been struck .
 "It's not like Hollywood, where someone gets shot and falls over backwards. It’s not like a Hollywood movie,” he says . “It's like Hollywood. It's not Hollywood,’ he says. ‘I’m not Hollywood.
 Itek discovered that when the bullet hit JFK, he first jerked forward 2.5 inches before starting his rapid movement backward . JFK's rapid movement was similar to that of a bullet hitting a car .
 Unless the film is slowed considerably and enhanced, the forward motion is not detectable . The film is not available on Blu-Ray or DVD .
 When the bullet destroyed the President’s cortex, it caused a neuromuscular spasm, which sent a massive discharge of neurologic impulses from the injured brain shooting down the spine to every muscle in the body .
 “These are the muscles of the back and neck …”110 They contract, lurching the body upward and to the rear,” says author .
 At the same instant the President’s body was in a neuromuscular seizure, the bullet exploded out the right side of his head . The President was struck by the bullet at the time of the attack .
 Luis Alvarez, a Nobel Prize-winning physicist, focused on that to discover the second factor that drove the President's head back .
 Alvarez established it through physical experiments that re-created the head shot and extensive laboratory calculations . Alvarez established the image using physical experiments and extensive lab calculations .
 When brain and blood tissue exploded out JFK’s head, they carried forward more momentum than was brought in by the bullet .
 That caused the head to thrust backward, as a rocket does when its jet fuel is ejected . That's the opposite direction of the rocket's thrust as it does when it ejects jet fuel .
 The bullet exited on the right side of JFK’s head, it forced him to be propelled back and to the left . This is exactly what is visible on the Zapruder film . Because the bullet exited, JFK was propelled back to the right and left .
 By his movement alone, you can’t tell which direction he was shot from . The man was shot in the head with a gun .
 You then need to examine the bullets, the bones, bones, tissue, X rays, and photographs to determine from where the bullet came . The bullet is then examined to determine where it came from .
 There is no doubt that the bullets that hit John Kennedy, both in the neck and in the head, came from the rear . John Kennedy was hit by a bullet that hit his neck and head in the early 1960s .
 Tests showed residues of copper at the edges of the jacket’s hole . The same metal was used to jacketed Oswald's ammunition, the same metal that jacketed his ammunition .
 The President suffered from Addison’s disease, a rare illness named after the English physician who discovered it . The disease was a well-kept secret at the time .
 The disease slowly destroys the cortex of the adrenal glands . While it is usually fatal, cortical hormones alleviate many of the symptoms .
 The President, in shock from the wounds, was in desperate need of the hormones since his adrenal glands were incapable of producing any . The President was in . need of . hormones .
 Malcolm Perry says, “There must be three hundred people who claim they were in there that day, and there’s no way that could be true.” Perry says .
 President Kennedy’s stretcher was never in that location . Only one was connected to the assassination, as only one was in the area .
 A slightly deformed whole bullet was later determined to have been fired from Oswald’s rifle, to the exclusion of all others . The bullet was found to be the only bullet found in Oswald's rifle . Oswald was killed in the July 4, 1918, assassination .
 Critics have dubbed it the “magic bullet” because the Warren Commission concluded it was responsible for President Kennedy’s throat wound and all the wounds to Governor Connally . Critics have called it the "magic bullet" because of its findings .
 The coffin had an air-lock mechanism that, when turned, hermetically sealed the lid on the casket . When turned, the lid was sealed by an airlock mechanism .
 To get the body out, the conspirators would have had to unstrap the coffin and unscrew the lock, allowing the unit to unseal itself . The body would have to be removed from the coffin to get out .
 After removing the President’s body, something of similar weight would likely have to be placed inside, so people handling the casket would not notice it was too light . The President's body would likely be placed in a lighter casket inside .
 The casket would have to be resealed and strapped back into its original position before anyone on the plane noticed the unusual activity . Finally, the casket must be re-opened and re-strapped again before anyone noticed the activity .
 His book Best Evidence eventually became a national best-seller in 1980 . Best Evidence was published in 1980.
 He concluded that one tree had been artificial on the day of the assassination, in order to camouflage snipers . During the mid-1960s he did his own photo enhancements of the shrubbery on the grassy knoll .
 Lifton believed he spotted a man wearing a Kaiser Wilhelm helmet, another with an electronic headset, one with a periscope, and another with a machine gun hidden in a hydraulic lift . Lifton said he also thought he saw a man with a headset, a perisope,
 Despite his prodigious research, some experts still have little respect for his work . Some experts say he should be respected for his research work .
 Lifton had a theory of fake trees, that a construction company put in fake scenery and so forth at Dealey Plaza, and then after the shooting, it was removed . Professor David Wrone, a historian and assassination researcher, says Lifton's theory is that the fake trees were
 He thought it helped the assassins get close for the shooting and also confused the people . He thought the shooting helped them get close to the target .
 Robert Blakey, the chief counsel for the House Select Committee, says, “Lifton is just bizarre.” He adds that Lifton is "just bizarre"
 Billings called Lifton a “master nit-picker” and said his theory was “a preposterous notion’ and “at best, the book is a monument to one man’s ingenuity’ Billings said Lifton's theory was
 Kennedy was given the choice of which hospital she wanted for the procedure . The conspiracy plan would have required teams of conspirator doctors at both Walter Reed and Bethesda, as well as key civilian hospitals .
 The body almost remained in Dallas for an autopsy, requiring further conspirators in that medical examiner’s office . Moreover, the body almost stayed in Dallas, requiring more conspirators .
 Lifton actually believes that “President Kennedy’s body was never supposed to have left Dallas unaltered.” Lifton believes that President Kennedy's body never should have been altered . Lifton: “The body was not supposed to be altered. It was never
 Even if Connally had not been wounded, it's difficult to imagine how any of the events in Dallas would have been different . Connally was wounded in Dallas, Texas, in March 1968 .
 President would have been taken to Parkland and an effort would've been made to save his life, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Lifton gives no indication whatsoever of how the medical deception involving Kennedy’s corpse was to be carried out in Dallas . Yet Lifton does not give any indication how the deception was planned .
 Forensic pathologists are not just concerned with what caused the death but also with the circumstances around the death . Pathologists are also concerned with the cause of the death and circumstances surrounding the death of the victim .
 A plain gray coffin, containing the body of an Air Force officer in a body bag, arrived at Bethesda before JFK’s coffin .
 O’Connor and Custer also allege the President had no brain when he arrived . Custer: 'I’ve got no brain. But I’m not sure what happened to the President. He’s no brain'
 Custer even asserted that he put both his hands inside the President’s head and it was empty . Custer said he put his hands in the President's head and found it empty .
 They were both interviewed by the House Select Committee in 1978, but neither mentioned what they now claim to have witnessed .
 The doctors and FBI agents who removed the body are consistent in their descriptions of the body . The FBI and doctors are consistent with their descriptions .
 Parkland students correctly described the white sheets, plastic liner, and rubber bags that were used . They noticed the damage on the bronze casket .
 They charge that while the X rays of the neck and head are forgeries, the conspirators forgot to replace the photographs of the face, which he admits are real . They say the photographs are real, but he admits that they are fake .
 X rays show the right eye and forehead to be missing, but photos do not, they say . They claim those photos contradict the X rays since they show the missing eye and head .
 People who were willing to murder the President of the United States were more afraid of the possibility of a future congressional subpoena . In other words, people . were more . afraid of a possible congressional subpoena than a possible subpoena .
 Robert Kennedy feared the public display of the X rays and photos would be offensive to the Kennedy family . Robert Kennedy reached an agreement with the Warren Commission not to publish them .
 Humes had given everything from the autopsy, including the brain, to JFK’s personal physician, Admiral George Burkley . Humes gave all of the autopsy to Burkley, the physician who oversaw the autopsy . The autopsy was conducted by Humes and Burkley at JFK�
 First Parkland physicians to see autopsy photos . Each confirmed the photos represented what they remembered seeing that day . The rear of President Kennedy’s head shows no defect .
 It has been suggested that the reason the photo shows the rear of the President's head as undamaged is because the doctor is holding a large flap of skin to cover the rear defect .
 Jenkins laughed when the author read him the Groden and Livingstone charge . Jenkins laughed as he read out of the charge .
 This has caused some to charge that Kennedy was shot by a second gunman from another location at Dealey . The autopsy team either negligently or intentionally overlooked that wound, some say .
 President Obama was trying to take President's temporal pulse with his finger on his left temple . He was operating a breathing bag with his right hand with his left hand . The president was in the middle of the attack when he died .
 Cyril Wecht said that such a finding did not preclude a shot also entering from the front . Cyril . Wecht: Such a finding does not preclude the possibility of a shot coming in from the back .
 Just as Oswald fired from behind and his bullet exited the President’s head, a front shooter fired into the wound created by the rear bullet . In other words, just as Oswald's bullet exited his head, the front shot created the wound . Oswald fired his bullet from behind,
 Wecht’s way of explaining why there is not another entry hole on JFK's head . Wecht: JFK's entry hole is the only reason for the hole in the head to be there .
 The front shot may have been a frangible bullet, which would have exploded upon impact in the brain . He first suggested that the front shot could have been an explosion .
 The front bullet may have been plastic, and penetrated the brain but did not exit . Finally, he suggested that the front bullet was plastic . It may have entered the brain, but not exit, he said .
 He argued that since the brain is not available for examination, his speculation is possible . Plastic bullets were rarely available until 1968, five years after the assassination .
 Victim's upper torso and legs arched off the ground, in the opposite direction of the bullet . The victim was lying flat on his stomach on the ground when he was shot in the rear of the head .
 Zapruder film shows Governor Connally's wounded shoulder pushing back into the car seat . Connally did not fall forward, but is clearly visible on the film, but his wounded shoulder pushes back in the direction he was shot .
 Lattimer also conducted twelve physical experiments that confirmed Alvarez’s work . Alvarez's work was confirmed by the physical experiments .
 In each instance, the jet effect, on mock-ups of human heads struck from the rear by a 6.5mm bullet, caused the specimens to rocket back toward the shooter .
 Two motorcycle policemen riding to the rear of the President’s car were splattered with blood and brain tissue . Another argument that the shot must have come from the front is based on the fact that two motorcycle policemen rode to the . rear of . the President's car . were spl
 On an enhanced version of the Zapruder film, the two officers drive right into the head spray, which actually shot up and to the front of the President . The two officers are seen in the film, but on the enhanced version, the spray actually hit the president .
 The Warren Commission and the House Select Committee did the best they could with photo and computer technology as it existed in 1964 and 1978 . The Warren commission and the Select Committee tried to make the best use of the technology available .
 Scientific advances in the past five years allow significant enhancements of the Zapruder film, as well as scale re-creations using computer animation .
 It is now possible to settle the question of the timing of Oswald’s shots and to pinpoint the moment when both Kennedy and Connally were struck with a precision previously unattainable .
 FBI test-firing of Oswald’s Carcano in 1964 determined a minimum of 2.25 to 2.2 seconds was necessary between shots to operate the bolt and reaim . In 1964, the FBI determined that a . minimum of a couple of seconds was needed between shots
 According to the Warren Commission, the fastest he could have fired all three shots was 4. seconds . The Warren Commission says he could've fired the shots in 4.2 seconds .
 Eleven volunteer marksmen fired clips of three bullets at a moving target . Volunteers fired clips at moving targets in a bid to get them to the target .
 Oswald had almost daily practice runs with the Carcano’s bolt action . None of them had dry practice runs in New Orleans . Oswald had a dry practice run with the weapon .
 The times range from 4. seconds to 6 seconds, with the average being 5. seconds, and two out of three hits on the target . Yet the times were almost half a second faster than what the Warren Commission thought was possible .
 The House Select Committee lowered the time between shots on the Carcano to 1.66 seconds, with the shooter hitting all the targets . Based on its 1977 reconstruction tests, the House Select committee lowered the . time between . shots on a Carcano .
 This reduced the time necessary for three effective shots to 3.2 seconds . The time needed to complete three shots was reduced to just 3.3 seconds .
 The time necessary to operate the Carcano must be compared to the Zapruder film, which serves as a time clock for the assassination . The Carcano was used in the assassination of President Kennedy Kennedy Jr.
 Zapruder’s camera operated at 18 frames a second, FBI concluded . FBI concluded that Zapruders’ camera operated 18 frames per second . The FBI concluded the camera's speed was so fast that it operated at just 18 frames .
 Witnesses almost unanimous that the head shot was the final one . No matter what number of shots they heard, witnesses are unanimous that it was the last .
 The Warren Commission was unsure when the first shot was fired, or if it even hit Kennedy or Connally . It is unsure if the shot even hit Connally or Kennedy or even if it hit Kennedy .
 The Commission thought the first shot would be the most accurate . It implicitly favored the theory that the first bullet hit Kennedy in the base of the neck . The first shot was thought to have hit Kennedy .
 When the President’s car turned in front of the Depository, the shooter had to make a fast decision . Soon after the turn, the car disappeared under the foliage of a large oak tree .
 President and the Governor disappear behind that sign . Neither shows any reaction to being struck by a bullet .
 Commission thought he was reacting to a bullet, which means he was wounded somewhere behind the sign . However, when the President emerges from behind the road sign at frame 225, it was thought he had been hit by a bullet . Commission thought that when he emerges from the sign, he was
 The Commission concluded that is the earliest he could have been shot . Since the assassin did not have a clear shot until frame 210, that is when Kennedy emerged from under the tree cover .
 The latest would have been at frame 225, when he appears to be raising his right arm in response to the wound . He appears to have raised his arm after the injury to his right side .
 Critics have interpreted the Commission’s work to give Oswald as little time as possible to fire all three shots . The critics have consistently interpreted the . critics have said the Commission gave Oswald the . time to fire .
 Oswald had very little time to fire all three shots, a minimum of 4. seconds and a maximum of 5. seconds . Oswald had to fire each shot at least 4.5 seconds to survive . Oswald was shot in the head by Oswald's wife .
 The Commission admitted this was the “minimum allowable time to have fired the three shots,” but concluded that it was “possible” for Oswald to have done it within that time . The Commission concluded that Oswald could have fired three shots at the time of the shooting
 The assumption that the first shot struck the President is wrong is wrong . However, the assumption is that the President was struck by the first bullet is wrong.
 Ear-witness testimony suggests the first shot actually missed and was fired before the presidential car disappeared under the tree cover . Zapruder film suggests the shot was fired earlier than frame 166, according to witness testimony .
 Buell Frazier, standing on the Depository footsteps, said the President’s car barely made the turn from Houston onto Elm when the first shot rang out . Frazier: The President's car was barely making the turn at the time of the shooting . Frazier says the President's
 Howard Brennan, leaning against a concrete railing at the corner of Houston and Elm, said the car had just passed him when the first shot was fired . Brennan said he was just passing the car when the car was shot .
 At 5:30 P.M. on the day of the assassination, while on a plane returning to Washington, Bennet jotted notes of what he had seen five hours earlier . Bennet's notes were published on CNN.com .
 The first shot sounded like a “fire-cracker,” but it made him look at the President . The first-shot sounded like an "firecracker," but it was a "fire cracker"
 The Commission did not rely on witnesses in resolving the issue of whether the first shot missed . It did not use the evidence to determine whether the shot missed.
 The Commission refused to decide whether the second shot missed . Since there was also testimony from several witnesses who thought the first shot missed, the Commission did not decide between them .
 New Zapruder enhancements confirm ear-witness testimony that an early shot missed the President and the Governor . New film enhancements confirm the earwitnesses' testimony .
 A young girl in a red skirt and white top was running along the left side of the President’s car, down Elm Street, when she began turning to her right . The incident occurred at frame 160, frame 160 .
 Some believe the girl’s reaction was because her father, Phil Willis, stood only ten feet away, told her to stop and come back toward him . Some believe that her father was standing only 10 feet away .
 He looked to his right toward the crowd, and then back to his left to Jacqueline, as if to be reassured that everything was all right . He looked at Jacqueline as if she was reassured .
 Willis girl, the President, and Mrs. Obama react to the Willis girl's appearance . Willis girl is the daughter of President Obama and President Obama .
 Kennedy, Governor Connally’s recollection and actions confirm a shot was fired before frame 166 . Kennedy, Gov. Connally, says he was not shot at the scene of the shooting . Connally: "I’m not sure what happened to the shooting. I�
 The Governor has always been consistent in his testimony, and because he is a surviving participant, his perceptions must be given considerable weight . The Governor is a survivor participant in the trial .
 The film reveals that the Governor’s head turned from mid-left to far right in less than half a second, beginning at frame 162, when the Willis girl turned around and the President stopped waving .
 The film provides additional evidence of the moment of the first shot, but in an unusual way . The film also provides additional footage of the scene .
 Dubbed the “jiggle analysis, it was first postulated by Luis Alvarez, the Nobel Prizewinning physicist .
 He checked the film for evidence that when a shot was fired, the sharp noise made Zapruder jerk the camera, blurring the next frame or two . The sharp noise caused the camera to jerk, he said .
 The men were unable to hold the camera still . Despite advance knowledge that shots would be fired, Zapruder did not have an advantage . The men had advance knowledge of the shots, but were unable hold still .
 The presence of a jiggle or blur in the film, of course, could be caused by other factors .
 The sudden movement of Zapruder’s camera may not prove a shot was fired, its absence is good evidence there was no shot . However, the absence of sudden movement from the camera is a good sign of no shot being fired .
 The question is whether Zapruder had the jerky reaction for an early, missed shot . The film was shot in the first half of the series . It was released in 1945 .
 The House Select Committee determined there were four noticeable movements, any of which could be evidence of a shot . The committee also determined that any of these movements could be a sign of a shooting .
 Even a mediocre shooter has time to aim and operate the bolt twice . That's enough time for even a . mediocre shooter to aim .
 Neutron-activation tests done on the whole bullet and fragments show they represent only two bullets . The fragments were found to be only fragments of a bullet .
 Robert Kraus, a firearms expert, told the author, “The bullet definitely could have hit something, especially if you are firing close to a tree”
 The bullet could have grazed it and put a groove in the branch, or could have drilled right through it without knocking the branch off .
 Just after the car passed, she heard the first noise and “I saw a shot or something hit the pavement.” She says she heard a gunshot or something hitting the pavement .
 After the assassination, a deputy sheriff, Buddy Walthers, asked him why he had blood on his face . The deputy sheriff asked him to explain why he was bloodied in the face after the assassination .
 On the edge of the curb, along Main Street, we found the bullet mark . "And I showed him, and we crossed the street and ... found the . bullet mark," she says . "I showed him and showed him ... and he showed him"
 When asked which shot hit the curb, Tague says, “I actually can’t tell you which one.” Tague said he doesn't know which .
 I could try to pick one, but through the years I have maintained accuracy. "Through the years, I've maintained accuracy," he says of his accuracy .
 The Commission did not talk to him until July 1964, and the FBI did not even get a sample of the curbstone until the next month . The FBI was not even given a sample until July .
 The Warren Commission concluded, “The mark on the south curb of Main Street cannot be identified conclusively with any of the three shots fired.” The mark was found on the curb of the Main Street . It was not immediately identified with the shots fired .
 The Commission’s guess that a fragment from the head wound might have caused the curb damage is not realistic . Under the circumstances it might have been a product of fragmentation of the missed shot upon hitting some other object .
 Two large fragments were found in the front of the President’s car, one weighing 44. grains, and the other 21. grains . Smaller lead fragments were also found under the carpet and near the front seat .
 The fragments were so spent from the tremendous force expended on Kennedy’s head wound that all they did inside the car was crack the windshield and dent a chrome strip . However, those fragments were spent on Kennedy's head wound . The fragments did not penetrate the car .
 They did not penetrate any of the leather seats or the dashboard or cause any other damage to the car or its occupants, police say . The car was driven by a man who crashed into the vehicle .
 There is a much simpler explanation of how Tague was wounded, and it resolves the issue of what happened to the missed first shot . There is also a simple explanation for what happened .
 There was no copper found on the curb, it meant the fragment that struck was not jacketed . Since no copper was found, it means it wasn't jacketed, the fragment struck . The fragment was struck in a collision with a car .
 Agent Lyndal Shaneyfelt testified that the lead instead came from the bullet’s core . The lead was found in the bullet core of the bullet .
 If a 6.5mm bullet struck a hard tree branch, it could tear itself apart by its own rotational speed . Art Pence, a competition firearms expert, told the author, “If a . 5mm bullet strikes a hard . tree branch,. it could . tear itself
 It would then fragment, with maybe the largest fragment, the tip, being up to one third of the bullet, flying off . The tip of a bullet would then fly off, with one third flying off, according to experts .
 If the tree was oak, "it has tremendous compressive strength," he says . "It could easily suffer less damage than the bullet that hit it," he adds .
 The destabilized copper jacket hit the pavement, giving Virgie Rachley the impression of sparks . Virgie's copper jacket was destabilized by the impact of the collision .
 On an unenhanced version of the Zapruder film, when the presidential car emerges from behind the road sign at frame 225, President Kennedy’s right arm appears to be rising in response to a bullet wound .
 Governor Connally does not appear to show any reaction to his wounds until his mouth opens at frame 235 . Connally was shot in the head with a bullet wound to the head .
 Just over half a second is the difference of ten frames between the reactions of the two men . That difference is ten frames .
 If Connally was hit by another bullet, it had to be fired from a second shooter . The Warren Commission’s own reconstructions showed that Oswald could not have operated the bolt and refired in 1.2 seconds .
 The House Select Committee came to different conclusions, but it did not eliminate the timing problem . The House of Representatives' panel came to a different conclusion .
 Select Committee increased the time between the moment Kennedy was wounded and the moment it saw a marked difference in Connally’s posture and facial expressions . If the same bullet struck both men, the difference of 36 frames meant the Governor sat unfazed in his seat for nearly two seconds after
 The Warren Commission and Select Committee both cited many examples of gunshot victims who had slow reactions and sometimes did not even know they were hit by a bullet .
 Connally admitted he did not know about his wrist and thigh wounds until the following day . Connally said he didn't know about the injuries until the next day . They pointed out that Connally was not aware of the wounds .
 Both government panels ignored his clear testimony about instantly feeling the impact of the bullet in his right rear shoulder . However, both government panel members ignored his testimony .
 The latest enhancements show that before the President disappeared behind the sign at frame 200, he was waving to the crowd with his right hand .
 The top of his right hand can sometimes be seen waving from his car . Even when the car and his body are obscured by the road sign, the top of the hand is seen waving .
 The Governor has also emerged and is fully visible, but all that can be seen of the President is his right hand . The Governor is also fully visible .
 In Zapruder frame 225, the President is almost in full view and his hand is lower, with the elbow resting on the edge of the car . The President's hand is also lower, and his elbow is lower than the other .
 He was in full reaction to the bullet that hit him from the rear and exited his throat . He was hit by the bullet in the rear, exiting his throat, police say . The bullet hit him in the back and out of the throat .
 Working backward from JFK’s reaction, it is possible to pinpoint the precise time of the second shot . JFK's reaction to the first shot can be traced back to JFK's death .
 The Warren Commission was not aware that the President’s spine was damaged by the bullet that entered the base of his neck . The autopsy physicians did not examine the spine and did not use the X rays in preparing their final report .
 The bullet passed so close to the spine that it caused “blast injury,” trauma near the sixth cervical vertabra, C-6 .45 . On the X rays there are small splinters of bone at the point of trauma .
 The bullet did not even have to hit the spine to cause such an injury . The bullet entered the body at nearly 2,000 feet per second and traversed very close would be enough .
 Most observers of Zapruder film incorrectly thought the President was grabbing at his throat in response to the bullet that struck him . The President was struck by the bullet in the face .
 The Thorburn Position is a neurological reflex, and upon examination of the enhanced film one can see that the President’s hands never touch his throat . But the Thorburn position is a . neurological reflex .
 JFK's arms would have remained locked in the raised position indefinitely, except the destruction of the right hemisphere of JFK’s brain by the head shot released the position .
 Zapruder enhancement adds to his damaged C-6 . He suffered the Thorburn damage to his C6 during the battle of the Second World War . Zapruders added a new version of the film .
 In the nearly five seconds that elapsed between the neck and head wound, Mrs. Smith was hit with a bullet wound to the head .
 At one point, she grabbed his raised left arm with her right hand and tried to push it down . At another time, she tried to shove his raised arm down .
 She reached with both hands and tried again to push it down, but the film clearly records his resistance . Then she reached again to try again, but film clearly shows her resistance .
 Oswald fired his first shot near frame 160, more than enough time for him to cock the bolt, re-aim, and fire again . That is 3.2 seconds after Oswald had fired first shot . Oswald's first shot was fired 3.3 seconds after he fired first . Oswald
 Watching the Zapruder film at its normal speed, or looking at photographs of still frames, provides a misleading impression of when Governor was hit .
 Governor examined four-by-five-inch transparencies, and after several hours still felt he was hit at frame 234 . Two and a half years later, he still feels he was struck in frame 234, the Governor said .
 The enhanced film shows several physical reactions that reveal exactly when the Governor was hit, and it is within a half second of when he and his wife originally thought the shot struck . The enhanced video shows several reactions to the Governor's reaction .
 At 224, the right front of the Governor’s suit lapel flips up from his chest . Governor's lapel at 224 is the size of the lapel on his jacket .
 The jacket movement may be one of the most important timing confirmations in the case, as it established the moment the bullet hit him . Confirmed in 1992 computer enhancement by Jeff Lotz of Failure Analysis Associates .
 The movement of the jacket took place at the exact area where the Governor’s suit and shirt have a bullet hole, as the missile passed through his right shoulder blade and out under his right nipple .
 Kennedy and Connally were less than two feet apart in the car . The bullet, with an initial muzzle velocity of more than 2,000 feet per second, passed through them almost simultaneously .
 Select Committee finds Connally was struck at 226 at the time of his death . Connally’s suit jacket, his expression, and his expression were also shown to have been rigid .
 The Governor’s light-colored Stetson hat, which he was holding in his right hand, near his chest, started rising . Michael West, shows that the Governor was holding it in his hand, when it started to rise .
 That violent reaction with the governor’s hat took less than one third of a second .
 West says it is “positive proof” of a neurological reaction to physical trauma . West: It is ‘positive proof that’s positive proof’ of a reaction to the trauma .
 "When he took his next breath, his lung collapsed, and that is a very painful situation," the hospital says . "That's a very difficult situation. When he took the next breath ... his lungs collapsed, he said . He said: "That is a painful situation."
 It sends a nerve signal to the brain’s cortex, which in turn will send out his pain transmitters, all in an instant . The brain is sending a signal to his cortex, the cortex, and the brain sends out transmitters .
 Charles Gregory, one of the surgeons who attended to Connally at Parkland, said the bullet passed through the Governor, it compressed the chest wall, and the epiglottis involuntarily opened, forcing air out of his mouth .
 Gregory estimated such an expulsion of air could come up to half a second after the bullet struck . Gregory estimated that such an expletive of air would have occurred in the first half of the bullet strike .
 Gregory had not seen the Zapruder film when he testified, instead basing his opinion on his medical expertise . Gregory did not see the film, but based his opinion of the film on his expertise .
 Connally was shot near frame 226 in Zapruder film, according to estimate . Connally is believed to have been shot in frame 226 .
 The enhanced Zapruder film shows the Governor was struck just one ninth of a second earlier, at frame 224, the same moment President Kennedy was wounded . The enhanced film also shows the President was struck in frame 224 at the same time .
 Connally’s reaction to the shot, while slower than Kennedy's, was still fast . Connally's reaction to Kennedy's shot was also fast. Connally was not the first time he had a reaction like Kennedy's .
 He showed signs of physical stress within a tenth of a second, and reacted visibly to pain only two thirds of the second after he was hit . The incident took place in the early hours of Sunday morning .
 The Governor’s memory of what happened is perhaps the most lucid of the witnesses’ there. “The Governor” was perhaps the . most lucid . of the . witnesses, he said . Governor's memory of the incident is perhaps . perhaps the best lucid memory of
 "I immediately thought of an assassination attempt. I turned to my right to see if I could see anything unusual, and especially to see him," she says .
 "I didn’t see anything but the general blur of waving and of people moving," she says . "It was a blur of people waving," she adds .
 That was the sound he heard that made him start to turn sharply to his right . That was what he heard when he heard the sound of a gunshot .
 On the film, the Governor was still turning back to his original position, just as he recalled, at frame 224 . On film, on film, he was still turned back to the original position .
 "Any rifle has a velocity that exceeds the speed of sound," he says . "After I heard that shot, I started to turn to my left before I felt anything," he adds .
 It is not conceivable to me that I could have been hit by the first bullet, and I felt the blow from something which was obviously a bullet, which I assumed was a bullet . "I never heard the second shot, didn’t hear it," he says of the first
 Doctors familiar with gunshot wounds say it is normal for the shock caused by the wound to block the sound from the victim . Doctors say it's normal for a gunshot wound victim's shock to block out the sound .
 The Warren Commission decided that the first bullet most likely hit Kennedy and Connally . Yet the Warren Commission still decided that . The first bullet likely hit Connally and Kennedy and Kennedy .
 The Governor had described a “very, very brief span of time” between the first shot and the one that hit him, he knew that was impossible . The Governor said he knew there was no time for the shooting to take place .
 He accepted the Commission’s conclusions about Oswald being the lone assassin . But he continued to insist that the first bullet fired did not strike him .
 Governor Connally had another difficulty with the Warren Commission’s conclusion about the sequence of shots . Connally was governor of Texas at the time of the assassination .
 He thought the President was hit by the first shot . Although convinced he was struck by the second bullet, he thought the first bullet was the first .
 He admitted that when he turned to his right after hearing the first shot, he did not turn far enough to see the President . Yet he admitted that he didn't turn to his left after the shooting .
 The Zapruder film shows the first shot did not affect the President, either . The film also shows that the President was not hit by the shot .
 If Governor Connally had continued to turn to see the President, he would have seen Kennedy waving to the crowd . Connally would have been able to see Kennedy waving back to the crowds .
 The primary reason Connally believed the first bullet hit the President was the testimony of his wife, Nellie . Connally's wife testified that she saw the President's bullet hit her .
 She told the Warren Commission that when she heard the first shot, “I turned over my right shoulder and looked back, and saw the President as he had both hands at his neck.” She said she turned over her right shoulder, and . looked back .
 She could not have heard her husband say, "Oh, no, no" at the first shot . Then there was the second shot, and it hit John …”62 .
 Nellie pulled me over into her lap, she could tell I was still breathing and moving, and she said, ‘Don’t worry.’ She said, 'Don't worry. She said to me, 'Nellie. She could tell me she
 Connally thought was the first shot was actually the second shot, which hit both her husband and the President . Connally was hit by a bullet that hit both his wife and President .
 When she turned to look at the President, she did indeed see his hands up near his neck, but it was in reaction to the bullet that struck him at frame 224, the same bullet that forced her husband into her arms . The President's hands were up near the President's neck
 Governor said in an October 30, 1966, interview with Life magazine, “There is my absolute knowledge, and Nellie’s too, that one bullet caused the President’S wound, and that an entirely separate shot struck me.”
 The author presented some of the new evidence to Governor Connally during a telephone conversation in May 1992 . Connally presented the evidence to Connally in 1992 .
 He was open-minded that new technologies might provide an understanding of the few seconds in Dealey Plaza not available in earlier years . He said he was open to new technologies that might provide new understanding .
 Connally was mistaken about seeing the President raise his arms after the first shot,” he says . “The President was not raising his arms when he was killed,’ he adds .
 Based upon the angles, the second bullet, which went through his neck, could have gone through his back . The second bullet went through the neck, it could've gone through my back, he says . "Based upon the angle, the first bullet went into his neck"
 Failure Analysis Associates applied the latest computer and film-enhancement technology to answer the question of whether one bullet could have caused the wounds and, if so, where the sniper would have to shoot from .
 Failure Analysis used a technique called “reverse projection’s” to answer the questions . Failure Analysis uses a technique known as ‘reverse projection to answer questions .
 A camera was placed in relation to where Zapruder was standing, and the lens was set to the same focal length . The view of the car was identical to that afforded in the film . Then a camera was set up to capture the car's view from the same angle as the
 Using Zapruder film, the images of Kennedy and Connally were sketched into the car . People who were the exact height and weight of the two men were placed into the seats in the positions shown on the film .
 Failure Analysis achieved precision on the placement because it used a sonic digitizer, able to make measurements of the bodies from Zapruder film, and convert them into three-dimensional space .
 The car was located at the exact spot on Elm Street that it was when the second shot was fired, at frame 224 . Once the car was filmed, it was placed into animation .
 The wounds on the President and Governor were measured and extended into the animation . Then the wounds were measured, extended into an animation of the wounds .
 The first question was whether one bullet could cause all the wounds, and the answer was yes . The first was whether the bullet could kill all the victims, but the answer is yes .
 The bullet punctured Kennedy’s back, exited his throat, and entered his right shoulder . Connally was hit by the bullet in a straight-line trajectory . The bullet entered Connally's shoulder and punctured his back .
 It struck Connally’s rib, then exited under his right nipple . Connally was hit by the bullet, which struck at a downward angle .
 Because he had turned in his seat, the Governor was slightly to the right . Because of the Governor's seat, he had to turn in to the left . Because he turned in, he was able to get a photo of the governor .
 The bullet continued through his right wrist and then into his left thigh . He was hit by the bullet in his left wrist and right thigh .
 "The bullet came out of Kennedy’s neck, made a right turn to hit Connally's shoulder, then made another right when it left his chest in order to strike his wrist, and then completely changed directions and made a left to enter his thigh .
 The computer worked backward to provide a “cone” within which the sniper had to be . The sniper was shot in the head by a sniper in the early morning .
 CE 399, denigrated as the “magic bullet” by buffs, is described as “pristine” in conspiracy books . CE 399 is denigrated by buffs as ‘pristine,’ and is described by conspiracy books as a 'pristine' in
 It is deformed; it would be very difficult to take a hammer and flatten it to the degree that this is flattened . It would be difficult to flatten the image with a hammer, it would not be possible to do so .
 In reconstructions, firing shots into a variety of items, the Warren Commission was unable to duplicate a bullet in the same condition . The Warren Commission reconstructed a bullet from a bullet that was shot in the wrong place .
 The bullet that did the actual wounds to both men also had to pass through the President's neck, the Governor’s chest, and then into his thigh . It seemed to indicate that the stretcher bullet could not be the single bullet that hit both men .
 A 6.5mm shell traveled at over 2,000 feet per second directly into a wrist bone . The shell hit the bone of the wrist bone in a wrist .
 Of course you are going to get deformation of the bullet when it strikes a hard object at full speed. Of course, you're going to have deformation when you hit a hard thing .
 If Governor Connally’s wrist had been hit on the straight fly by that bullet, CE 399, the bullet would be in much worse shape, and so would his wrist . The bullet hit the governor's wrist, but not the bullet that hit him .
 The bullet slowed as it passed through the bodies, and it never hit a hard surface, like bone, on its nose . What the Warren Commission did not understand was that the bullet slowed . The bullet hit bone on the nose, but never hit bone like bone on it, the commission
 Dr. Charles Gregory, the treating physician at Parkland for Connally’s wrist and thigh, agreed that the bullet had been tumbling and entered backward . Dr. Gregory said that based on his examination of the wound, the bullet was tumbling .
 Most of us thought it hit the rib while tumbling, and a sideways hit explains why such a hard bullet is flattened . The bullet hit the ribs, but most thought it was hit by a hard rib .
 When it struck the wrist bone, which is small, it was not deformed, since its velocity was so low . The velocity of the bone is so low that the bone did not have to be deformed because of its velocity .
 The 6.5mm slug left Oswald’s rifle at 2,000 feet per second and hit Kennedy at the base of the neck . Oswald's rifle hit Kennedy between 1,700 and 1,800 feet-per-second . The slug hit Kennedy's neck at 1,
 The bullet lost another one to two hundred feet per second and hit Connally at 1,500 to 1,600 . Passing only through flesh, the bullet passed through flesh . Connally was hit by a bullet that hit him at about 1,800 feet persecond .
 The bullet was traveling slow enough that while its speed and density were still greater than the bone it was hitting, it was not moving so fast as to deform seriously the metal jacket . The bullet hit the bone, but not so fast that it would deform seriously .
 "I have seen cases of machine-gun fire at a stationary person, and the bullet paths and injuries produced are never duplicated," he says . He says he has seen cases where machine gun fire hits stationary people .
 There can be minute differences in the manufacture of the ammunition, the condition of the gun that fires it, and the slightest contraction of any muscle on the victim can cause the bullet to take a different path .
 Re-creation tests on dead bones may not be as helpful, since they can be different from live bones . Re-created tests may be more difficult than re-created ones .
 Bullets react differently to bones with blood going through them as opposed to bones that are dry, say experts . Bullets react to bones in bone that have blood passing through them .
 The minutest difference in distance between two bullets fired can affect the path of the bullets, the injuries, and the damage to the bullet . A bullet can be fired with a distance of less than one bullet fired .
 For the Warren Commission, the Army conducted separate experiments with 6.5mm bullets . One to determine the effect on a bullet that passed through the President's neck and another to test a bullet going through the Governor's rib . The tests were carried out by the Army .
 The one that passed through the mock-up of the President’s neck was not deformed . The President's neck did not appear to be deformed, CNN reported .
 The missile that hit the reconstruction for the Governor's rib did not have the benefit of first being slowed through the President's neck . The missile hit the President’s rib, it was not the first time the missile was slowed down .
 The remaining question was whether a bullet at a reduced velocity could strike the radius bone in the wrist and emerge in good condition . Yet, still, it only had a slight flattening, similar to CE 399.81 .
 Researchers lowered velocity on a 6.5mm bullet to 1,100 feet per second and shot it through a cadaver’s wrist . They lowered the velocity on the bullet to . 1,000 feet per . second . They shot a bullet through the wrist of a c
 The FBI randomly weighed 6.5mm Carcano bullets and determined the average weight was 161 grains . The average weight of the bullets is 161 grains, the FBI says .
 The stretcher bullet weighed 158.6, meaning only 2 grains of its mass were lost . Only 2 grains were lost when the bullet was hit by the bullet .
 Governor had three fragments of his wrist removed from his wrist during surgery . Two small fragments remained in his wrist and one was embedded in his thigh .
 The fragments he removed were varying from five-tenths of a millimeter in diameter to approximately 2 millimeters in diameter . Each fragment is no more than a half millimeter thick in thickness .
 "I would estimate that they would be weighed in micrograms, which is a very small amount of weight," says the author . "They would be very small," she says .
 Dr. Gregory described it as “microscopic, five tenths of a millimeter by 2 millimeters” weighing again in micrograms, postage stamp weight …”88 A reconstruction of weights based upon the fragments removed from the fragments . The fragments were “
 Gregory, in his Warren Commission testimony, also pointed out that the fragments he recovered from the Governor’s wrist were lead, not brass or copper . Gregory said the fragments were not brass, but lead not brass . Gregory also said that he recovered the fragments from Governor's wrist were
 neutron activation makes it possible to determine the probability that different fragments were part of one bullet . By analyzing the trace elements found in bullet lead, lead lead can be used to identify bullet fragments .
 Most were convinced that the fragments from Connally’s wrist did not come from the stretcher bullet . Connally's wrist fragments were found in the wreckage of the plane crash .
 The Western Cartridge Co. bullets made for the Carcano were different from any of the other bullets he had tested during twenty years . He discovered that the bullets he tested were different than any other bullet made for Carcano .
 Guinn, the most striking feature, and most useful for identification purposes, was that “there seems to be no uniformity within a production lot.”
 Guinn concluded that the fragments were bullets made by Western Cartridge Co. bullets for the Mannlicher-Carcano rifle . Guinn also concluded that all fragments were made by the same company .
 The fragments from Kennedy’s brain matched the three testable fragments found on the floorboard of the limousine . They were all part of the third shot fired, the pathologist says .
 CE 399, the stretcher bullet, was indistinguishable, both in antimony and silver, from the fragments recovered from the Governor’s wrist . CE 399 was indistinguishable from CE 399 from the fragment recovered from his wrist . The bullet was found to be the same size as CE 399
 Guinn’s test proved is that the stretcher bullet and the Connally wrist fragments came from the same batch of bullets . Guinn: ‘The stretcher . bullet’ and the . Connally . wrist fragments are believed to have been from the . same batch
 Guinn’s conclusion was much more specific than that . But the great difference in the composition of the metal among individual bullets meant that Guinn's conclusion was more specific .
 He considered the test results as definite as any he had seen in two decades of testing . The test results were confirmed as definite, he said, as well as any others he had ever seen .
 "This chapter is based primarily on the latest enhancements of that film," the author says . This chapter is the latest in a series of films based on that film . The film is set to be released in October .
 Michael West, a medical examiner in Mississippi, and Johann Rush, the journalist who filmed Oswald during his Fair Play for Cuba demonstration at the New Orleans Trade Mart . Failure Analysis Associates, a prominent firm specializing in computer reconstructions for lawsuits, has also completed a reconstruction .
 Failure Analysis work was an extensive undertaking for an American Bar Association mock trial of Lee Harvey Oswald . Mock trial was held at the ABA’s 1992 convention .
 Failure Analysis project involved 3-D scale generations of Dealey Plaza, physical mock-ups of the presidential car, and stand-in models for the President and Governor . The project was designed to determine trajectory angles and the feasibility of one bullet causing both sets of wounds .
 Failure Analysis re-created experiments with the 6.5mm ammunition . They used updated information to further test the ‘single-bullet theory’ and the condition of the missile .
 Failure Analysis presented scientific evidence for both the prosecution and defense of Oswald . Failure Analysis was presented at the ABA trial of Oswald in Texas .
 The only technical breakthroughs were on the prosecution work, and they are presented in this chapter . The prosecution work is presented in the chapter .
 The defense presentation was fundamentally flawed and centered on two primary arguments . The defense presented a flawed presentation of the case .
 Oswald did not take a supposedly better straight shot as JFK’s car approached the Depository on Houston Street . The first was why Oswald didn’t take a better shot .
 Failure Analysis tried illustrating its contention by creating computer animation of Oswald’s view of the car . Failure Analysis created the animation by creating a computer animation .
 The computer animation was not an accurate representation of what Oswald saw . Connally was sitting in front of Kennedy in the car, he would have blocked part of his view along Houston Street .
 Failure Analysis presentation did not take into account that ballistics experts conclude that a target coming toward and below a shooter is a more difficult shot with a telescopic sight . Oswald was better hidden from the view of neighboring buildings by choosing a line of fire along Elm Street .
 Failure Analysis: A glycerin bullet could have been fired from the grassy knoll and not have exited on the left side of JFK’s head . The second Failure Analysis defense argument was that a glycerine bullet could not have been shot from the knoll . The
 Failure Analysis shot glycerin bullets into full, plastic, water bottles to illustrate the contention . Failure Analysis: Glycerin shots were fired into full plastic water bottles .
 The mock jury was never told that glycerin bullets are almost completely unstable at the distance between JFK’s car and the grassy knoll . Yet, the mock jury never told .
 Failure Analysis did not establish whether a glycerin bullet could penetrate a human skull at the Dealey Plaza distance . Also, failure analysis did not determine whether glycerins could penetrate human skulls .
 Zapruder’s camera ran between 18 to 18 frames per second in the first 30 seconds of operation, FBI tests show . The FBI's 1964 tests determined that in the . first 30 . seconds, the average frame rate was 18. frames per . second . The average frame
 Kennedy and Connally's reaction times were statistically unimportant . While that is a 3 percent variance, it is not the same as the reaction times .
 The tenth of a second is statistically insignificant and does not affect the overall calculation for Oswald's shooting . This is essentially true of the other shots as well .
 He believes he had called out to his daughter and that that is why she turned and stopped . The father says he believes he called out and that she stopped .
 Zapruder film shows he was still taking photos of the motorcade, with his camera in front of his face, when Rosemary slowed and turned . However, the enhanced film shows that the film was still being taken by the photographer .
 He had not even looked at her by the time she was staring toward the Depository . He was not even even looking at her .
 There was, however, a crack on the inside of the windshield and a dent in the chrome stripping along the top of the car .
 Experts concluded that if either of those had been struck directly by a nondeflected stray bullet, the shell would have penetrated the glass or the chrome . The shell would not have penetrated either of the chrome or the glass .
 The President's head wound was caused by fragments from fragments from his head wound . The fragments came from fragments that came from the President’s head wound, he said .
 None of the witnesses recall the sound of a bullet striking metal . However, it is unlikely that the first shot hit it, since none of them remember the sound .
 Jack Franzen thought they saw fragments flying inside the car after the first shot . The first shot was fired from a car in the middle of the road .
 Two other witnesses, motorcycle policeman Starvis Ellis and railroad worker Royce Skelton, saw something hit the pavement near JFK’s car, but thought it happened after the first shot . The other two witnesses, a motorcycle policeman and a railroad worker, also saw something strike the
 John Lattimer performed shooting experiments with the same 6.5mm ammunition as that used by Oswald . He discovered that the lead core ‘often’ separated from the jacket .
 There was no radial damage, but even if that nerve had been hit, he wouldn’t have dropped it . Even if there had been any damage, there was no damage to the nerve .
 Zapruder film never shows him dropping the hat . Baden says it is a “moot point,” since the film does not show him dropping it . The hat is never shown dropping it, he says .
 The bullets were designed to pass through bodies and, if no major organs were struck, only to wound the victim . If no major organ organs are struck, the bullets were only to hit the victim's body and wound it .
 The 6.5mm Carcano ammunition was designed to do exactly what it did on the President and the Governor . That is often ignored. That the Carcano . ammunition was often ignored .
 Nichols shot a 6.5mm slug through four feet of ponderosa pine boards . Lattimer put one through two feet of elm wood . Nichols shot one through four foot boards .
 Shaw recalled the wound as only half that long, but agreed the bullet could have been tumbling . Six months later in his Warren Commission testimony, Shaw said the wound was only half as long as the bullet had hit . Shaw said he thought the bullet hit the wrong side of the wall
 In a March 1992 interview with the author, he remembered Connally’s injury as a small puncture wound . Connally's injury was described as a "small puncture hole"
 No one in the supposed conspiracy could know whether the bullets that had been fired at the motorcade were still inside the bodies of the victims . At the time it would have to be planted, no one could know if the bullets were still in the victims' bodies .
 If the conspirators planted a bullet on the stretcher, then fragments belonging to three different bullets were found in Kennedy and Connally, the plot would have exposed itself by planting a fourth bullet . There was only time for Oswald to carefully fire three shots, Oswald shot three shots .
 The X ray from the side looks like the fragment left there is on the bone, but that is because you have no sense of depth . The X-ray from the left shows that the bone fragment is not on the right side .
 Dr. John Lattimer squeezed an equivalent amount of the lead core from a 6.5mm bullet . He created forty-one fragments the size of the size that he squeezed into the core of a bullet .
 Q-609, the section of the curbstone near James Tague that was struck by a bullet fragment . CE 569, a fragment recovered from the front floorboard of the presidential limousine . CE 841, tiny particles scraped from the inside surface of the limous
 Oswald's interrogation of Oswald began soon after homicide captain Will Fritz arrived at the police station . Oswald is being questioned by police for his role in the assassination of President Kennedy Kennedy .
 Oswald was taken to the third floor, to a ten-by-fourteen-foot room with glass windows covered by blinds . Oswald was later taken to a room covered in blinds and blinds covered in glass windows .
 There, he was questioned at length, at least five separate times, for a total of approximately twelve hours, between 2:30 P.M. on the day of the assassination, Friday, November 22, until just after 11:00 A.m. on Sunday, November 24
 Dallas police detectives, FBI and Secret Service agents, postal inspectors, and assistant Dallas district attorneys answer questions . Accounts of the questions and answers come from more than twenty-five participants .
 Robert Oswald arrived later that evening, as did his mother, Marguerite . Robert Oswald's father, Robert Oswald, also arrived at the family home in New York .
 "He answered almost every question with another question, and never gave that much information," he said . He answered almost all of the questions .
 The world's press was just outside Fritz’s door, and when we walked him through the hallways, he would have been the first to yell if we had done something to him . Fritz would be the first person to yell at him if he had done anything to him,
 When Marina visited him, she felt his eyes betrayed his guilt . Marina felt he was guilty of his crimes . Marina visited Marina again, but she felt the guilt was too much to bear .
 She knew that if he had been innocent, he would have demanded his immediate freedom and complained to the highest officials . If he was innocent, she knew she knew he would demand immediate freedom .
 His compliance, coupled with his assurance that he was not being mistreated, added to her feeling he had committed the crime . Her compliance, and her assurances that he had not been mistreated added to the feeling of her feeling .
 He looked like the Cheshire cat that had just swallowed the canary . But I knew him well enough to see he looked like he'd just swallowed a canary, he said .
 He had the smug satisfaction of knowing that he had struck a bold stroke for his cause . He had been smug satisfaction that he'd struck the bold stroke .
 He denied owning a rifle,9 and asserted he had never used an alias at his rooming house . He said he had no knowledge of the name Hidell .
 He said he had not taken a trip to Mexico City,11 was not involved in Fair Play for Cuba, and had not been undesirably discharged from the Marines, he said .
 Oswald says he never told Frazier he had curtain rods in any package he carried into the Depository . Oswald says Frazier never said to Frazier that curtain rods were in any packages he carried .
 When pressed in the interrogations, Oswald remained firm and even dismissed the seriousness of what had happened . Oswald was firm when pressed, even though he had been forced to give evidence .
 I drew up the Tippit charge first because there was no doubt what to write up on that one . I drew it up first because it was there were no doubt about the charge .
 At that time, any district judge in Texas could grant a writ of habeas corpus for any prisoner in the entire state . The writ of writ was granted by a district judge at the time .
 My fear was that once you were playing with an ideology like Communism, you didn’t know what was going to crawl out of the cracks . My fear of Communism is that it will lead to the collapse of Communism in America .
 Oswald said, ‘This isn’t an arraignment. And when David Johnston started to read him the charge, he said, 'This isn't an arraignment. This isn't a ambulance. Oswald said . Oswald said: 'When David Johnston
 "I told him in no uncertain terms to shut his mouth, and he was quiet after that. And I told him to shut it up," he said .
 The theory of the test is that gunpowder residue will react with the paraffin and turn blue on the cast . The theory is that the gunpowder will react to the cast to turn blue .
 Oswald’s hands proved positive; his cheek, however, was negative,19 which raised doubts about whether he had fired the rifle earlier that day . Oswald was found to have fired the gun, but his cheek was negative . Oswald's hands were positive, but the cheek proved negative
 Paraffin reacts to many items besides gunpowder, such as tobacco, cosmetics, pharmaceuticals, soil fertilizer, and food .
 Even the positive result on Oswald’s hands was not credible evidence against him, since so many oxidizing agents might have caused the reaction . Oswald's hands were not enough evidence to convict him of the assassination .
 Dallas police had never before even conducted a paraffin test on a shooter’s cheek . The Dallas police say they had never even conducted the test before .
 More than three hundred reporters camped out on the third floor of the jail, with cameras, cables, and wires forming a tangled mess . More than 3,000 reporters were camped in the jail's third floor .
 Whenever a witness appeared for a lineup or Oswald was escorted through the hallway, journalists surged forward . Journalists surged forward, shouting questions and snapping photos .
 The Dallas police department had never had such a notorious case and was not certain how to handle the press rush . Dallas police had never been able to handle such a large case .
 Chief Curry decided to make Oswald available for a press conference in a small basement assembly room . Chief Curry made Oswald available to speak to the public for the first time since his arrest .
 Shortly after midnight he was brought into the room, which was packed with one hundred police and press . He was brought in to a room packed with police, press and police .
 A few reporters corrected Wade, pointing out that early press reports said it was Fair Play for Cuba . Wade: "Early press reports say it was fair play for Cuba"
 A Dallas nightclub owner sneaked into a press conference . He spoke from the back row was not even a reporter, but a nightclub owner .
 Ruby was born Jacob Rubenstein, into an Orthodox Jewish home, on March 25, 1911, in Chicago . Ruby was the fifth of eight children, born into a family of eight .
 Joseph was often arrested on assault-and-battery and disorderly conduct charges, sometimes filed by Fanny . Fanny often filed the charges against Joseph .
 At school, he had trouble making friends and thought classmates often picked on him . He said he thought he would be bullied by classmates .
 He frequently skipped classes to stay on the streets, and as a result flunked the third grade . As a result, he often skipped classes and lived off the streets .
 He later claimed to have finished the eighth grade, but records show he completed only the sixth grade .
 By the age of ten, he was scalping sporting tickets and hustling anything he could sell for a few dollars . He was scalped sporting tickets, hustled anything he was able to sell for just a few cents .
 By the time he was eleven, in 1922, his mother referred him to the Institute for Juvenile Research of the Jewish Social Service Bureau . By the age of 11, he was "truancy and incorrigible at home"
 A psychiatric report found Jack boastful that “he could lick everyone and anybody in anything,” suffered from a hair-trigger temper, and was consumed by dual obsessions with sex and street gangs . Jack was obsessed with sex, drugs and gangs, according to a psychiatric report
 It concluded that the household atmosphere was so dreadful that his mother must have a “disturbance.” The report concluded that it was so bad that the boy’s mother had to have a disturbance. The report was published in 1925 .
 The following year, 1923, a juvenile court determined that Jack and two younger brothers and a sister were not receiving proper parental care . They were placed into a foster home, where they remained for eighteen months . Jack and his siblings were placed in foster home .
 Jack continued to run unchecked, with a reputation as an adept street fighter with a flash temper . Jack has a reputation for being a street fighter and a quick temper . He is known for his flash temper and his reputation for his temper .
 Nicknamed Sparky because of his volatile nature, he sometimes carried a stick that he used to beat opponents in fights . Sparky was nicknamed Sparky for his volatile and volatile nature .
 He continued scraping a living from the streets, and while the police took note of him, he avoided any major legal problems .
 Several of his friends were well on their way to becoming full-time criminals . However, several of their friends were soon to become full time criminals .
 In 1933, Ruby moved to California with several of his Chicago friends, hoping to make more money . Ruby moved in 1933, just before he turned twenty-two, to California .
 His sister Eva joined him in the U.S. after her divorce from her first husband . Eva moved to New York with her sister Eva in 2010 .
 Ruby worked as a singing waiter in Los Angeles and selling newspaper subscriptions in San Francisco . Ruby still had difficulty making a living selling tip sheets for horse races at the local tracks in both cities .
 By 1937 his new start in California had fizzled, and he returned to Chicago . By 1937 he had returned to his native Chicago .
 In July, his mother was committed by a court to a mental institution . She had suffered from “a psychoneurosis with a marked anxiety state” for more than ten years .
 Ruby, soon after his return, resumed ticket scalping and hustling small merchandise . She was released three months later, and then readmitted at her family's request in January 1938 .
 He also became involved in the Scrap Iron and Junk Handlers Union, Local 20467, working as a union organizer . He also worked as an organizer .
 His friend and union financial secretary Leon Cooke was shot by another Ruby associate, union president John Martin, in December 1939 . Cooke was also shot by Martin's union president, John Martin . Cooke and Martin were friends and associates of Ruby .
 In 1941, he started the Spartan Novelty Company with his brother Earl and two friends . He started the company with his brothers Earl and friends .
 Operating out of inexpensive hotels, they sold everything from punchboards to commemorative plaques of Pearl Harbor .
 From late 1942 to 1943, he worked as a salesman for Globe Auto Glass and Universal Sales Co. The business quickly floundered, and from late 1942 until 1943 . He worked as an auto glass salesman until the war .
 As part of a group of local toughs, Ruby and his friends frequently crashed and disrupted rallies of the pro-Nazi German-American Bund . Ruby and friends also frequently crashed rallies of pro-Nazis German-Americans .
 Ruby bragged that he could hit harder than prizefighter Joe Louis . He bragged about hitting harder than Joe Louis. Ruby was an incessant talker . Ruby brags that he can hit harder .
 He maintained a reputation as one of the South Side’s toughest street brawlers . He exercised at several gyms, and although not a big man, he maintained a . reputation .
 He originally received a deferment in 1941, but in 1943 he was re-classified 1-A and drafted into the Army Air Force . He was drafted in 1943 and became an Air Force generalist .
 At the age of thirty-two, he was the oldest in his unit . He ran some dice and card games, as well as peddling everything from chocolates to cigarettes .
 Once, when a sergeant called him a “Jew bastard,” Ruby beat him mercilessly . Ruby beat the sergeant mercilessly when he called him "a Jew bastard" Once, he was a "Jew bastard"
 He had no disciplinary trouble while in the Army, achieved the rank of private first class . He was honorably discharged on February 21, 1946 . He returned to Chicago but stayed there for another year and a half .
 Jack was selling punchboards, key chains, bottle openers, light tools, and salt and pepper shakers . Jack was also selling key chains and light tools at the time .
 He quarreled with his brothers, and they eventually bought out his share for $14,000.69 He decided to follow his sister Eva to Dallas .
 She had gone there in 1947 and, with money borrowed from her brothers, opened the Singapore Supper Club, which she ran as a nightclub . She ran the club in Singapore, Singapore and Singapore .
 Paul Roland Jones, who represented a group of Chicago criminals, tried to bribe the Dallas sheriff, Steve Guthrie, in 1946 . Jones represented a Chicago criminals .
 Guthrie later claimed that Ruby’s name had come up in conversations with Jones a number of times . Guthrie said Ruby's name had been discussed with Jones many times .
 Guthrie said he never heard Ruby's name mentioned . A Dallas policeman said he did not hear Ruby mention . Guthrie's account contradicts his account .
 We talked to every hoodlum in Chicago after the assassination, and some of the top guys in the mob, my informants, didn’t even know who Ruby was . They didn't even know that Ruby was, he says .
 The Carousel, a Dallas strip club, was the last one to turn a profit at . During the next 16 years in Dallas, he owned interests in six nightclubs, losing money in each venture .
 In 1952, he had a mental breakdown and had to recuperate for several months . His financial woes were so great that he had to spend months recuperating .
 He spoke alternately of killing one of his partners or ending his own life . He spoke repeatedly of killing his partner or ending himself .
 For a while, he thought of returning to Chicago, but decided to stay in Dallas . For a long time, he decided not to move back to Chicago .
 By the mid-1950s Ruby had an excise-tax delinquency with the federal government . He had to borrow $5,500 from his brother Sam to pay the debt . Ruby's money problems stayed with him .
 Besides nightclubs, he tried other businesses, including selling sewing machine attachments to costume jewelry .
 He became the manager for a black youngster dubbed “Little Daddy Nelson” and spent whatever money he had promoting the act . He spent whatever he had to promote the act and spent it on the youngster .
 At various times, he sold pizza crusts to Dallas restaurants, anti-arthritis preparations, twistboards, liquid vitamins, and English stainless steel razor blades . He was also selling pizza crusters to restaurants .
 He tried to build log cabins at a Texas lake resort, and even looked into selling jeeps to Cuba . He provided entertainment to Dallas hotels, promoted music records, promoted records .
 By the time he was arrested for shooting Oswald, he owed me over 16,000 dollars . By that time he owed him over sixteen thousand dollars . He owed me more than $16,000 .
 Tony Zoppi was a prominent entertainment reporter for the Dallas Morning News and knew Ruby well . Ruby was a well-known figure in the entertainment industry .
 They were fellows always trying to make a name for themselves, always hustling something . They were always hustlers, hustlers always hustled something, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "They were always always hustler"
 He was a hanger-on who was very impressed by famous people, impressed by ‘class,’ and with anybody that he thought had it. He was impressed by 'class' and with anyone that he believed had it, he said .
 "He knew a tremendous number of people in Dallas, but he didn't have many friends," he said . He knew a lot of people, but didn’t have many of them, he said. "He was very lonely," he added .
 "Oh, he wanted friends, but he didn't have the capacity to make and hold them," he said . "He wanted friends but he wasn't capable of making and holding them"
 No matter how hard he tried, he just wasn’t going to get very far in Dallas . And no matter how well he tried—and he did try hard to have people like him—he just wasn't going very far .
 His employees generally liked him and found him generous if they were in need . They readily acknowledged he had a volatile and vicious temper .
 He beat one of his musicians with brass knuckles, cracked another’s head with a black-jack, knocked another's teeth out, and put the club's handyman in the hospital with a severe beating .
 To avoid paying the club’s cigarette girl $50 in back wages, he threatened to throw her down the stairs unless she relented in her claim . The cigarette girl's cigarette girl was forced to pay back $50 .
 He threatened a stand-upcomedian, Robert McEwan, after he had told several ‘inoffensive Jewish jokes’ in his act, and thereafter enforced a strict ban on any Jewish remarks . He also banned a comedian from telling Jewish jokes .
 "On at least twenty-five occasions he badly beat them using either his fists or a blackjack, or else pistol whipped them," he said .
 He often ended his fights by throwing the victim down the Carousel’s stairs .
 He was not above attacking people from behind, kicking men in the groin or face once he had knocked them to the floor, or even striking women .
 Once when a patron pulled a gun on him, Ruby disarmed him, beat him almost to death, put the gun back into the man’s pocket, and then hurled him down the stairs . Ruby also disarmed a patron, disarmed and beat him, then threw him
 Once, a cabdriver came into the club and asked where a patron was who had refused to pay the taxi fare . A cabdriver asked where the patron was, and a cab driver came in to find him .
 He was often malicious, forcing beaten victims to crawl out of the club on hands-and- knees . He forced them to do it on hands and knees, forcing them to crawl from the club .
 He ran after another nightclub owner, Joe Bonds, through a nearby alleyway, shooting at him several times but missing . Once he ran after Bonds, he shot at him through an alleyway .
 Patricia Birch, who had danced for him under the stage name Penny Dollar, recalled he was a fitness fanatic who frequently came into the girls’ dressing room without his shirt and hit his chest like a gorilla .
 At a party, she witnessed him take off his clothes and roll around the floor naked . She witnessed him roll around naked at a party .
 Ruby occasionally telephoned some of his dancers and read them obscene poetry or described in detail his private parts . Ruby read obscene poetry and described himself to the dancers .
 Sometimes, he warmly welcomed guests to his club, and on other nights, for no apparent reason, told them they were not wanted and could not enter the club . Sometimes, sometimes the same guests were told they could not be seen .
 According to his star dancer, Jada, Ruby was “impossible, totally unpredictable” Ruby was unpredictable . Ruby sometimes switched in the middle of a sentence to a completely different topic .
 William Serur knew Ruby for over ten years and watched him change for the worse . Ruby's death is the first known death of the young man to be taken to the U.S. hospital .
 He went out of his way to encourage Dallas policemen to visit his clubs . He gave them reduced rates and free drinks .
 He befriended dozens of them, attended the funeral of one killed in the line of duty, and staged a benefit for the widow of another . He also attended the funerals of one of the officers who died in the service .
 Once he jumped in and helped two Dallas policemen who were being beaten by a group of men . “They dropped by to say hello and screen the crowd,” says Bill Alexander, “and it was better than having a bunch of hoodlums there”
 Ruby catered to tourists, and nobody was going to get rolled at his place with the type of police contacts he had had . Remember, he catered for tourists .
 One of his earliest Dallas friends was Paul Roland Jones, convicted of narcotics trafficking . Jones was convicted of attempting to bribe the Dallas sheriff .
 One of Ruby’s early partners in the Vegas club, Joe Bonds, had a criminal record . Joe Bonds was one of Ruby's early partners .
 Bill Alexander kept close associations to known gamblers, including Lewis McWillie . “It was the nature of his business,” says Bill Alexander .
 There were rumors Ruby dealt in narcotics or even in prostitution, but there is no firm evidence that he did anything more than socialize with some people involved in those vices . Ruby is believed to have been involved with some of the vices he was involved in .
 Alexander told the author, “The police had a pretty good idea of what happened at Ruby’s club, and there was no dope and he certainly didn’t allow the girls to do anything illegal from the club, because that would have cost him his license . Alexander
 During 14 years, he was arrested nine times, for charges ranging from disturbing the peace to assault to carrying concealed weapons . During that time he was charged with disturbing peace, assault and weapons charges .
 The Texas Liquor Control Board also frequently suspended his license for violations, primarily for allowing obscene stage shows or for serving liquor after hours .
 Ruby's legal difficulties and associations with criminals have been the basis of much speculation that he was part of the mafia . Ruby's killing of Oswald was ordered by the mob to silence the President’s assassin .
 The word was on the street that you couldn’t trust him because he was telling the cops everything . "You couldn't trust him," police officer says .
 "He was a real talker, a fellow who would talk your ear off if he had the chance. He was a fellow talker," says Bob Greene .
 "You have to be crazy to think anybody would have trusted Ruby to be part of the mob," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 "We knew who the criminals were in Dallas back then, and to say Ruby was part of organized crime is just bullshit," says the author . Ruby was a Dallas resident in the 1980s and '90s .
 It’s guilt by association, that A knew B, and Ruby knew B back in 1950, so he must have known A, and that must be the link to the conspiracy . Ruby knew A and Ruby, and B knew Ruby, so they must be guilty by association .
 Ruby’s main competition was from the Theater and Colony clubs, owned by two brothers, Abe and Barney Weinstein . Ruby was a member of the Colony and Theater clubs .
 Ruby tried to compete with the Weinsteins’ amateur nights, but soon complained to AGVA that the union’s constitution prohibited professional and amateur entertainers from working together . Ruby demanded the Weinsteinins be stopped . The union's constitution prohibits professional and amateurs working together
 AGVA was riddled with corruption and compromised by its mob connections, officials say . AGVA also compromised by connections to mobsters, officials have said . It is believed that AGVA will be a victim of corruption and corruption .
 Tony Zoppi believes the Weinsteins received preferential treatment because they bribed union officials . Tony's wife says she bribed officials to get preferential treatment . The Weinstein family is accused of bribing union officials in order to get the deal .
 Ruby’s frustration over the Weinsteins’ use of amateur nights peaked during the summer and fall of 1963 . Ruby was angry at the Weinsteiners’ decision to use amateur nights in their homes .
 It coincided with a series of AGVA complaints about his Carousel Club as well as a contractual dispute he had with his star stripper, Jada, who he brought back to Dallas .
 He had hired her in the summer, hoping she could turn around his diminishing fortunes, but fired her by the end of October . He had hoped she could help him turn around the company's fortunes .
 In addition to the problems with Jada, he also went through three masters of ceremonies at the same time . He also had to go through a master of ceremonies ceremony .
 He had a growing tax delinquency totaling more than $40,000 . Ruby accelerated his campaign to compel some union action against the Weinsteins .
 He had earlier warned an AGVA official, Irvin Mazzei, that he could use ‘labor connections in Chicago” to pressure the union . He had also warned an official that he may use “labor . connections in . Chicago’s labor connections
 In front of an FBI agent, he physically threatened Vincent Lee, another AGVA official . He physically threatened Lee in front of the FBI agent . Lee was a member of the AGVA. Lee's office. Lee was in the office at the time .
 He called his brother Earl and asked for names of people who could be helpful . He called him to ask if he could help him find a way to help .
 The House Select Committee did an extensive computer analysis of Ruby’s five home and business telephone numbers for all of 1963 . Ruby's five telephone numbers were analyzed by the committee .
 The Committee checked each number he telephoned, as well as the records of those he called, and determined that most of the increases in his long-distance bill were due to his AGVA problems . The Committee found most of his increases in long distance bills were caused by his AG
 Select Committee: Three of the calls raised the possibility that they might be of significance in the Kennedy case . But three of those calls, said the Select Committee, were not of significance .
 The author’s investigation reveals the calls were not as mysterious as the Select Committee assumed . However, the author's investigation reveals that the committee was not as secretive as the committee assumed .
 The first was to Chicago bail bondsman Irwin Weiner, who often represented mob figures . Weiner represented Weiner in the 1980s and '90s . Weiner was also a bail bond agent for the mobsters .
 Weiner refused to cooperate with the FBI in its Warren Commission investigation . Weiner had refused to be part of the investigation into Weiner .
 The second call was to the office of Nofio Pecora, a lieutenant to New Orleans godfather Carlos Marcello . The second called was to a trailer park in New Orleans, to a New Orleans trailer park .
 This October 30, 1963, call worried the committee since it appeared to be a contact with a high-ranking aide to Marcello less than a month before the assassination . The call was believed to be the call from Ruby's contact with an aide to the aide of the late Mar
 Harold Tannenbaum, a fellow nightclub owner and friend of Ruby’s, lived in the Tropical Court Tourist Park . Harold lived in that trailer park, the Tropical . Park .
 Tannenbaum arranged the deal that allowed Ruby to bring Jada from New Orleans to Dallas . Ruby often called him at his trailer-park home and his French Quarter nightclub to complain about his contractual problems with the temperamental dancer .
 In 1978, Pecora told the Select Committee that he did not know Ruby, nor did he remember ever speaking to him . Ruby was the subject of a federal investigation into the death of Ruby in 1978 .
 Pecora, who ran the trailer park from his one-man office, admitted he occasionally took a message for someone in the park, but did not remember doing so for Ruby . Ruby was found dead at the scene of the incident in the early hours of the day .
 There is no way to know if Ruby first telephoned Tannenbaum’s home, since if no one was there, there would be no toll record . Ruby is believed to have phoned the home of the late mayor .
 Tannenbaum had apparently received the message from Pecora and returned the call, collect, for twenty-one minutes . Ruby’s call was collect, collect .
 The third call that stumped the Select Committee actually comprised three calls, two on November 7, and one on November 8, all to Robert "Barney" Baker, an aide to Teamster boss Jimmy Hoffa . Baker was a Teamster aide to Hoffa.
 The committee was concerned since Hoffa had such a well-known hatred for both John and Robert Kennedy . Hoffa's hatred for the Kennedy brothers was well known . Committee was concerned because Hoffa was known for his hatred of the Kennedy family .
 Baker and Ruby did not know each other before Ruby called him on November 7, 1963 . Ruby called Baker and Baker on that day . Baker says he and Ruby had never met before .
 Ruby had telephoned Baker, but Baker was not in and his wife had taken a number in Dallas . Ruby told the agents that on November 7, Ruby had called Baker but Baker wasn't in . Ruby's wife took the number and called the police . Ruby was found dead in
 Ruby introduced himself, explained his labor-union problems with his club, and sought Baker’s assistance . Ruby then introduced himself to Baker, explaining his labor union problems with the club .
 Baker did not help, nor did he remember the last call the following day . Baker said he did not remember the call from the last day .
 At the time he spoke to the FBI and talked about Ruby’s AGVA problems, it was independent of knowing that Ruby had also told the police that the conversations were about union problems, the FBI says .
 Baker challenged the agents to check their tapes and listen to the conversation if they had any doubts . Baker, who thought the FBI tapped his phone lines, reportedly challenged them to listen to their tapes . Baker reportedly challenged the FBI to check the tapes .
 Despite Ruby’s intervention with the AGVA board and his pleas to organized-crime figures, no one came to his aid . Unfortunately, there apparently was no surveillance of his line .
 The President's dispute with AGVA was still unresolved the weekend the President was assassinated . The dispute was unresolved the day he died .
 Dallas police department’s policy in 1963 was not to record interrogations . However, the police department in 1963 did not record any interrogations.
 We had Miranda before the Supreme Court handed it down for the rest of the country . Miranda's Miranda case was the result of a Supreme Court ruling .
 We had to inform him that he did not have to make any statement, and that any he did make had to be voluntary, witnessed, reduced to writing, and could be used against him . We told him that any statement he made must be voluntary and witnessed .
 There was no way they could be used in court . So our questions for him were strictly to get information, but there were no way we could use them . So we asked him to answer them, but were not allowed to use them in court.
 Even if we gave him the proper warning, and then reduced his statement to writing, it was useless . If he then refused to sign it in the presence of a witness, it would be useless, he said .
 He could always say the statement was induced by threats, fraud, or coercion . He could also say he was coerced by threats or fraud .
 On a later FBI inventory of items taken from the Paine household, the Minox camera was listed as a light meter . The FBI listed the camera as an item taken from Paine's home .
 Critics charged that the government was covering up evidence of intelligence equipment issued to Oswald . Critics say the equipment was given to Oswald in Oswald's days .
 The author was the first person to ask Paine about the camera and to show him copies of pictures from the film that had been confiscated and developed .
 She has lived in Texas since the assassination and has been bombarded by the buffs for nearly three decades . She says she has lived there since the shooting and has lived with her family for nearly 20 years .
 Marina has been susceptible in the past to the arguments of conspiracy buffs, even the most bizarre ones . Marina has always been susceptible to conspiracy theories, even though she has been open to them .
 In the summer of 1980 she joined the successful legal effort of British author Michael Eddowes to exhume her husband’s body . In the belief that the man in the grave was actually a Soviet KGB agent who had impersonated the real Oswald, even fooling his mother
 Forensic pathologists at Dallas’s Baylor Medical Center used dental and medical records to confirm the exhumed corpse was that of Lee Oswald . On October 4, 1981, four forensic pathologists used dental records at Baylor to confirm that Lee Oswald's corpse had been found .
 The following day, H Louis Nichols, president of the Dallas Bar Association, also visited Oswald . Oswald was found dead in Dallas, Texas, on November 23 .
 Ruth Abt did call, but Abt was not at home, and thereby missed the opportunity to represent the accused presidential assassin . Ruth did call but missed the chance to represent Abt, who is accused of killing President Obama .
 Oswald was arraigned on the charge of killing the President at 1:30 A.M. on Saturday . Oswald has been charged with the murder of the President . Oswald is accused of shooting President John Kennedy to death .
 Molina was a leftist who was on the Dallas police’s intelligence watch list . He was originally thought he might be connected to Oswald . Molina had been on the watch list for years .
 Alexander concocted a story that Oswald had been FBI informer S-179 and had been paid $200 a month . Alexander and two local reporters concocted the story after the incident .
 Lonnie Hudkins, one of the reporters, printed the story, attributing it to an unidentified source . The story was printed in the Washington Post .
 The fallout was so great that the Warren Commission held a January 22, 1964, executive session to discuss the issue . The Warren Commission later held an executive session on the issue in 1964 .
 Three others were negative on the firing hand and positive on the non-firing hand . Three other people were negative and negative on firing hand .
 Only two men were positive on their firing hand and negative on the other . Only two of the men were negative on either hand .
 In another test, the FBI tested people who had not fired a gun and tested both their hands . The FBI tested the hands of people with no firing weapons .
 Birth records were not officially kept in Chicago prior to 1915 . School records, driver’s licenses, and arrest records were among the six different dates .
 March 25 is used by the author since it is the date most often given by Ruby himself in his adult life . The author is using this date as a reference to the author's own life .
 Ruby was so upset over the death of his friend that he later adopted the middle name Leon . Ruby adopted the name Leon after his friend's death . Ruby became so upset that he adopted his middle name .
 Harry Rubenstein, a convicted felon, ran several clubs in Chicago . Rubenstein was convicted felon who ran many clubs in the city .
 "Once after the war, he returned from downtown Chicago with blood all over one of his good suits," he says . "Once again, he went to downtown Chicago and got blood on his suit"
 Zoppi knew Ruby as well as anyone in Dallas, Dallas, and his characterizations of the nightclub owner are substantiated by many others .
 The rumors persisted because Ruby never married and did have several male roommates, the last of which was George Senator . Ruby was married to several men .
 Senator referred to Ruby as “my boyfriend,” but said it was only a sign of friendship . Senator said Ruby was his boyfriend, but that it was just a friendship .
 Warren Commission lawyer Burt Griffin, who researched the Ruby issues for the Commission, told the author, “I’m not sure if Senator was honest with us about his relationship with Ruby .
 His Dallas rabbi said Ruby was very shallow intellectually . He said he would not know the difference between a Communist philosophy and a totalitarian regime .
 Bonds was sentenced to jail for sodomizing a fifteen-year-old girl in 1953 . He had been Ruby’s partner in the Vegas Club in 1953, but their relationship ended when Bonds was jailed for sodomy .
 Ruby remained a part owner of the Las Vegas and considered it his second club . Ruby remained part of the club after leaving it to become a part-owned club .
 At the club, there were rumors that Ruby had an unnatural relationship with the dogs, something he vehemently denied on several occasions . Ruby vehemently denied the rumors that he had unnatural relationship .
 One of his Chicago friends, Harry Goldbaum, last visited Ruby in August 1963 . Goldbaum's last visit to Ruby was August 1963, when he was in Chicago .
 Ruby was taking care of three small dogs for a friend . Ruby spent an hour in the Carousel’s rear office, where she took care of them .
 Interviews with former Dallas policemen and Ruby’s employees indicate that he was acquainted with several hundred people . Ruby's associates say he was well-known to several hundred of them .
 Between April to October, he met with Agent Charles Flynn eight times, giving information about thefts and similar offenses . Between April and October of that year, Flynn gave information about theft and similar crimes .
 In November, Flynn recommended that no further attempt be made to develop Ruby as a potential criminal informant, since his information was essentially useless . Flynn: Ruby's information is essentially useless, and his information is useless .
 Ruby told the Warren Commission he visited McWillie in Havana for one week in August 1959 . Ruby said he spent the week in Havana in 1959 . He said he visited the island for a week and said he was in Havana .
 The House Select Committee found Ruby made at least two, and probably three, trips to Havana . The longest was for a month and the shortest was for one day .
 He bought two pistols for McWillie, and may have acted as a courier to bring some money out of Havana . He may have been a gun courier to get some money from Havana .
 Ruby always maintained his time in Cuba was for pleasure and not business . Ruby maintained he spent time in the country for pleasure, not business, in Cuba .
 Ruby claimed to have met Santo Trafficante in 1959, then a prisoner at a Cuban jail . However, a British journalist later claimed that Ruby met Trafficante as a prisoner in 1959 .
 Trafficante, later the mafia don of Tampa, denied under oath that he had ever met Ruby . No one at the prison confirmed the story . Trafficante later became the mafia boss of Tampa . Ruby was convicted of murder in 1995 .
 A convicted Texas gun runner says Ruby offered $25,000 for a letter of introduction to Castro . Ruby represented Las Vegas interests that wanted the release of three prisoners in Cuba, including Trafficante .
 Most of the calls were made before the President’s trip to Dallas was even announced, much less before the motorcade route was set . However, the telephone calls are not evidence of a conspiracy to kill JFK, since most of them were made prior to the trip .
 Even if there was a plot to kill Kennedy and then silence Oswald, it is difficult to imagine that Oswald would have been allowed to get away from the shooting alive . Oswald was the only person who survived the shooting to survive .
 The three days during which he was interrogated was more than enough time for him to expose the conspiracy . He was interrogated for more than three days before he exposed the plot .
 If he was really a patsy who did not know anything, there was no reason to kill him, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "There is no reason for killing him"
 The conspirators could not know where Oswald would be arrested or whether state or federal authorities would have jurisdiction over him . Oswald would not be able to know if he was arrested or if authorities had jurisdiction of his case . Oswald was shot in the head with a bullet to the head .
 The only way Ruby was useful to a conspiracy was to penetrate the police security at the local Dallas jail . Ruby was only useful to the plot was to break into the jail, according to the FBI .
 Oswald would be captured and placed there was only one of many things that could have happened to him . Oswald would have been killed if he had not been captured and put there . Oswald's capture is one of the most unlikely things to happen to Oswald .
 'Conspirators with Ruby in September and October made no practical sense,' she said . 'Conspiracy with Ruby was not practical sense. Therefore, conspiring with Ruby would not be practical sense'
 If he was given a mafia assignment to kill Oswald, his telephone activity would likely have increased from the afternoon of the assassination until the day Oswald was killed .
 Ruby’s long-distance calls were all made much earlier, not during the assassination weekend . Ruby's calls were made earlier than the weekend of the assassination, but not during that weekend .
 It is important to follow Ruby carefully to discover whether there is any evidence of a conspiracy . It is also important to find out if there is evidence of an ongoing conspiracy .
 Jada Jada is in the midst of a breach-of-contract lawsuit against her ex-partner . Jada has been accused of breaching her contract . She says she wants to protect herself from the lawsuit .
 When he left Rudberg, he spent two hours with Connie Trammel, a young woman he had met several months earlier, who was job hunting in Dallas . He spent the time with her, and she was job-hunting in Dallas, Texas .
 Near the end of his time with Trammel, about 1:00, he stopped at the Merchants State Bank and paid the rent for the Carousel . The Carousel will be on display at a museum in New Jersey .
 Bill Alexander spoke to him about bad checks that a friend had recently passed while visiting Dallas . Alexander was visiting a friend in Dallas, Texas, when he found out about the death of a friend . Alexander: "It's not easy to say goodbye to a friend who died of bad checks
 Advertiser wanted to run weekend ads for the Carousel and Vegas clubs . After that, he telephoned John Newman, a salesman in the advertising department of the Dallas Morning News .
 Sometime on Thursday he also telephoned a local lawyer who was handling his federal excise-tax problem . Sometime later, he also called a lawyer who handled his federal tax problem .
 Ruby ran into several people on the street before heading to the Carousel . Ruby is currently in the process of getting ready for her first ride .
 He tried to make a date with a woman, so he could persuade her to work for him . He gave some of them passes to the club, and tried to persuade them to join him .
 The Carousel opened in the late afternoon and closed officially at midnight at midnight . Carousel closed seven days a week . It closed at midnight every night .
 Ruby was recuperating from abdominal surgery, and had to watch both clubs . However, she was not able to watch either of the two matches .
 He stayed at the Carousel for over four hours and then drove Curtis LaVerne Crafard, known as Larry, to the Vegas at 7:30 that evening . He then drove him to a young drifter who was living at the club and acting as its handyman .
 Crafard agreed to help Ruby oversee the Vegas while Eva convalesced . Crafards had agreed to stay with Ruby while she recuperated .
 Ruby spoke with Lawrence Meyers, a Chicago sales manager for a diversified line of consumer goods . Ruby then returned to the Carousel, where he spoke for nearly an hour with Meyers . Meyers was visiting Dallas when Ruby spoke to him .
 Meyers first met Ruby at the Carousel four years earlier . Meyers was a steady customer during his visits to Dallas . Ruby was the star of the show .
 Ruby complained about his contractual dispute with Jada as well as the Weinsteins’ amateur nights and how they were crippling his business . Ruby also complained about the Weinstein's amateur nights, which he said were crippling business .
 Shortly before midnight he drove to the Bon Vivant room at the Cabana Hotel, where he joined his Chicago friend Meyers, Meyers’ brother, Eddie, and sister-in-law, Thelma .
 Eddie Meyers worked for Pepsi-Cola, and Ruby spent the conversation trying to interest him in his twist-board product . Ruby found out that Meyers works for the company . Meyers is a former Pepsi executive .
 $3.95 exercise/diet gimmick consists of a small wooden platform set on ball bearings . The user twisted and rotated on the platform, on which the user twisted .
 Ruby left the Cabana Hotel by 12:30 A.M. and returned to the Carousel to get the night’s receipts . Myers was not interested and Ruby left . Ruby says Myers was "not interested"
 By 2:30 A.M., he went to his usual early-morning hangout, Lucas B&B Restaurant, next door to the Vegas. Vegas.com restaurant .
 On Friday, November 22, Ruby was up by 9:30 and at the Dallas Morning News shortly before 11:00, in order to place his regular weekend advertisements for his two nightclubs . Ruby's nightclubs are located in Dallas .
 The President is going to be here today,” and spoke to the other about some diet pills he had recommended, he said . The other spoke to him about some of his diet pills .
 He then stopped by the office of Tony Zoppi, the newspaper’s entertainment reporter, but he was not in . He then went to the entertainment reporter's office .
 Ruby next went to the second-floor advertising department, where he met with Don Campbell, the sales agent he had seen at the Cabana Hotel the night before . Ruby next met with Campbell, an advertising agent he'd seen the night night before, in the advertising department .
 Before 12:40, John Newman, another advertising-department employee, observed Ruby sitting at the same desk where Campbell had left him . Ruby was found dead at the scene of the shooting .
 Seth Kantor, a respected journalist and member of the Washington press corps covering the President’s trip to Texas, was at Parkland Hospital after the assassination .
 He knew Ruby and had worked for the Dallas Times Herald before moving to Washington . Ruby was a longtime reporter for the Times Herald in Dallas .
 Kantor was running up some stairs when he felt someone tug at his suit coat . Kantor had been running up stairs when someone tugged his coat out of his closet .
 Ruby denied to the FBI and the Warren Commission that he had ever been at Parkland that day . Ruby later denied to FBI and Warren Commission he had been at the school . Ruby is the father of the school shooting victims .
 None of the many press photos or television films shot of Parkland show him in the crowd .
 Kantor knew many Dallas policemen and reporters, but no one saw him except Kantor . Kantor was the only person to see him .
 House Select Committee determined Kantor "probably was not mistaken" Kantor was mistaken, committee says .
 Ruby arrived at the Carousel Club by 1:45, leaving too little time for him to stop by the hospital . Newman said Ruby left the News no later than 1:30. Kantor claimed he saw Ruby between 1:00 and 2:00.
 Ruby arrived about five minutes after he heard the radio announcement that the President was dead, Armstrong said . Armstrong said that Ruby arrived .
 His arrival would have placed his arrival at the Carousel shortly before 2:00 p.m. That would have been at the time of 2:30 a.m., which would have put his arrival there at around 2:50 p.a.m .
 The club’s phone records show a call to Chicago, to his sister Eileen, at 2:05.48† Ruby not only had the time to stop briefly by Parkland, but had reason to lie about being there, in the same way he later lied .
 Ruby visited Parkland on Sunday, hanging out at the jail over the weekend, might be natural for a fellow like Ruby . Visiting Parkland might be a natural for Ruby, who visited the jail Sunday .
 "He was like horse-shit, all over the place, wherever anything exciting was happening," he says of the late actor .
 The President’s assassination and all the follow-up activity at the jail with Oswald and the press attracted Jack like a magnet . That's why the President's assassination and . all the following-up activities at the . jail with . Oswald and . the press . attracted Jack to
 Eileen told him to stay in Dallas and that she would call him later that night . She told him she was going to call him when he left Dallas .
 All those who saw or spoke to him remember his grief was visible and real . "All those who see or spoke of him remember him as a man of grief," he said .
 Gladys Craddock, who worked for him as a hostess, said he had great admiration for the Kennedy family . She said he was a great admirer of the family .
 Wynn Warner, a musician who had worked for Jack, said the President’s murder shattered his world, especially since it happened in Dallas, Texas .
 It was almost as if the assassination had triggered an emotional collapse for Ruby, who was already under tremendous business pressure . Ruby had already been under enormous business pressure when he was assassinated .
 His stability also might have been adversely affected by his severe dieting, aided by an appetite suppressant, Preludin, an ‘upper,’ which exacerbated his volatile temperament .
 Even Ruby later admitted it was a “stimulus to give me an emotional feeling …” He was heartbroken .
 Paul informed him that he did not intend to close his restaurant . Ruby’s competition, the Weinsteins, would probably not close, he said . Paul told Ruby that his competition would not close .
 He called an ex-girlfriend he had not dated in eleven years, Alice Nichols, to express his shock . Though he was “crying pretty bad,” he called her to express the shock .
 Ruby telephoned Alex Gruber, a boyhood friend living in Los Angeles, to find out who he was calling . Ruby was a friend of Gruber's before he was killed . Ruby's death was a suicide attempt .
 Gruber felt Ruby was emotionally distraught and needed to talk, but the conversation was brief since Jack broke down sobbing and had to hang up . Gruber said he felt Ruby needed to speak to him and he hung up .
 He stopped by the Ritz Delicatessen, only two blocks from the Carousel, and then went to the club and told Crafard to prepare a sign saying it was closed . The club was closed on Sunday .
 He called the News to cancel his advertisements, but they had already reserved the space for him . He changed the ads to say the clubs were closed, so he changed the ad .
 Eva's sister Eva witnessed the real depth of his anguish, and unwittingly contributed to it . Eva said she was shocked by the depth of her brother's anguish . Eva: "Eva was not the only person to witness his anguish. But his sister Eva was the only one to witness it
 She told her brother that Oswald was a “barbarian,” and said, “That lousy Commie. He put in great Jewish men in office …”68 She said that Oswald’s “lousy Commie” was “that
 He did make the remark, he said, ‘I never felt so bad in my life, even when Ma and Pa died.’ He said he never felt bad in his life even though he had lost his parents, he added .
 He told the Warren Commission he was not there Friday night before 11:15 P.M. and it believed him . But first, he apparently stopped by police headquarters .
 At least five witnesses, police and reporters who knew him, reported seeing Ruby on the third floor of the headquarters sometime between 6:00 and 9:00 P.M. at the Dallas Police Department .
 He saw him step off the elevator, hunched between two out-of-state reporters with press identifications on their coats . He said he saw him come out of the elevator .
 The next time Rutledge saw him, he was standing outside room 317, where Oswald was being interrogated, and “he was explaining to members of the out-of-state press who everybody was that came in and out of that door.” Rutledge said .
 He saw him approach the door to the office where Oswald was being interrogated and start to open it . Oswald had been being interrogated by the FBI at the time of the assassination .
 Jack was so disturbed about what happened in Dallas that he talked about selling his business and returning to Chicago . His home telephone records show that, among others, he called his friend Ralph Paul, his brother Hyman, and two sisters, Marion and Ann, about 9:00 P.
 The President's clubs were closed out of respect for Dallas, Dallas, the President's widow says . The clubs are closed in honor of the assassination of the President .
 When he left the deli, he hoped to stop by KLIF radio, his personal favorite, and drop off some food . But he did not have the station’s private night-line number, which he could not .
 He drove past police headquarters, past several nightclubs, and noticed most were open . He then drove to police headquarters and drove past nightclubs in front of officers .
 Ruby saw several detectives he knew, shouted to them, and they helped him get inside . Ruby saw a detective he knew and shouted to him to help him get into the police station .
 Jack Jack “stuck his head in our door and hollered at us. Jack’s friend Eberhardt was in the burglary-and-theft section . Ruby had been at his club at the time of the incident . Ruby was charged with burglary and theft
 Ruby told them about the sandwiches he had brought, and then the discussion switched to the assassination . Ruby said the sandwiches were sandwiches he'd brought were sandwiches .
 He told detectives “how terrible it was for it to happen in the city. He told the detectives how terrible it had happened in the country .
 He noticed Ruby in the right-hand corner, with a notebook and pencil in his hand . Ruby was also spotted with a pencil and notebook in the corner of the room . Ruby is a member of the team at the centre of the story .
 Ruby thought Oswald was smirking at his police guards, and in only a few minutes he was convinced that Oswald was guilty . Ruby believed Oswald smirked at his guards at the time of the assassination .
 When the press conference finished, Ruby walked outside the room and saw Dallas district attorney Henry Wade . Ruby walked out of the room to see Wade's office . Ruby was arrested in connection with the shooting .
 In a few minutes he saw that Pappas had an open telephone line and was trying to get Henry Wade’s attention . Wade was able to get his attention back in the first place .
 Ruby took it upon himself to interrupt Wade’s conversation with several other men, and took the district attorney over to Pappas for the telephone interview . Ruby interrupted Wade's conversation with other men and took him over to the district prosecutor .
 District attorney Wade asked if the station wanted a live interview with Wade . Wade also asked if he wanted to talk with the station . Wade is a former sheriff's deputy .
 Wade said Oswald was not insane and that the President’s murder was premeditated . Wade also said Oswald not insane . Wade said that Oswald not only killed the President .
 Knight walked the four blocks back to KLIF, and Ruby drove there . After that interview, Knight walked back to the radio station .
 He talked briefly to Knight and several other employees before the 2:00 A.M. newscast . Knight: "I'm glad to be here today for the first time"
 He bragged he had personally seen Oswald, whom he bragged about . He expressed his sadness over the assassination, and said he was glad evidence was mounting against Oswald .
 Ruby decided to drive to the Dallas Times Herald at 2:30 a.m. Although it was approaching 2.30 in the morning, Ruby decided not to drive . Ruby decided instead of driving, Ruby drove to the paper .
 Harry Olsen was a Dallas policeman . Kay Coleman was a stripper who worked at the Carousel under the stage name Kathy Kay .
 He often visited the Herald at that early morning hour in order to check on his ads for the following day . He would often visit the Herald to see what he was about for the next day .
 He talked to several employees, who remembered him as “pretty shaken up” about the assassination . He said he was excited over his involvement with Henry Wade and having seen Oswald .
 At one point, shaking the newspaper emphatically in the air, he said, “Poor Mrs. Mrs.”
 He wondered whether there was a connection between that sign and the Weissman advertisement . The Weissman ad is a classic of American art .
 When he arrived at his apartment, “I very impatiently awakened George Senator,” Ruby remembered . Ruby remembered how he was impatient to wake him up in his apartment .
 He was moody; and the first thing come out of his mouth is … ‘Gee, his poor children and Mrs. Mrs.’ He said: ‘His poor children, Mrs. and Mrs. [his] poor children’. ‘He
 Senator called Larry Crafard, who was sleeping at the Carousel Club, and ordered him to “get that Polaroid with the flashbulbs and meet me downstairs.” He made Senator get dressed and called .
 He had earlier failed to find Weissman in the phone book, which encouraged his belief that the name was invented in order to blame Jews for the events in Dallas, Texas .
 It was after 5:30 A.M. when they left the post office and drove to the Southland Hotel’s coffee shop . The couple had been together for more than two weeks .
 Ruby picked up a copy of Friday’s Dallas Morning News and saw the Weissman advertisement . Ruby picked it up and again saw the advertisement . He then picked up the paper again and saw it again .
 He kept rereading the ad and mumbling that he could not understand why someone would publish such an insulting tirade against the President . The ad was published by President Barack Obama .
 Senator felt Ruby, who had a strange and abnormal stare, was disturbed in a way he had never before seen . Ruby was disturbed by the Senator's strange stare .
 At 8:30, Crafard woke Ruby by telephoning to say there was no canned food for the dogs at the Carousel . Ruby woke Ruby to find out there were no canned canned food . Ruby was the first person to wake Ruby from her bedside at 8:
 Crafard had been at the Carousel for nearly six weeks, but Ruby’s odd behavior the night before, and now this vicious verbal attack, was too much for the youngster . Ruby was too scared to take on the challenge .
 Later that morning, around 11:00, he took $5 from the club’s cash register and left Dallas, hitchhiking back to his sister in Michigan .
 Crafard admitted to the Warren Commission that he had done similar things in the past . He did not even know where his wife and two children lived in the U.S. He admitted to being a drifter .
 He told only the garage attendant next to the club that he was leaving . He told the attendant that he had left the club .
 He drove by the Carousel. He said no, and when he spoke of the ‘terrible assassination, “his voice was shaking …”132.132 He said .
 At about 1:30 P.M. he told an attendant to notify any of his acquaintances who stopped by that the Carousel would stay closed for the weekend . At the Nichols Parking Garage next door, he told Tom Brown, a parking garage attendant, to notify anyone who stops by
 Frank Bellocchio, the owner of a jewelry firm, was in a discussion with a friend when he blamed Dallas for the assassination, when Ruby got involved . The owner of the jewelry firm and a Ruby acquaintance for almost eight years was spotted at the scene .
 Ruby went into a tirade about the ad being the work of radical groups trying to “stir up anti-Jewish feelings,” claiming Weissman was fictitious . Ruby claimed the ad was dangerous since Jews in Dallas might be blamed for the assassination .
 Bellocchio produced two of his IMPEACH EARL WARREN photos, but refused to share one . He said it was part of a “scoop” he was working on .
 Ruby drove back toward the Carousel and stopped at the Nichols garage to check if he had any messages . Harkness saw him near a large crowd that had gathered for a scheduled transfer of Oswald at 4:00 P.M. Ruby drove to the Nichols Garage and stopped to check
 Ruby told the garage’s general manager he was “acting like a reporter,” and then got on the phone . Garnett Hallmark, the garage's general manager, spoke to Ruby, who told him he was "acting like reporter"
 He called KLIF radio station twice within a few minutes and spoke both times to Ken Dowe, a news announcer . He called the station twice in the next few minutes .
 As far as Jack was concerned, he was now officially representing KLIF as a reporter . Jack now officially represents KLIF .
 Ruby then went to Dealey Plaza, where he looked at the many memorial wreaths that had been left overnight . Ruby then visited the memorial site to look at the wreathes left overnight, looking at the memorial wreath .
 As he walked around the plaza, he ran into an acquaintance, Wes Wise, a newsman from KRLD radio . Wise is a local radio newsman . He says, "It's been a great day for him. It's a great time for him"
 Ruby pulled up in his 1960 white Oldsmobile to policeman James Chaney, who was acquainted with him . Ruby's car was driven by Chaney's wife, a police officer . Ruby was killed at the scene of the shooting .
 Ruby asked if the two men standing several hundred feet away were Chief Curry and Captain Fritz . Ruby then asked if they were the same as Chief Curry . Ruby said they were standing a hundred yards away from each other . Ruby asked Chief Curry if he was the real Chief Fritz .
 When he left Dealey Plaza, it appears Ruby once more went to the third floor of the police headquarters, expecting an Oswald transfer that never took place . Ruby is believed to have been waiting for Oswald to be transferred from the police station .
 He later denied being there Saturday because, again, he probably feared it might be interpreted as evidence of premeditation . He said he didn't want to show up because it might have been interpreted as premeditated .
 Earlier in the day, Ruby had put his head through the open window of a remote television truck for NBC affiliate WBAP . Ruby began watching monitors that showed activity on the third floor of the jail .
 Later in the afternoon they saw him on their monitors wandering the third floor of police headquarters . He approached Wade in an office from which regular reporters were barred .
 Only the next day, after Oswald was shot, did the van’s reporters learn ‘the creep’ was Ruby . Ruby was Ruby, a member of the White House staff at the time of the assassination .
 Ruby, a French newspaper reporter, was asked by a reporter for France-Soir . Ruby was the subject of an interview with the French newspaper . Ruby says he has been in the news for more than a decade .
 Ruby’s response was, ‘Ooh la la Folies-Bergère,” which Labro was convinced was the only French he knew . Ruby's response to Labro's story was, "Ooh La la Folie Folieur," Labro
 French correspondent, François Pelou, saw him later hand out sandwiches to some of the press . Another French correspondent also saw him handing out sandwiches .
 He was aggressive in getting the reporters’ attention, pulling the sleeves of some and slapping others on the back or arms of some .
 As soon as you get a chance, I want all of you boys to come over to my place, the one downtown here is more convenient, and have a drink on me .
 Kaufman said Ruby “rambled,” and that he was “upset” about the effects on the Dallas Jewish community . Kaufman said he was "upset" by the effects of Ruby's actions on the community .
 Jack told Kaufman the ad’s black border was a tipoff that those who placed it knew about the assassination . Ruby assured Kaufman he was helping the police get to the bottom of the Weissman matter .
 Ruby left the headquarters just before 6:00 P.M. the next day . Chief Curry told the press they expected to transfer Oswald at 10:00 A.m. The transfer is expected to take place in the early hours of the morning .
 Using her telephone, he made several calls to local acquaintances, complaining about the Earl Warren sign and that competing nightclubs had stayed open . In each call, he complained about the sign, and in each complained about it . He then made a series of phone calls to acquaintances complaining about it
 By 9:30 Ruby had returned to his apartment . Russ Knight at KLIF received a brief call from him, and “he asked me who Earl Warren was …”157*
 There, he received a call from one of his strippers, Karen Bennett Carlin, whose stage name was Little Lynn . Carlin was a stripper known as Little Lynn, who had a stage name called Little Lynn.
 She wondered if the Carousel was going to open over the weekend, because she needed money . She had driven into Dallas from Fort Worth with her husband and wondered if it would open . The Carousel is a Dallas attraction .
 When he had not arrived by 10:30, Carlin’s husband, Bruce, again telephoned the apartment, and emphasized they needed money for rent and groceries . When he didn't show up, Bruce called the apartment and said he needed money to pay for rent .
 Ruby spoke to the attendant at the Nichols garage, Huey Reeves, and persuaded him to lend the Carlins $5 so they could at least return to Fort Worth . Ruby told Carlin to call him the next day about getting more money .
 He next telephoned Lawrence Meyers, a Chicago friend he had seen Thursday night . Meyers was a Chicago man who had seen him on the night of the night . He called Meyers to say goodbye to his friend .
 Ruby complained about the “terrible, terrible thing,” and then began talking about Mrs. Ruby . Ruby complained of the ‘terrible” thing .
 Shortly after speaking to Meyers, Ruby drove back to his sister’s apartment . Ruby drove to the apartment after Meyers spoke to him .
 He called Ralph Paul’s Bullpen restaurant and spoke to his close friend . From there he telephoned Ralph Paul to speak to him . Ralph Paul's Bullpen .
 Paul remembered that Eva was crying in the background and that Ruby told him he had driven around the city to check on his competitors and none of them were doing any business . Ruby told Paul that none of the competitors in the city were doing business .
 Outside the Carousel, he briefly said hello to Harry Olsen and Kay Coleman, the couple he had spoken to for an hour late the previous night .
 Inside the club, he made several brief calls to Ralph Paul and Breck Wall, a friend and entertainer who had gone to Galveston when his show had suspended its performances because of the assassination .
 Wall was also the newly elected president of the Dallas council of AGVA, the union with which Ruby was having difficulties . Wall also was also elected to the council of the union .
 Norton expressed strong feelings about the assassination of President Kennedy . Norton: "It's not easy to talk about it, but it's a very personal matter" Norton: Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 . Norton says, "I'm not sure what I think about it"
 He complained he was tired and, only fifteen minutes after arriving, left to return to his apartment . He complained: "I'm tired. I'm tired"
 Jack telephoned Eva at 12:45 to see how she was feeling and then went to bed himself by 1:30 . On Sunday, Mrs. Eva had been in bed by 1.30 .
 Elnora Pitts, Ruby’s cleaning lady, called between 8:30 and 9:00 A.M., waking him up . Ruby's cleaning lady woke him up between 8 and 9 a.m. Ruby's father, Ruby, is still in the care of
 He offered to go downtown and send it to her by Western Union, but told her it would “take a little while to get dressed.” He said it would take him a little time to send it .
 Dealey Plaza wreaths left overnight in memory of the President . President's route downtown took him past Dealey plaza, where he saw many new wreathows left .
 Oswald assumed Oswald had already been transferred from the jail, he said . As he drove near the jail he noticed a large crowd and assumed Oswald was already there . Oswald was transferred to a federal prison in Texas .
 Oswald would have been moved to the sheriff’s custody nearly an hour earlier . Oswald was taken to the police station at the time of the shooting . Oswald is now in the sheriff's custody .
 Guards were posted at the two driveway ramps, and at the five doorways into the garage . Guards were also posted at two driveway rampes and at five entrances to the garage. Guards were stationed at two of the ramps .
 A crowd of several hundred gathered before 10:00, in front of the jail, to watch the event . Then the press was allowed to set up to film the transfer .
 The transfer had undergone a series of last-second changes and delays . However, the transfer had been due to be completed in time and space .
 Oswald's life had been threatened by anonymous telephone threats . Police considered and rejected a secret nighttime transfer of Oswald . Oswald was killed in August 1945 .
 Their plans stayed in a state of flux as they decided on the best compromise between security and press access . Their plans remained a state-of- flux .
 Only an hour and a half before the planned move, the police decided to make the arrangements themselves . Instead of the usual policy of allowing the sheriff’s department to take responsibility, they decided to take over .
 Oswald brought Oswald through the basement of the club to get more room for the press . The press was given more room to take pictures of the signing of the new boy .
 The original plan to transfer Oswald in an armored truck went awry when two armored vehicles arrived that were unusable . Oswald was transferred in a truck that was too small to fit into a vehicle .
 One was too small to hold guards, and the other was too tall to fit under the jail’s eight-foot driveway clearance . The jail's driveway clearance is eight feet higher than the 8-foot clearance .
 Captain Fritz decided to use the larger armored truck as a decoy and move Oswald in an unmarked police car . Oswald was moved in the unmarked car by the police officer .
 Postal inspector Harry Holmes was due to arrive for final interrogation . Postal inspector arrived for a final interrogation at the time of the transfer .
 "I got out of church and I said, ‘You get out, I am going down and see if I can do something for Captain Fritz. I got to church and said, 'I am going to go down, I'm going down to see if it can be done
 He patiently waited in line while another customer completed her business . Then he patiently waited for another customer to complete her job .
 It was impossible for him to know that Oswald had not been transferred, since there was no television or radio at the Western Union office . "There was no TV or radio" at the office, and no radio or television .
 When he got to the counter, the cost for sending the moneygram totaled $26.87 . The cost of sending a moneygram to send a $25,000 bill was $26,000 .
 He handed over $30 and waited for his change while the clerk finished filling out the forms and then time-stamped the documents . The clerk then time stamped the documents and gave the man change .
 Ruby’s receipt was stamped 11:17.192* When he left Western Union, he was less than two hundred steps from the entrance to police headquarters . Ruby was on his way to the police station when he was killed .
 Oswald was on the third floor of the headquarters at 11:00 A.M. Police informed Oswald that they would immediately take him downstairs and move him to the sheriffs jail . Oswald was taken to the Sheriffs' jail after his arrest .
 Captain Fritz sent for some sweaters, and when they were brought to him, he put on a beige one, and then changed his mind and switched to a black sweater . Captain Fritz put on the beige sweater, but then switched to black .
 Oswald would have left the jail almost five minutes earlier, while Ruby was still inside the Western Union office . If Oswald had not decided at the last moment to get a sweater, he would have walked out of the jail .
 Ruby walked the one block along Main Street and stopped near the eight-foot-wide rampway . Now, Ruby walks along Main St. and stops near the 8-foot, wide rampway.
 Rio Pierce drove a black car up the Main Street ramp as part of the decoy plan . Rio Pierce drives a black vehicle up the ramp as a decoy car .
 A large armored truck that was originally scheduled to move Oswald was blocking the Commerce Street ramp . That ramp was normally a one-way entrance into headquarters, but Pierce had to use it as an exit . The armored truck blocked the entrance to headquarters .
 Officer Roy Vaughn stepped away from the center of the rampway, into the middle of Main Street, to stop the traffic so Pierce could safely exit . Pierce was able to safely exit from Main Street .
 Oswald arrived at the back of a crowd of police and press only seconds before Oswald was brought past . He walked down the ramp and arrived at a back of the crowd at the end of the day .
 Oswald was taken downstairs from the third floor to the basement . If the car that was scheduled to move Oswald had been in its correct position at the bottom of the ramp, it would have blocked Ruby from gaining access . Oswald was moved downstairs to a basement .
 Cramped inside the garage confines were almost thirty reporters and seventy police . Cramped in the garage were almost 30 reporters and 70 police . The garage was full of reporters and police .
 As Oswald walked into the garage, the large clock on the wall turned to 11:21.196 . Jimmy Turner, a television director at WBAP, was waiting for Oswald to come out the door when he saw a man walking at the bottom of the Main Street ramp . Turner was
 He noticed Ruby’s dark suit and hat, and later said the man on the ramp was the same one who shot Oswald . Oswald later said he was the man who shot him in the head .
 When Turner first saw Ruby at the ramp, it was only thirty seconds before the shooting . Turner says he saw the shooter at the entrance of his car at the time . Turner: "When Turner saw Ruby, he said, 'It was just thirty seconds from him'
 It cut off the main intestinal artery and the aorta, and the body’s main vein, as well as breaking up the right kidney . It also broke up the body's main vein and the main intestine artery .
 Ruby, who was excited from the shooting, talked to anybody who came by . When they got to the third floor, Ruby was excited to talk to anyone who came to see her . Ruby was the first person to be taken to the hospital .
 Ruby told Sorrels “he had been to the Western Union office to send a telegram, and that he guessed he had worked himself into a state of insanity, where he had to do it’s . Ruby said he had gone to the office to get a te
 He thought he was going to go through the booking, and then he would be released, he said . He thought that he would go through booking, but then he was released . He said he didn't think he would get through booking .
 Jack actually thought he might come out of this as a hero of sorts, getting the acknowledgment he always wanted in Dallas . "Jack actually thought ... he actually thought . He actually thought it might come from this as ... a hero," he said .
 While in jail, Ruby often granted press interviews, and talked to police and investigators . Ruby often gave interviews to police, investigators and others .
 Eva realized that shooting Oswald was a momentary explosion caused by his violent temper . Eva realized she shot Oswald in the head after he shot Oswald .
 In Texas, there was a crime called murder without malice, equivalent to manslaughter in most states . The crime is a crime without malice . It is punishable by manslaughter in Texas, but not murder .
 Belli gambled that he could acquit him completely and argued that Ruby’s family had a history of mental illness and that he was insane when he shot Oswald . Belli argued that the family of Ruby's shooter had a mental illness .
 He came down here thinking he was going to teach us ‘hicks’ in Texas a lesson, he said . He came to Texas thinking he’d teach us 'hicks' a lesson. He said, ‘I’m sure he came down with
 "Day by day Jack melted—he just looked worse and worse. Well, he put on this god-awful defense," she said . "He put on a god-wasted defense, and day by day ... he just looked bad and worse"
 Instead of being a hero, Belli was bringing out all this stuff about Jack’s mother in an insane asylum and how Jack himself was sick . Belli's mother was in an asylum and Jack was sick. Belli is sick .
 Belli just wanted to get on the stand and say, ‘I shot the guy because he killed my President,’ but Belli hacked away at his family in public . Belli said he wanted to say he shot the man because 'he killed my president' Belli
 After his arrest, there had been a steady mental deterioration after his arrest . The conviction hastened his decline, and his mental decline .
 The very item that kicked off his original interest on the weekend of the assassination, the Weissman advertisement, grew into an obsession . His belief that it could have been published to embarrass Jews, grew to an obsession, he says .
 He often told her to kill herself because “he thinks they are going to kill out all the Jews” He has made remarks that 25 million Jews have been slaughtered, on the floor below, in the jail, she says .
 Once, he tried to split his skull by pounding his head against the wall . He tried to do the same thing once, he said .
 Once he tried hanging, and once he tried to electrocute himself with a light fixture, he says .
 He kept a picture of President Kennedy in his cell and kissed it during the day . He kept the picture of the president in the cell and kept it in the day.
 Ruby was in this state of mind when the Warren Commission interviewed him on June 7, 1964 . Ruby was interviewed by the commission on June 9, 1964.
 During the course of the questioning he pleaded to take a polygraph to prove “I am as innocent regarding any conspiracy as any of you gentlemen in this room’s room,” he said .
 Conspiracy theorists have focused on the fact that Ruby asked nine times to be taken to Washington . Ruby asked for help nine times before he was taken to D.C.
 They assert that JFK could not tell the truth about some secret conspiracy to kill JFK while he was in Texas . They assert he could not have told the truth .
 Ruby’s pleas were exactly the opposite, a desire to be taken to Washington to vindicate himself of the rumors that he was part of a conspiracy . Ruby's testimony was read in court to prove he was not a conspirator .
 Ruby thought his life was in danger, as part of an extermination program against Jews, primarily undertaken by the John Birch Society . Ruby thought he was at risk of being murdered by the society's extermination program . Ruby believed his life would be in danger if he survived .
 Rabbi Silverman thought Washington was the only place where he could tell the world that he had nothing to do with Oswald, not that there was any other story . “In his demented frame of mind,” he said, “he thought Washington ... was the place where
 The Commission did have a polygraph exam administered on July 18, 1964 . The Commission has never been in touch with the public .
 The Texas Court of Criminal Appeals granted Ruby a new trial on October 5, 1966, on the grounds that his statements to Dallas policemen immediately after the shooting should not have been allowed . Ruby told the truth when he said he never knew Oswald .
 Wichita Falls, Texas, has been selected as the site for the retrial . The retrial will take place in Wichita Falls on December 5 .
 When the sheriff from Wichita Falls arrived in December 1966 to move Ruby for his new trial, he refused to take him because he seemed too sick . Ruby was moved to a new trial in Wichita Falls, Texas, in 1966 .
 The Dallas jail had been treating him with Pepto-Bismol for a stomach problem . The jail treated him with a stomach ailment . He was taken to a hospital in Dallas .
 At Parkland Hospital, he was first diagnosed with pneumonia, but a day later doctors realized he had cancer in his liver, brain, and lungs .
 None of the jail physicians had seen his condition as a serious one . Although he had probably had it for fifteen months, none of the prison doctors had seen it as serious one.
 Ruby died, officially of a blood clot, on January 3, 1967, more than three years after he shot Oswald . Ruby died more than 3 years after his shooting death .
 One of the Houston witnesses claimed Ruby had a scar on the left side of his face . Ruby is accused of stabbing a man to death in the head .
 Ruby returned to Dallas the same afternoon, repeating his high-speed highway trip . Scheim says Ruby returned the same day to Dallas, Texas .
 Ruby actually spoke to Don Campbell, a salesmen in the advertising department of the News . Don Campbell is a salesman in advertising department .
 He invited Ruby to the Castaway Club on Thursday night, but Ruby declined . Ruby declined Exhibit 3, 3, WC Vol. 3, Vol. 4 .
 Ruby did not know Brading, and while they were both at the same hotel on November 21, they did not meet . Ruby and Brading did not go to each other's hotel rooms .
 Mary Lawrence described Ruby’s restaurant acquaintance as having a small scar near his mouth . Mary Lawrence said Ruby had a scar on his face .
 Beverly Oliver claims to be the missing “babushka lady” of Dealey Plaza . Beverly Oliver says Jada introduced her to Ruby and Oswald over drinks at the Carousel . Jada is believed to be Ruby's girlfriend .
 She was extensively interviewed by reporters soon after the assassination and never mentioned seeing Oswald . She was also extensively interviewed soon after her death .
 Although Jada Conforto is dead, the author spoke to her son, Joe, who had been involved in a business with his mother . The author spoke with her son about the relationship between Jada and his mother, Joe .
 Oswald used to banter loudly with the stage acts, bump and grind with strippers and meet with mobsters . Some of Ruby’s employees initially told the police and FBI they had never seen Oswald . Oswald had been at the club and used to talk loudly about opening a narcotics ring
 After Ruby killed Oswald, there was a groundswell of stories, people who claimed they saw them together . Bill Alexander, who prosecuted Ruby, told the author, “After . Ruby killed . Oswald, he said, "People who claimed to have seen them together"
 "I would have had the greatest murder case in the world if any of it was right," says author of the book . He says he would have been the 'greatest murder case of all time'
 It would have made our case easier and I would have pursued it in a moment. I would've pursued it a moment, he says . It would've made our cases easier, he adds. It would make it easier to find a way to get back on the case .
 No credible witness or evidence connects Ruby to Oswald at any place, at any time, in any way, says CNN's John Sutter . "We checked out every one of those stories, took them all seriously," he says .
 Hansen, said he saw Ruby in front of the Dallas police station and said hello to him at 9:30 A.M. either on Thursday, November 21, or Friday, November 22 . Hansen said Ruby was seen at the police station in Dallas, Texas, on November 21 .
 George Senator said Ruby left too late on Friday to be at the police station by 9:30 . It was most likely Thursday, since George Senator says Ruby left late Friday .
 'Whenever he came to our offices, it was a visit people remembered. That was his way, and whenever he came he was remembered,' says the former president .
 On the Friday the President was shot, I later learned he had stopped by my office to see whether I was going to run a piece on a new master of ceremonies he was hiring, a guy who did ESP with the audience .
 The News building was crowded with employees, and no one saw Ruby leave the second floor until after the assassination . The timing of such an excursion is almost impossible .
 He was a politically conservative twenty-six-year-old, recently discharged from the United States Army . He was recently discharged .
 Lane promised to arrange a meeting in Dallas at which Weissman could confront the story’s source . Lane said he would arrange to meet Weissman to confront the source .
 The 1:45 call was to Karen Carlin, a stripper, to tell her the club would probably be closed . Carlin called the club at 1.45 a.m. to say it was probably closed .
 The 1:51 call was to Ralph Paul’s Bullpen Drive-In restaurant, but it was also made by Armstrong . Armstrong also called Ralph Paul's Bullpen drive-in restaurant .
 Carousel’s records show a call to the Bullpen restaurant at 2:42 for less than a minute . The Carousel's records show the call was made to The Bullpen at 2.42 .
 Ruby discovered Paul was not at the restaurant but instead at home, he telephoned him there . Ruby found him at home and called him to say goodbye to Paul .
 Later, he realized that carrying his pistol might be construed as evidence of premeditation, he said he did not have his gun on Friday . He said he didn't have his pistol on Friday when he realized it might be possible to carry it .
 A photo of the rear of Ruby, taken in the third-floor corridor that night, shows a lump under the right rear of his jacket . Ruby was found dead at the scene .
 If he was a mob-hired killer with a contract on Oswald, he would have shot him at his first opportunity . Oswald would have been shot at the first opportunity, the president says .
 Any contract to kill Oswald would not have been one Ruby could fulfill at his leisure . Certainly, any contract would not be one that Ruby was able to fulfill .
 Oswald was only a couple of feet away from Ruby when he had the perfect opportunity to shoot him . Ruby did not shoot Oswald, despite having the chance to do so . Oswald was the only man in the world to shoot Ruby .
 Ruby could have easily been led, through the power of suggestion, to have killed Oswald, his attorney said . However, Joe Tonahill, one of Ruby’s attorneys, believed that Ruby, without even realizing it, could have led Oswald to kill Oswald .
 Ruby kept the chance meeting with Olsen and Coleman a secret until after his trial was finished . Ruby kept it a secret for years until after he was acquitted .
 Some interpret the use of the twistboard as an indication that Ruby was not really that upset over the assassination .
 He did not change the time because he remembered it differently but rather because a friend who saw him there remembered being there at 4:00. He didn't change it because he didn't remember the time . He did change it from 4:30 to 4:45 .
 Two witnesses say Ruby was at Dealey by 3:00, and their testimony is confirmed by police chief Jesse Curry . Yet those two witnesses say he was there by 3,00 . Their testimony was confirmed by an interview with police chief .
 Curry initially planned the transfer for 4:00 P.M. on Saturday, November 23 . Curry was hoping Fritz would be ready to relinquish Oswald by the afternoon . The transfer was originally planned for the afternoon of November 23, when Oswald would be available .
 Armstrong said he was “fed up’ with Ruby’s unexpected temper tantrums . Armstrong quit on the spot after the incident .
 Ruby returned by 10:00 for a longer visit to Eva’s apartment . The first visit was a brief one shortly before 8:00, then a longer one later that night .
 Phone records show the call was made at 10:44 P.M. from her apartment . Phone records say she made the call at 10.44 p.m. from the apartment .
 None of the other workers at the Bullpen who were near Helmick at the time corroborated her testimony . Helmick's testimony was not corroborated by other workers who witnessed her .
 Paul testified before the Warren Commission in August 1964, when Ruby’s conviction was on appeal, and it is doubtful he would have said anything that could have been used as evidence of premeditation against his friend .
 Telephone records reveal the conversation at the Bullpen lasted nine minutes . Ruby said the other clubs in town were doing terrible business . Paul remembered the conversation as a nine-minute conversation .
 Ruby telephoned the restaurant again at 11:18 and discovered Paul had gone home . Ruby called the restaurant to say Paul had returned to his home .
 He then telephoned Paul three times at home, at 11:19 for three minutes, 11:36 for two minutes, and 11:47 for one minute . He then phoned Paul at home three times during the time he was at work .
 In 1988, he told the Dallas Morning News, “Then in the course of the conversation, he started talking about Oswald’s Oswald.”
 Wall is only one of many witnesses who recalls more information years after the event than he did in his contemporaneous testimony . Wall is not the only witness who has more information than he does in his contemporary testimony .
 Unless there is a convincing explanation for the alteration or addition to the original statements, the earliest account must be considered accurate . The earliest account is considered accurate by the historian .
 Wall’s Warren Commission testimony, where he stated that Oswald was not mentioned during his conversation with Ruby, is the most credible . In this example, Wall said that Oswald wasn't mentioned .
 They described him wearing clothes he did not own, and their physical descriptions were not accurate . The physical description of him was not accurate, and he was not wearing clothes .
 A witness at Ruby’s apartment complex thought he saw him doing laundry near 10:00. A witness said he saw Ruby doing the laundry . Ruby was found dead at the scene of the shooting .
 The basement was also accessible from an unguarded hallway inside the police and courts building . The basement is accessible from a unsecured hallway .
 Dallas policeman Don Flusche, who was parked across the street from the ramp, knew Ruby, yet did not see him enter . Ruby was found dead at the scene of the shooting .
 Vaughn was momentarily distracted when Pierce’s car drove up that ramp a minute before Oswald walked into the garage . It could not accept the use of the Main Street ramp entrance because it was only happenstance that Vaughn was distracted .
 At that time, there was no way that Ruby could have known about Pierce’s car, much less that the Main Street ramp had been changed from an entrance to an exit, unless he saw it .
 Committee did not believe police testimony since officers had not said it in their initial written reports . Committee concluded that the police testimony was not true . Committee said police testimony had not been reported to the public .
 Because of his frequent visits to police headquarters, Ruby was intimately familiar with the building . He could have known about the alternate route described by the Select Committee . Ruby visited the police headquarters frequently .
 Such a plot would have centered around Karen Carlin, whose plea for money took him to the Western Union office and near the jail . Carlin was arrested in 2008 after pleading for money to be sent to jail .
 Some of the others guilty of complicity would include George Senator, for confirming the Carlin story and Ruby’s departure time from the apartment . Postal inspector Harry Holmes, for delaying the transfer with his questions, police chief Curry and Captain Fritz, for selecting the basement and abandoning the armored
 Rio Pierce, for driving his car up the ramp a minute before Oswald was taken from the jail . Officer Roy Vaughn, for turning his back when Ruby walked down the ramp, also turned his back .
 Charles Crenshaw claimed he answered a call from President Lyndon Johnson demanding a deathbed confession from Oswald . Crenhaw was part of the team that tried to save Oswald at Parkland . He claimed he had answered a telephone call and it was from President Johnson .
 President Kennedy’s memorial service was held in Washington, with an enormous contingent of foreign heads of state . That day was the same day that President Kennedy's memorial service .
 In apparent retaliation against one of his original attorneys, Tom Howard, he claimed that Howard was responsible for concocting the story that he had shot Oswald because of concern over Mrs. Mrs. Oswald . He also claimed Howard had concocted the story because he was concerned about his wife .
 When word spread that Oswald had been shot inside police headquarters, the crowd spontaneously broke into cheers and applause . The crowd spontaneously applauded when word of Oswald's shooting broke out .
 Ruby received thousands of letters while in jail, most praising his murder of Oswald . Ruby later received thousands more letters while he was in jail .
 Owner of Egyptian Lounge restaurant knew Ruby well and visited the jail together with his wife . Campisi, owner of the Egyptian Lounge, said Ruby was a good friend of the restaurant owner .
 The author spoke to a number of experts on organized crime; none of them recalled an instance in which a mob boss issued a murder contract and then visited the arrested hit man in jail . None of the experts recall an instance of this happening .
 Max Rudberg, a friend of Jack Ruby, said, “Well, everyone was saying the son-of-a-bitch needs killing, and Jack was anxious to please.” Ruby friend said .
 Even in his final days, he was still protesting the implication that he had killed Oswald ‘to silence’ him . It is proof that, even in his last days, that he still protested that he killed Oswald to silence him .
 In the days following Oswald’s death, unfounded but spectacular stories of left-wing and right-wing plots, the complicity of Cuban and Soviet leaders, even . Soviet leaders . Even speculation about Lyndon Johnson hatching a plan to seize the presidency swept the country .
 Government officials have announced public investigations into the assassination of President Obama .
 Texas attorney general Waggoner Carr declared that Texas would hold a public court of inquiry . On the first business day after the murder, Monday, November 25, Texas will hold a hearing . The hearing will take place on November 25 .
 Lyndon Johnson tentatively approved the Texas commission in conversations with Carr . The Texas commission was approved by Johnson's administration .
 Carr panel was to include only Texans and no federal officials . Since the crime had happened in Dallas, the panel was only Texan officials .
 Johnson had also decided to release the FBI’s initial report on the assassination the day it was finished . It would contain raw and largely unsubstantiated data .
 Nicholas Katzenbach, acting attorney general while Robert Kennedy mourned with his family, worked feverishly behind the scenes to change LBJ’s mind .
 Senator Everett Dirksen of Illinois suggested the Senate Judiciary Committee examine the case . The panel has wide bipartisan support .
 There was even a possibility of war if either Cuba or the Soviet Union was found to have sponsored JFK’s death . Johnson appointed a seven-man panel of distinguished public servants he thought had unimpeachable credentials .
 Earl Warren, chief justice of the United States Supreme Court, was chosen as chairman . Seventy-two-year-old Earl Warren is the chairman of the board .
 Congressmen Hale Boggs, Gerald Ford and Hale Ford were both members of the House of Representatives . They were both Democrats and Republicans . The two men were both Republicans and Democrats .
 The final members were prominent attorneys—John J McCloy, former president of the World Bank and high commissioner of Germany after World War II . Allen Dulles, the CIA’s former spymaster, was also a prominent attorney .
 Other proposed state and federal investigations promptly gave way to the presidential panel . The members and their mandate were so prestigious that other proposed state, federal investigations gave way .
 It had subpoena power, as well as the right to grant immunity to compel testimony otherwise protected under the Fifth Amendment’s self-incrimination article . The case was brought before the Supreme Court in 1998 .
 All federal and state agencies were ordered to comply fully with its requests . All federal, state agencies must comply fully, the government says .
 The Commission’s general counsel was former U.S. solicitor general J Lee Rankin . 14 lawyers comprised a legal staff; under Rankin's supervision .
 Staff attorneys determined facts and are responsible for draft findings . Staff attorneys determine facts and draft findings. The staff attorneys determined the facts .
 Major disputes were brought to the attention of the seven commissioners . The seven commissioners were present at the meeting .
 The Warren Commission had its first meeting on December 5, 1963, only two weeks after the assassination . Four days later the FBI presented its five-volume report that summarized the Bureau’s preliminary findings .
 It conducted some 25,000 interviews and submitted over 2,300 investigative reports . It submitted more than 2,000 investigative reports, totaling more than 25,,000 pages .
 Critics of the Warren Commission say the Commission favored witnesses and documents that supported its early conclusion that Oswald alone killed the President . Many critics of the Commission acknowledge that a mammoth examination was accomplished in a relatively brief period .
 This view underestimates the independence the legal staff had within the Commission’s hierarchy . Yet, this view underestimated the independence of the Commission's legal staff, it said .
 LBJ feared rumors might start that he had political reasons for delaying the report . He wanted the work finished before the presidential nominating conventions . LBJ wanted the report to be completed before the conventions .
 Warren told the other members, in a January 21 executive session, that it “would be very bad for the country to have this thing discussed” during the coming campaign . Warren: “I'm very sorry for the president, but it's very important that we don't
 Tempers often flared during the final months as Warren pushed the probe at a pace that meant fourteen-hour days, seven days a week, for the legal staff .
 The Commission had done an extraordinary job of marshaling information and presenting it in a cohesive and organized manner, in only ten months it was not possible to delve into many issues that would later come to the forefront as nagging and persistent problems .
 Since it was so limited in manpower, the Commission was almost entirely dependent on agencies such as the FBI to conduct the actual investigation .
 Rankin referred to “tender spots” that might hinder sharing of information . Rankin had referred to potential embarrassments to the FBI or CIA . The FBI and CIA are working together to share information .
 J Edgar Hoover convinced within days of the assassination that Oswald alone had killed Kennedy . Hoover was convinced by days later that Oswald was responsible for Kennedy's death . Hoover believed Oswald alone killed Kennedy, according to FBI reports .
 JFK knew that if Oswald was part of a conspiracy, the Bureau's reputation would suffer for not having uncovered the plot prior to JFK’s trip to Dallas . He knew, of course, that if . Oswald was . part of an . conspiracy, he knew that .
 Because of his iron-clad control over the Bureau, his feelings on the case colored the work the field agents did . The case was one of the most difficult cases in the history of the FBI .
 Hoover believed the Warren Commission could only cause problems by delving into many other areas . Hoover thought the answer to the assassination was straightforward, Hoover thought it was straightforward .
 The FBI did not treat the Commission as its partner in search of the truth, the Commission says . The FBI was not treated as a partner in looking for the truth . The Commission says the FBI should not have been treated as partners with the Commission .
 The relationship between the Commission and the Bureau was partly adversarial, because no one wanted to bring that tension out into the open . The relationship was partly antagonistic, but it was never adversarial . No one wanted the tension to be out of the open, the Commission says .
 Lee Rankin complained to the commissioners, “They would have us fold up and quit” Rankin said on January 22, 1964, in 1964 . Rankin was a member of the Board of Commissioners .
 Oswald's name, address, and telephone number were deleted from Oswald's address book . Hosty’s name was also deleted when the information was sent to the Commission staff . Oswald had also deleted Hosty's telephone number and address .
 The CIA withheld information that the mafia and the CIA had embarked on a joint effort to kill Fidel Castro . The CIA also withheld information about the mafia's involvement in the killing of Castro .
 Lee Rankin did not know about the CIA conspiracies to kill Castro, he says . Rankin: "I am not convinced, as I look back on it now, that Lee Rankins knew about the conspiracies" Rankin says .
 Rankin operated with his door always closed, maybe he knew something and it was this secret . I don’t have any evidence, but as I look back on the failure to bring us together to speculate, he .
 Only Johnson, the Chief Justice, Allen Dulles, and Bobby Kennedy knew about the CIA plots against Castro . Only Johnson and Dulles knew of the plots, and only Dulles .
 Oswald's motive might have allowed us to say something reasonably definitive about Oswald’s motive . It might have given us a clue as to why Oswald was involved in the assassination .
 It would have put a new dimension on his Cuban activities, it would have opened new areas of exploration, it has said .
 The Commission wanted to use the autopsy photos and X rays as the best evidence of how the President was shot, but the Kennedy family refused to release them . At the time, the Commission wanted the photos to be used as evidence .
 Warren feared that if the Commission had the photos, they might be leaked to the press . As a result, he was hesitant to pressure Robert Kennedy on the matter .
 Staff attorney Howard Willens, a staff attorney, had worked for Robert Kennedy and persisted to obtain the documents . The documents were obtained by a staff member of the Kennedy administration .
 None of the other commissioners or staff ever saw autopsy photographs or X rays . The panel used independent forensics experts to examine the case .
 Those drawings were mistaken in the placement of both entry wounds, and that later developed into a significant issue for the conspiracy press .
 The tests also calculated the minimum firing time and accuracy by shooting at stationary targets as opposed to a moving one such as Oswald .
 The Commission did not have the technology in 1964 to positively establish the single-bullet theory .
 The Commission could not figure out how Oswald could have fired the three shots within the approximately five seconds they mistakenly allotted to him . But unless one bullet caused the wounds to both Connally and President Kennedy, the Commission couldn't figure out what happened . The Commission was unable to determine how Oswald
 The Commission had no way of being certain the single bullet was viable . But advances in neutron activation and photographic and computer techniques now confirm .
 Senator Russell threatened not to sign a final report that concluded the single bullet was correct . The members were almost evenly split in their feelings about the theory .
 Few of the witnesses who contradicted the official version of events testified before the Commission . Few witnesses who contradict the official story testified .
 If they had been examined, their testimony would have been explainable, but because the Commission ignored them, critics had ammunition for future claims of deliberate omission . The Commission ignored the testimony because it had not been examined .
 The Commission underplayed Jack Ruby’s underworld associations and did not effectively portray him as the unbalanced and volatile person he was, leaving itself open to criticism that it had failed to pursue the Ruby clues because it feared where those might lead . Also, the Commission did not portray Jack
 All the commissioners had full-time jobs that entailed substantial responsibilities . They could only spend part of their time at hearings .
 Senator Russell had the poorest attendance record, hearing only 6 percent of the testimony . Senator Russell attended the hearing only six percent of his testimony .
 Only three of the seven commissioners heard more than half of the testimony .
 The most controversial aspect of the Commission’s work may be its conclusion about the possibility of any conspiracy . The Commission concludes that any conspiracy is possible .
 There is plenty of evidence in the testimony and documents that could lead a reasonable person to pursue a conspiracy theory . The testimony and the documents could be fodder for conspiracy theories .
 There is nothing that then establishes a conspiracy theory, but there is plenty there that would allow a reasonable person to speculate . There is plenty of evidence to suggest a conspiracy conspiracy theory .
 Statements like that sweeping ‘no conspiracy’ one does a disservice to our overall work,’ says CNN.com . ‘It’s not a conspiracy,” says one of the researchers .
 In Europe, the Commission’s work was viewed as the official, sanitized version of history . But in Europe, where political conspiracies and government changeovers by violence are an integral part of history, it was seen as a sanitized history .
 Leading European commentators questioned its conclusions without ever reading the report . Many leading European commentators have questioned the conclusions .
 By the time the Warren Commission published its report in September 1964, a network of amateur sleuths were prepared to check its accuracy against the research they had compiled since the day of the murder .
 An eclectic mixture of people across the country, many were admitted leftists and were suspicious that a Communist was blamed for the murder in a right-wing city, had independently collected everything printed on the subject .
 As they heard about one another, some began sharing information about each other . Some of the people shared information and ideas with each other.
 Vincent Salandria, a Philadelphia lawyer, collected newspaper articles that discussed police agencies that might have been involved in the assassination . He collected articles that discuss police agencies .
 Professor Josiah Thompson studies ballistics and firearms to better understand what happened in Dealey Plaza . Thompson is an assistant philosophy professor specializing in the Danish philosopher Kierkegaard .
 Shirley Martin, an Oklahoma housewife, drove to Dallas, with her four children, to interview witnesses . Shirley Martin: "I don't believe it's a lie. It's not a lie" Shirley Martin says she believes it was a lie .
 Lillian Castellano, a Los Angeles bookkeeper, believes President was shot from the front by an assassin hidden in a storm drain near the car . The bookkeeper pursued the government and media with her belief that the President was killed .
 David Lifton, a Los Angeles student, focused on the foliage at Dealey Plaza . He asked whether it was all real or moved in as part of the plot . Lifton: The foliage is real or not real .
 Professor Josiah Thompson said their work was an ‘obsession’ and that “there’s a fantastic way in which the assassination becomes a religious event.” Professor Thompson said that ‘there”s a ‘fantastic way’ in
 There are relics, and scriptures, and even a holy scene -- the killing ground . There is also a holy site, the holy scene—the killing ground. There were relics and scriptures .
 The earliest books focused on apparent contradictions and unanswered questions in the report . Whether the man photographed standing in the doorway of the Depository during the assassination was Lee Oswald or his co-worker Billy Lovelady .
 The issues raised now seem rudimentary, but they were the first to undermine the authority the press had bestowed on the Warren Commission . The Warren Commission was given the authority it had been bestowed on .
 Oswald acted alone, according to Oswald's critics . Oswald's supporters say he acted alone . Oswald was the only person to have acted alone in the assassination .
 The books accomplished their goals if they merely raised doubts about the official version of the book . The books were intended to raise doubts about official version .
 Their view was that a cover-up of key information had taken place, by the FBI, the CIA, or others in the federal government . The general tenor was that the extreme right had probably hatched the plot .
 The rumors of Soviet or Cuban complicity were never popular with the critics . They figured it made no sense for the U.S. government to cover up evidence if it pointed to the guilt of Communist regimes .
 Many books acknowledged they did not have the answers, and called for a new investigation . Many of the books acknowledge they do not know the answers .
 In its own reexamination of the case in the late 1970s, the House Select Committee investigated the first generation of critics and found their work wanting in terms of fairness and accuracy .
 Select Committee’s chief counsel said many early critics “had special axes to grind.” Robert Blakey, the committee's chief counsel, said that early critics had special axes .
 The Commission’s report was released this week . The Commission's questions were answered when it released . Assassin or Fall-guy?
 In 1966, Harold Weisberg published Whitewash, the first in-depth attack on the Warren Report . The Warren Report was published in 1966, and the first of its kind in the world .
 Weisberg was a former Senate investigator who had been dismissed for possibly leaking information to the press . He later published another five books on the case, later published more books .
 He unsuccessfully argued with the Commission to be allowed to represent the deceased Oswald at the hearings . He was allowed to cross-examine the witnesses who appeared in the hearing .
 Rush to Judgment has sold more than a million copies in various editions . Reportedly, Rush to Judgement has sold over a million books .
 Lane’s attack on the Commission was an admitted brief for the defense by a skilled advocate . Lane's brief was admitted brief by the Supreme Court . Lane: Lane's attack on Commission was a . admitted brief . Lane is an admitted .
 He persuasively argued that the Commission’s work was seriously flawed . Using only the evidence that buttressed his arguments, he argued that he was wrong .
 He was careful in his book about whom he accused and about the scope of the conspiracy he said he had discovered . But in his dozens of college lectures and radio and television appearances he went much further, charging complicity at the highest levels of government .
 Lane was a critic who fit the Committee’s ‘unfair and inaccurate’ description . Cronkite concluded there were a number of examples in his work of “lifting remarks out of context to support his theories .
 Philosophy professor Richard Popkin was the first to use mistaken sightings of Oswald to develop the theory of an imposter . Popkin used mistaken sightings to develop theory of imposter theory .
 Raymond Marcus, the owner of the retail sign business, published The Bastard Bullet, an attack on the single-bullet theory . Raymond Marcus is a former sign business owner .
 Leo Sauvage, a professional journalist, wrote The Oswald Affair, which raised more questions about the Commission’s evidence-gathering . The Oswald case is the subject of a new book, The Oswald Case .
 Penn Jones, Jr., the editor of a small Texas newspaper, introduced the issue of “critical” witnesses who were supposedly dying mysteriously . In his self-published Forgive My Grief, Penn Jones Jr. introduces the issue .
 1966 also saw the publication of Edward Jay Epstein's Inquest, which was originally his master’s thesis at Cornell .
 A careful study of the inner workings of the Commission . Temperate in tone, it was a careful study in tone . The book was published by the BBC, BBC2 and Channel 4 .
 Epstein charged the Commission had sought the ‘political truth’ rather than the factual truth about the case . Epstein says the Commission sought the 'political truth' rather than truth . Epstein: The Commission sought political truth, not the truth .
 FBI report to the commissioners indicated the bullet that struck the President in the neck/shoulder only penetrated a short distance and did not exit, Epstein said . The autopsy and the Commission concluded that it was the single bullet that went on to wound Connally .
 Epstein raised the issue, but it appeared valid since the autopsy photos and X rays were still locked away . Epstein: "It appeared valid" since the photos and the X rays had been locked away from the hospital . When Epstein raised it, it appeared that the problem was valid .
 House forensics panel reviewed autopsy X rays and photographs and confirmed FBI report was mistaken . House Select Committee’s forensics committee reviewed autopsy photos and X-rays .
 Epstein had academic credentials, appeared to make an objective examination, and drew moderate conclusions . Epstein's book was critically accepted as an important one . Epstein was critical of Epstein's work .
 A series of critical articles through 1966 and 1967 cast doubt on the Commission's credibility . As a result, a series of . critical articles cast further doubt on Commission's . credibility .
 The two puncture points at the top are Lane's book and Epstein's book . Lane’s book is what gets public notice . Epstein's is the book's first to be published in the U.S.
 Sylvia Mea-gher did the index for Inquest, and reviewed Sauvage’s book . She also did the book's index and reviewed the book .
 There was no equivalent of the conspiracy network to support the Warren Report . The Warren Report was published in 1996, but there was no network of conspiracy networks .
 When the Commission disbanded, the members failed to arrange to defend their work or answer questions .
 Although a few books were published in support of the report, they had little impact in slowing the critical onslaught . A few books have been published supporting the report .
 Gerald Ford’s Portrait of the Assassin was the first pro-Commission book, published in 1965 . It consisted largely of reprints of testimony from the Commission's volumes . It did not answer any of the early critiques .
 Charles Roberts, Richard Lewis, and John Sparrow wrote slim volumes that contributed little new information about the case . Lewis’s book was largely a hard personal attack on the critics themselves .
 Two significant books, both written by graduates of the buff network, added to the growing mistrust of the Commission . But they were overshadowed in 1967 by the publication of two significant books that added to growing mistrust .
 In Six Seconds in Dallas, Josiah Thompson tries to determine what happened at Dealey Plaza . He focuses on ballistics, trajectory angles, medical evidence, and eyewitness testimony .
 Thompson had an advantage since he was the first conspiracy writer who had studied the original Zapruder film, and his book included drawings of critical frames . Thompson had a advantage because he was first to have studied the film and had studied it closely .
 The second book that further damaged the Commission was Sylvia Meagher’s Accessories After the Fact. Meagher's Accessories After The Fact. The Commission was damaged by the book .
 Meagher probably knew the twenty-six volumes of the Warren Commission hearings and exhibits better than any other critic . Meagher knew the hearings better than anyone else . He also knew the transcripts of the hearings, exhibits .
 The volumes originally had only a name index, making it almost impossible to work effectively with the more than 1 million-plus words . It was received as an important contribution for research since the volumes originally only had only an index .
 Meagher was a committed leftist, and her politics were clear throughout the book . Meagher's politics are clear throughout her book .
 Her invective about the Commission was as harsh as that of anyone since Lane’s Rush to Judgment . She was the harshest critic of the Commission in decades .
 Subsequent events had significant impact on the development of the post-Warren Commission review of the assassination . The Warren Commission reviewed the assassination of President Kennedy . The review was published by the Warren Commission in 1973 .
 It was revolutionary legislation that allowed private citizens to apply for the release of federal government files, even including those maintained by the FBI, CIA, and other agencies .
 The government agencies could only refuse to release the documents if they fell under privacy or security exemptions that were set forth in the law . The law allows agencies to release documents under privacy and security exemptions .
 Since its inception, over a million pages of documents have been released about the Kennedy assassination .
 One of the little things they did was to provide you with atrocious copies of the book . "One of the things that they did at first was to . provide you ... was the first time they did this," says author .
 "They would wait for the copy machine to run low or something, and provide terrible copies," he said . They would wait until the machine ran out of printouts, he added .
 The FBI was repeatedly unmasked for lying to those who filed FOIA requests . The FBI repeatedly lied to the people who asked for information .
 A 48,000-card index was created in the Dallas field office . The index index is an index of 48,500 cards .
 The Warren Commission discussed and relied on the results of the Bureau’s spectrographic test in its final report . The FBI steadfastly refused to give Weisberg the underlying data .
 To many, that obstinacy added to the growing public perception that the government had something to hide in the Kennedy case .
 At times, they do it for political reasons, but other times it is part of their effort to resist disclosure, no matter what is being requested . Sometimes it's part of the effort to avoid disclosure, even if it's not politically motivated .
 In general, the government’s only interest in its records occurs when . somebody asks for them, and that point they go into paralysis . The government is paralyzed by the government's interest in their records, he says .
 They suspect that somewhere there must be something that spells trouble . They suspect there must have been something in the news . They say there is something there that could spell trouble .
 The Freedom of Information Act gave added impetus to the effort to extend the examination into the assassination . Nevertheless, the Freedom of
 The momentum against the Warren Commission led to the introduction in 1966 of a congressional resolution to reexamine the case . In spite of the difficulties encountered by those using FOIA, FOIA, the case was re-opened in 1966 .
 FOIA and the new resolution were overshadowed by another event that had started in July 1966, which temporarily electrified the critics and the nation . Yet the passage of FOIA and a new resolution was overshadowed by the events of July 1966 .
 New Orleans district attorney convinced there were suspects in his city who had been part of a conspiracy to kill JFK . Garrison launched the first official investigation into the assassination since the Warren Commission . Garrison: The first official probe into JFK's assassination was launched in 1963 .
 Almost immediately it was referred to as the Warren Commission . However, almost immediately it became known as the 'Warren Commission'
 In February 1964, Redlich was publicly assailed for his membership on a civil-liberties panel and for having co-authored an article with a Communist sympathizer . Redlich: "I'm a hero. I'm not afraid to be a hero"
 Redlich had never worked with the other author, but a magazine had merged their two separate articles together and given them joint credit . Redlich and Redlich never worked for each other .
 Assassination researcher David Wrone told the author, “I took every footnote in his Rush to Judgment.” ‘Rush to Judgment’ is a book about the assassination of JFK.
 "I checked them against the text and so forth, for accuracy, fidelity, and all of that," she says . "It's a good story. I checked them out for accuracy"
 Warren Commission staff attorney Wesley Liebeler said, “It’s just incredible to listen to him. It's just incredible,” he said .
 Marcus became convinced he could see four to five assassins in photos of foliage at Dealey Plaza . Jones later self-published another three books on the assassination, as well as conspiracy newsletter .
 Jones argued that John Connally, President Johnson, the FBI, the CIA, the Dallas police, and the news media were all part of the conspiracy . Eventually, he argued that President Johnson and President Connally were all involved .
 The supposed mystery deaths of key witnesses has become one of the entrenched myths in the Kennedy assassination . As for the alleged mystery deaths, it has become a myth .
 See Appendix B, “The Non-Mysterious ‘Mystery Deaths,’” for a detailed discussion of the deaths .
 Goodhart wrote an article in The Law Quarterly Review that cast doubts on the quality of his work . Goodhart has been accused of being a plagiarist .
 Wesley Liebeler was infuriated that one of his internal memos that criticized “the writing of the report’s report” was misused by Epstein to challenge the conclusions of the investigation .
 Epstein was critical of Epstein for having taken remarks of general counsel J Lee Rankin out of context to imply the Commission was ready to squash any evidence that Oswald had been an FBI informant . The Goodhart article also criticized Epstein for taking remarks taken out context of Rankin's remarks .
 Belin wrote two books defending the Commission’s work and its conclusion that Oswald acted alone . Belin says the Commission's work was vindicated by its findings .
 He also served on the Rockefeller Commission’s re-examination of the case in the 1970s . The Rockefeller Commission also re-examined the case .
 Belin was virtually the lone public voice for the Commission by the 1980s . Belin, through many articles, lectures, and debates with critics, was the only public voice .
 Life magazine had purchased the exclusive rights to the film for a reported $150,000 . Thompson had worked as a consultant to Life magazine on the film .
 He later tried to purchase the right to use reproductions of several frames in his book . Life refused to sell him the rights, so he had drawings recreated from memory from memory .
 In 1975, Life gave the film back to the Zapruder family instead of donating it to the National Archives . Life gave it back in 1975, instead of giving it to National Archives in 1975 .
 The Zapruder family has sold use rights for books, documentaries, and films for tens of thousands of dollars .
 The author, in reading the twenty-six volumes, made a new card index and compared it to Meagher’s publication . However, the author made a different card index . The author also compared it with Meagher's publication .
 Meagher lists a total of only twenty-three incidents in the volumes that relate to Oswald's potential for violence . Meagher does not find a reference until Volume II, and lists only three incidents related to that subject .
 The author, however, discovered the first supporting reference was in the first volume . There were more than fifty citations just in the fifteen volumes of testimony .
 Meagher underplays evidence that incriminates Oswald but meticulously lists references that tend to exonerate him or raise doubts . There are quite a few other examples in which Meagher’s index underplays incriminating evidence . Meagher's index is one of many examples of how Meagher
 Those who use the index are following each other in making the same mistakes . It means those who use it are unwittingly ignoring evidence that buttresses the Commission’s conclusions .
 At six feet seven inches, with a bass voice and sharp tongue, Jim Garrison was an impressive figure . Garrison was the star of the 1960s and '60s television series . Garrison died in 1994 at the age of 65 .
 After his discharge in March 1946, he attended Tulane Law School, graduated in 1949 . He then moved to Seattle and Tacoma, where he was FBI agent for two years .
 In July 1951, he asked to be placed again on active service with the National Guard . Bored with the Bureau, he returned to New Orleans and returned .
 Garrison’s neurosis “interfered with his social and professional adjustment to a marked degree” Garrison was diagnosed with a form of neurosis, the Army said . Garrison was awarded a $1,000,000-a-year posthumous award .
 He impressed others at the New Orleans DA’s office with a quick wit . He was considered the sharpest of more than twenty lawyers in the office .
 He developed a reputation for making snap judgments and oversimplifying complex issues . However, he also developed a . reputation for . oversimplify complex issues with snap judgments .
 It soon became clear he had an ego that revealed a tendency toward arrogance . And it was soon clear that he had a tendency to arrogance .
 When he left the DA’s office in 1958, he again entered private practice . When he was in private practice, he became a prominent lawyer .
 He legally changed his name to Jim and developed a flamboyant reputation for expensive suits and cigars and multihour, four-martini lunches at the best restaurants .
 He unsuccessfully campaigned to be a judge of the criminal court during the 1959 election . He unsuccessfully tried to become a judge in 1959 .
 Two years later he was one of four candidates running against the incumbent district attorney, Richard Dowling . He was running against Dowling in 2010 .
 Given virtually no chance of winning, he took the campaign’s first television debate by storm and gained enough momentum to win by 6,000 votes . He took the first TV debate to storm and won the election by 6% .
 His conduct quickly became a preview of what would happen when he launched his JFK investigation four years later . His conduct was quickly becoming a precursor to what he would do in JFK .
 He often brought sensational charges that garnered headlines, but he seldom prosecuted the cases, much less ever obtained a conviction . He seldom prosecuted cases, even though he brought sensational cases to the highest court .
 The first warning signs that he might be willing to trample someone’s civil liberties in exchange for media ink came soon after he took office .
 He brought malfeasance indictments against the former district attorney and one of his senior assistants . The former DA's office has been accused of misusing the public money .
 He embarked on a cleanup of vice in the French Quarter . His work again resulted in no trials or convictions . He received national press attention for his nightly raiding parties .
 Garrison was brought to trial in January 1963, acted as his own lawyer, and was convicted . Garrison was convicted and sentenced to pay a $1,000 fine . Garrison acted as a lawyer in the trial and was sentenced to a fine .
 While the appeal was pending, he pursued what appeared to be a vendetta against the judiciary . He forced malfeasance indictments through the grand jury against a leading judge, Bernard Cocke .
 In two trials, Garrison tried the cases himself when his assistants refused, Cocke was acquitted . Cocke's trial was the first of Garrison's first two trials .
 In 1964, he held a press conference and announced that members of the state parole board were accepting bribes in exchange for granting early paroles . The parole board was accused of accepting bribes to grant early parole .
 Garrison personally represented the city at the judicial hearing . Garrison's case was so weak that it ended with no indictments or arrests . Garrison represented himself at the hearing .
 He says he is convinced that public bribery occurred in passage of House Bill 894 .
 The legislature unanimously censured him for his unsupported accusations . He was censured by the legislature for his comments .
 "When he made public statements, his only concern was whether it was going to get him a headline," he said . "He only cared about whether it would be a headline. When he made statements, he only cared for the headlines," he added .
 1965 was an election year for both the mayor and the district attorney . He was now unquestionably one of the most powerful political figures in the state .
 Early that year, signs appeared around the city proclaiming VOTE FOR GARRISON but not listing the office, fueling speculation he might run for mayor . The signs fueled speculation that he would run for office .
 He had occasionally spoken of higher office, but instead he ran for reelection . He had previously spoken of running for higher office .
 His opponent, criminal judge Malcolm O’Hara, urged voters to reject him . Malcolm O'Hara: "Ugly force compels him to destroy everyone who fails to bow to his will"
 He lobbied for a full pardon for a Bourbon Street stripper, Linda Brigette, who had been convicted for lewd dancing . Brigette was convicted of lewd dancing in New Orleans' French Quarter . He had earlier attacked vice in the French Quarter, but lobbied for full pardon .
 Brigette Garrison danced for a club connected to New Orleans mob boss Carlos Marcello . Aaron Kohn, an ex-FBI agent who headed the Metropolitan Crime Commission, criticized Garrison's actions .
 The publicity put pressure on Garrison to take action against the local mob . Garrison was forced to step down from his post .
 It asked Marcello questions for just over ten minutes, and did not return an indictment . It asked him questions for 10 minutes, but did not answer them .
 Garrison was building a reputation as a corruption fighter, but there is evidence he was developing a special relationship with Carlos Marcello . Garrison was accused of corruption in the 1990s of corruption .
 During his earlier raids on Bourbon Street clubs he had assiduously avoided those dominated by the local godfather . During his previous raids on New York, he avoided clubs dominated by locals .
 The man he hired as his chief investigator, Pershing Gervais, had previously been fired from the police for stealing payoff money, and later admitted he was friendly with Marcello . The man hired as the chief investigator had previously admitted to being friendly with the suspect .
 Garrison dismissed eighty-four cases against Marcello associates during his second term as DA . Garrison dismisses most of the cases against him . Garrison was the first DA in the country to take office in office in 1994 .
 JFK's murder was something that had been on his mind since his first term, but he now decided to pursue the case . JFK’s murder is something he had been thinking about for years, but now he is pursuing it .
 The investigation, which began in secret shortly after the second term commenced, was initially based on two different leads . The investigation is now being carried out in secret .
 The Bureau quickly determined that Martin’s information was false and that Ferrie had not been to Dallas in six years . Ferrie was found to have not been in the city of Dallas for six years, according to Martin .
 Martin turned out to be totally unreliable, a drunk who had spent time in prison and mental institutions . Martin was a drunk drunk who spent time with a mental institution . Martin turned up to be a drunk and a drunk .
 He fabricated the tale about Ferrie and Oswald when he heard a radio report that Oswald had been in the Civil Air Patrol in the mid-1950s, an organization to which Ferrie had belonged . He had fabricated the story when he learned about the civil air patrol .
 They had worked together in the past but were the only two members of their own radical offshoot of the Catholic church . They had not only worked together but were only two .
 Martin acknowledged he was drunk when he made the first call to the district attorney’s office . Martin confessed that his motivation was revenge for Ferrie's having excluded him from several recent cases .
 "I used to competitively roller-skate for years, and I had never ice-skated. I used to compete . I was a competitive roller skater for years," she says . "I had never skated. It was a very exciting experience," she adds .
 Garrison says the trip to the Winterland Ice Skating Rink was highly suspicious . Garrison: "I'm not sure what's going on here, but I'm sure it's not going to happen" Garrison: The trip to Winterland's Winterland was suspicious .
 Breck Wall, the Dallas head of AGVA, was in Galveston performing in a show when he spoke to Ruby . Wall was performing in the show at the time of the conversation .
 Ferrie, Beauboeuf, and the second teen, Melvin Coffey, had stopped in Galveston, Texas . Ferrie and Beauauauuf were killed in a car crash . Coffey and Ferrie were found dead in the early hours of Saturday morning
 DA Garrison also claimed Eva Grant, Ruby’s sister, had been in Houston on Saturday when Ferrie arrived . The DA said it was too much of a coincidence that the two were in the same city together .
 Garrison believed that the trip to the rink was obviously a cover for the conspiracy . Since Ferrie did not ice-skate with his friends but may have made some telephone calls from a pay phone, Garrison believed it was a cover-up . Garrison believed the trip was actually a cover
 He insisted Ferrie, a licensed pilot, was waiting for a message that would allow him to spirit one or more of the assassins out of the country . He insisted that Ferrie was waiting to receive a message from the assassin .
 Dean Andrews is a three-hundred-pound, forty-four-year-old jive-talking attorney with a reputation for exaggeration and showmanship . The second lead that revived Garrison’s interest in the assassination was a story told by Dean Andrews .
 After the assassination, he told the FBI that he recognized Oswald from the newspaper photos as a person he had done legal work for during the summer of 1963 . He said he knew Oswald from newspaper photos .
 He never identified any of the people he said had accompanied Oswald to his office, nor did he have any records substantiating the consultations . He said his office had been rifled and papers were missing .
 The day after the assassination, a man called “Clay Bertrand” telephoned him while he was in the hospital recovering from pneumonia . Bertrand allegedly asked if he would defend Oswald for killing the President .
 Andrews, who had a reputation as an ambulance-chaser, had a ramshackle office near the New Orleans port . Andrews was a notorious ambulance chaser .
 Much of his work was immigration cases for the city’s poorest clients . He could not explain why anyone would want him to represent the accused assassin, he said .
 Bertrand is the one who calls in behalf of gay kids normally to obtain bond or parole for them . He described Bertrand as “the one who ... normally, [Bertrand] calls ... for them,’s lawyer said .
 He could not provide more information about Bertrand, had no files on him, and no means of contacting him . I would assume he was the one that originally sent Oswald and the gay kids, these Mexicanos, to the office .
 In April, five months after the assassination, the FBI had confronted Andrews with the fact it had combed New Orleans and failed to find anyone who had ever heard of the name of the assassin .
 When he appeared before the Warren Commission three months later, in July, he revived the original tale . He revived the story in July .
 When pushed by Commission counsel Wesley Liebeler about the existence of a Bertrand and the call asking him to defend Oswald, Andrews again backed off . Andrews said he would tell that he was smoking weed .
 In October 1966, Garrison began calling Andrews, as well as some of Ferrie’s friends, into the office for discussions . Garrison started calling Andrews and some of his friends to discuss Ferrie's death in October 1966 .
 Oswald’s Mexican associate—Manuel Garcia Gonzales. He now remembered the name of his Mexican associate, Manuel Garcia Gonzalez .
 Andrews said Garrison was the first name that came to his mind because “I don’t know what he’s up to.” Andrews admitted it was a hoax . He said he told Garrison Garrison the name he thought of because he didn't know what it was
 Garrison shocked the rest of his staff when he announced that he had decided that Clay Bertrand was actually Clay Shaw . Shaw was a prominent civic figure and the man who had almost single-handedly led the restoration of the French Quarter .
 Shaw was the former president of the prestigious International Trade Mart . Shaw was an active member of the city’s social elite as well as a poet and playwright .
 Garrison knew he was gay, and that provided a link to Ferrie, also homosexual . Garrison knew that Ferrie was gay and that he knew Garrison was gay . Garrison and Ferrie knew each other were gay .
 Garrison’s assistant pointed out that Shaw was six feet four and had shocking-white hair, while Andrews had described Bertrand as five feet eight and with sandy hair . One of Garrison's assistants said Shaw had shocking white hair .
 Reporters for the New Orleans States- Item obtained the papers, which listed the office’s investigation into the Kennedy case .
 He could break the case, since he had the power of subpoena, not the courtroom that protected him from libel for anything he said . He could also break his own case, as he had subpoena power .
 Mark Lane, who billed himself as the “unpaid chief investigator for the DA,” advised Garrison on the evidence . William Turner, of Ramparts, compiled information for an ‘official history” of the case .
 Perm Jones, with Allan Chapman, believed a worldwide conspiracy of intellectuals controlled the television networks . Allan Chapman believed the networks controlled the TV networks .
 Vincent Salandria, Richard Popkin, and Mort Sahl gave advice to comedians . The comedians also gave advice on how to get the best of their audience .
 Ex-FBI agent Guy Banister and anti-Castro Cubans are subject of investigation . Banister is a former FBI agent who worked for the CIA in the 1970s .
 David Lewis claimed to have seen Oswald, Ferrie, Banister, and anti-Castro activist Carlos Quiroga at a meeting in New Orleans . He was David Lewis, a shipping clerk who claimed to be David Lewis .
 Lewis was adamant it was in early 1962, when Oswald either was in Russia or had just returned to Texas . The only problem was that Lewis insisted it was early 1962 . Oswald was either in Russia, or just returning to Texas or in Russia .
 Garrison was so desperate to build a case against Ferrie that he tried to intimidate and cajole witnesses to provide the necessary testimony . Garrison was trying to intimidate witnesses to give testimony . Ferrie was found guilty of sexual assault on Garrison in 2008 .
 'We would make a hero out of him instead of a villain, you understand. Also they would be, we would make him a hero,' he said . 'They would be ... heroes, not villains'
 "We can change the story around, you know, enough to positively, beyond a shadow of a doubt," he says . "I can eliminate him into any type of conspiracy," he adds .
 Beauboeuf overheard Ferrie and Shaw arguing in the apartment . He discussed “cross fire’s and escape routes,” he said .
 "I told them no way, and when they heard we had recorded Loisel, they went nuts," she says . "When they heard [Lois] go nuts. They went nuts."
 Louis Ivon came to my house and put a gun down my throat and threatened to kill me because I had exposed them, she says . Louis Ivan came to her house and threatened her with a gun, she writes .
 "I made a deal with him to sign a statement that it was all blown out of nowhere, just in order to get him off my back," he said . "I'm not going to let him off his back. Finally, he signed a statement saying it was just blown out
 Novel knew Novel knew Ferrie and claimed to have knowledge of his anti-Castro connections . Novel later discovered he knew Novel and claimed that he had antiCastro ties . Novel was arrested in 1993, but was released from prison in 1994 .
 Garrison decided to use Novel as a witness, and called him repeatedly to the DA’s office . Garrison called Novel several times, but he was never charged .
 Garrison suggested that Ferrie was stonewalling the investigation by lying, and that one solution might be for Novel to shoot Ferrie with a tranquilizer dart and then inject him with sodium pentothal to obtain the details of the assassination plot . Garrison suggests that Novel shot Ferrie in the
 Novel also saw apparent forgeries of letters purportedly from Oswald to Ferrie in the district attorney’s office .
 Novel, appalled by Garrison’s tactics, left for Ohio, where he had once lived . Novel, who was appalled at Garrison's tactics, moved to Ohio .
 Garrison announced it was a suicide, interpreting a rancorous letter to a friend as a suicide note . Garrison said he believed the letter was a letter from a friend, interpreting it as a letter . Garrison: "I believe it is a suicide. It is not a suicide"
 Ferrie was under tremendous strain from Garrison’s probe . Ferrie looked so bad in the days before his death that his acquaintances believed the pressure was too much for him .
 Garrison had set up a camera across the street from his apartment, and they followed him everywhere . Garrison had a camera set up near his apartment . Garrison set up the camera to watch Garrison's movements . Garrison says he's not surprised by the results .
 " knew we had the goods on him and he couldn’t take the pressure," he said . Ignoring the coroner’s report, he said, “ knew . we had . the goods . on him . He said .
 "I was trying to avoid a confrontation with him, because I knew he would stop at nothing to make his case," she says . "I knew he was going to do nothing," she adds .
 They wanted to see if Quiroga was stupid enough to touch it, and then they would have brought the gun and buried it somewhere in a hole and then found it . They wanted the gun to be found, and would have been charged with being part of the conspiracy, he
 "You cannot imagine what they were willing to do to succeed in their case," says CNN.com .
 "I had not come to America and worked fifteen hours a day to allow Garrison to destroy my life and ruin everything I worked for. I had not worked for Garrison," she said. "I worked for the U.S. and worked for my life," she added .
 "They took me next door and they gave me a couple-hour test, a real fishing expedition," he says . "I was given a fishing expedition. They took me to the fishing range, and I was very happy to see it," he said .
 Dean Andrews’s story about Clay Bertrand was not about Clay Shaw . Instead, he focused on Dean Andrews's story about Dean Andrews' story .
 Andrew “Moo’ Sciambra’s best assistant district attorney, Andrew ‘Moo' Sciamra, had talked to every informant in the French Quarter and found no one who had ever heard the name Clay Bertrand . He was not bothered that one
 On February 24, only two days after Ferrie died, reporters stopped Garrison as he left a luncheon and asked if he was close to solving the assassination . Garrison says he is still working on finding Ferrie's killer .
 "The key to the whole case is through the looking glass," he says . A few minutes earlier, he told reporters, “The key is through looking glass’s the key .
 Garrison agreed to meet Jim Phelan, of The Saturday Evening Post, in Las Vegas, at the Sands Hotel . Garrison: Shaw's arrest was only two days after Shaw’s arrest . Garrison was arrested on suspicion of drug possession .
 He liked an earlier article Phelan had written about his Bourbon Street cleanup and decided to give him the exclusive story behind Shaw’s arrest . Shaw was arrested on suspicion of drug possession in November .
 John Kennedy was everything that Dave Ferrie was not— a successful, handsome, popular, wealthy, virile man . He was everything he was not: a successful and popular, successful, wealthy man .
 Garrison: If they were all homosexuals, in Garrison’s opinion, it was too much of a coincidence . Garrison: 'If they were gay, it would be too much a coincidence' Garrison: "It's not a coincidence"
 The district attorney feared the Post article was in jeopardy because Phelan was still skeptical about the weak supporting evidence . Near the end of his ten-hour series of interviews with Phelans, the district attorney said he feared the article might in jeopardy .
 Garrison then walked to the dresser in his hotel room and picked up a thick manila envelope . Garrison then picked up the thick envelope from the hotel room . Garrison: "I'm not going to let it slide down, I'm going to do it"
 He had also given a February 24 television interview to WDSU-TV in New Orleans, in which he said he knew Ferrie and that Ferrie did not like Kennedy .
 When Sciambra showed Russo photos of Oswald and Shaw, Russo thought he might have seen Shaw twice, once at a gas station and once at the Nashville Street Wharf . Russo said he thought he saw Shaw three times, including twice at the same gas station .
 Russo drew a beard on the photo and said it resembled one of Ferrie’s roommates . Two days later, Russo submitted to sodium pentothal at Mercy Hospital in New Orleans .
 While interrogating Russo Russo, Sciambra introduced the name Bertrand for the first time . Russo was in a semiconscious state when he was interrogated .
 Garrison hired Esmond Fatter, who had no background in using hypnosis to elicit criminal testimony . Garrison hired Fatter for hypnosis, though he had no previous experience in hypnosis . Fatter had been hired by Garrison to use hypnosis in criminal cases .
 Fatter, in his interrogation of Russo, used a memorandum supplied by Garrison’s office . Fatter used the memo supplied by the office of Garrison, who is now retired .
 Fatter insinuated the idea of a conspiracy and Clay Shaw . While Russo was in a trance, it was Fatter's insinuation that a conspiracy was behind the scenes .
 At one point, Fatter said, “Picture that television screen again, Perry, and it is a picture of Ferrie’s apartment and there are several people there and there is a white-haired man.”
 Russo was ready to incorporate Shaw in his dream state at Fatter’s suggestion . Russo met Shaw in person on February 28 and had a photo of him .
 Fatter introduced the image of Shaw during the hypnotic trance . Fatter said, “Let your mind go completely blank, Perry.” Shaw .
 There will be a Bertrand, Ferrie, and Oswald and they are going to discuss a very important matter . Another man and girl there are talking about assassinating somebody, they are talking .
 Garrison, who had just received the packet from his office, had impulsively given it to Phelan without first reading the material himself . Garrison had been given the packet by the office without reading it himself. Garrison had given the material without first read it .
 Russo told his newly developed story about being at a party at Ferrie’s apartment, where Oswald, Ferrie, and Shaw discussed the details of an assassination plot . Russo says he was at the party at the apartment of Ferrie and Shaw .
 Russo identified Shaw as “Clay Bertrand” the name he said Shaw used at Ferrie’s party, Russo said . Shaw was brought into the courtroom, Russo placed his hand over Shaw's head and identified him as Bertrand .
 Garrison also produced a surprise second witness, Vernon Bundy, a black heroin addict . Bundy was in prison for a parole violation . Bundy is a former heroin addict who was in jail for parole violation, Garrison says .
 He testified that when he was shooting heroin along the lakefront during 1963, he saw Shaw meet Oswald and give him money . Shaw testified that Shaw met Oswald and gave him some money .
 The first time he ever publicly presented the story was at the preliminary hearing . The case is the first he has publicly presented it publicly .
 The judges took less than half an hour to rule that Shaw should be held for trial on the charge of conspiring to kill the President . Shaw was charged with conspiring to murder the President in 2009 .
 On June 19, NBC News aired the devastating results of an investigation into Garrison’s work . NBC aired the results of the investigation on June 19 .
 The district attorney's office tried to bribe and intimidate witnesses into giving favorable testimony . The show disclosed the extent to which the district attorney’s office had attempted to bribe .
 NBC revealed the incident with Al Beauboeuf . Fred Lemanns, who owned a Turkish bath, said Garrison offered him money to open a new club if he would testify that Shaw had visited the baths with Oswald .
 Russo admitted to reporter Walter Sheridan that his testimony against Shaw was a mixture of truth, fantasy, and lies . Russo feared that if he changed his testimony, Garrison would charge him with perjury . Russo admitted that he was afraid to change his testimony .
 Niles told NBC he was at the party but said no one resembled Oswald or Shaw . Niles said he was there but no one was there who even resembled Oswald .
 Moffitt denied being there, and said she had never even met Ferrie until 1965 . Moffitt denies being there and says she has never been in contact with Ferrie .
 NBC had uncovered two fellow inmates of Vernon Bundy, John Cancler and Miguel Torres . NBC also uncovered two other inmates of Bundy, Cancler, Torres .
 Torres says DA's office offered him a deal if he would testify he had been at sex orgies at Shaw's house . Torres says he knew Shaw used the name Bertrand and knew he used it at the time .
 NBC revealed that both Russo and Bundy failed friendly polygraph tests administered by Garrison . NBC also revealed that Bundy and Russo failed friendly tests .
 William Gurvich, Garrison’s chief investigator, resigned and headed for Washington . Gurvich told Robert Kennedy that Garrison's case was a sham and there was no basis to arrest Shaw .
 NBC gave him an unprecedented half hour of unedited national airtime to respond to its expose . NBC gave NBC an unprecedented 30-minute interview to defend his actions .
 He captivated a public all too willing to believe that JFK had been killed by a complex conspiracy . But he captivated the public with a belief that one brave prosecutor was fighting the cover-up .
 Depending on which show he was on, he said the assassination “was a Nazi operation, whose sponsors included some of the oil-rich millionaires in Texas,” or at other times it included the Minutemen, the CIA, the FBI, or anti-Castro Cub
 Garrison elaborated on that concept over several months . Audiences responded positively to his charges of Nazi involvement . Garrison: "I'm not a Nazi sympathizer"
 Garrison warned that America was “in great danger of slowly evolving in to a proto-fascist state” and that “our government is the CIA and Pentagon …” He claimed that Jack Ruby was a self-hating Jew who had smuggled guns with neo-Nazis .
 Garrison charged William Gurvich and Tom Bethell with theft of part of his files . John Cancler, the inmate who spoke to NBC, was hit with contempt of court . Gordon Novel, who resisted extradition from Ohio, had burglary charges placed against him . Walter Sheridan, the reporter behind
 He brought perjury indictments against Dean Andrews, Kerry Thornley and Layton Martens . He said he had not seen Oswald in New Orleans in 1963 . Life magazine editor David Chandler of Life magazine later became disillusioned .
 The only one convicted was Dean Andrews, for concocting the fictitious Clay Bertrand . Andrews was convicted of concocting his own fictional character .
 Filing the charges created an image that he was fighting a secret network of conspirators pressed into service to disrupt his investigation . Filing charges helped create an image of a secret conspiracy to disrupt the investigation .
 He soon added the media, which he had so successfully used, to his hit list . He also added that he had already used the media to his target .
 Much of the national press was part of a “CIA-inspired campaign” against him, he says . Much of national press is part of an ‘CIA- inspired campaign’ against him .
 The late 1960s, with the country in a rebellion against authority, many were wary of government duplicity over the war in Vietnam . Garrison’s assertions that the greatest government deception of a generation had taken place in the Kennedy assassination .
 Clay Shaw has been criticized for his handling of Clay Shaw's handling of the case . Clay Shaw is accused of sexual assault in the wake of a sexual assault scandal .
 Hundreds of would-be witnesses were interviewed by the DA’s staff in the months following Shaw's arrest . Shaw was charged with murder in connection with the death of James Shaw .
 Celebrated cases tend to bring forward people who want to be in the limelight . Shaw matter was no exception . Shaw case is no longer a mystery .
 Some were outright con artists, who wrote Garrison with exceptional tales about Oswald’s CIA connections and how Shaw fit into the plot . When the DA sent them air tickets to come to New Orleans, they merely cashed the tickets and were never heard from again .
 Garrison sent investigators across the U.S. to determine which stories he could use against Shaw . Garrison's investigators are looking at those who came forward to tell their stories .
 A man calling himself Julius Caesar appeared, wearing a toga and sandals, and put Oswald, Ferrie, and Shaw together in an elaborate plot that fit Garrison’s scenario . Garrison: "A man called himself Caesar appeared in the middle of the plot to put them together
 Garrison abandoned Garrison after the press discovered he was an ex-mental patient . Garrison abandoned him when the press found out he had been a mental patient .
 Garrison refused to talk to Rolleston, and made him pay his own hotel bill . Garrison made Rolleston pay his hotel bill and refused to speak to him . Garrison said Rolleston's story did not fit into his theory .
 Richard Nagell was confined to the psychiatric section of a federal prison in Springfield, Missouri . He was confined through the mail to a psychiatric ward in Springfield .
 Nagell claimed his role in an extensive conspiracy was to execute Oswald, on Soviet orders, in order to prevent the assassination . He claimed he was executed by the Soviets on orders to stop the assassination of Oswald .
 He changed his mind and instead robbed a bank in El Paso, Texas, in September 1963, so that he would be sent to jail and avoid his conspiratorial duties . He decided to rob a bank instead of going to jail .
 Nagell complained Martin was part of the CIA plot against him, Martin said . Martin said Martin was a CIA plot to kill him . Martin died at the age of 95 . Martin was killed by the CIA in 1995 .
 Before Shaw’s trial, he made statements about numerous issues for which he had no supporting evidence . Shaw was found guilty of making false statements about many issues . Shaw's trial is expected to last two weeks .
 Many of his pronouncements survived the prosecution of Shaw and became part of the folklore about the assassination . Nevertheless, many of Shaw's pronouncements survive the prosecution .
 On Johnny Carson’s Tonight Show, he produced grainy photographs of five men talking to police in Dealey Plaza after the assassination . He produced the grainy photos with a flourish of grainy pictures .
 Garrison’s staff had not identified any of the bystanders when he appeared on Carson . It was a photo of bystanders, none of whom were arrested, and Garrison had not been identified .
 Oswald's address book contained Ruby’s unlisted phone number . Another time he startled the press with the announcement of the number . Ruby's phone number was listed in the address book .
 Garrison deciphered Oswald’s book in code in code . Garrison said it was in code and he had decippedhered it . Garrison: Oswald's book was written in code by Oswald in Oswald's diary .
 Clay Shaw lived on the block on Dauphine Street where he lived . When asked how he came to subtract 1300, he said it was simply the block he lived on . Clay Shaw .
 When he started his investigation he thought there were only two, one in the Depository and one on the grassy knoll . He now believes there are only two of the two .
 Oswald was cleared of firing any shots at the Dal-Tex building . Oswald was not shot by a single person . Oswald had been cleared of any involvement in the shooting .
 To Playboy, he proffered a second ‘Oswald’ at Dealey Plaza, based on his talks with Richard Popkin . To Playboy .
 Garrison added four more assassins in a CBS interview after speaking to Raymond Marcus, who told him that blown-up photos of the trees revealed the men . Garrison added another assassin to his list .
 Allan Chapman convinced Allan Chapman that another shooter was hidden inside a storm drain . Allan Chapman persuaded Allan Chapman to convince him he had another shooter hidden inside storm drain. Allan Chapman: "Another shooter" was hidden in storm drain hidden inside drain . Chapman convinced Chapman that the shooter was inside storm
 Jones Harris convinced him that a pickup truck shown in a photo hid two more assassins . Harris convinced Jones Harris that the truck was part of a plot to kill two more people .
 He once showed James Phelan a bullet from his pistol and said, “That’s a magnum load, and my gun can’t handle it.” He showed him a bullet and said: “I’m not scared. That�
 After telling the press that Havana had sent a hired assassin who was stalking him,104 he hired bodyguards and used a code language when talking about the case over the phone .
 Garrison wanted to uncover “the secret recording room” that he believed monitored all his conversations . Gurvich said Garrison wanted “to raid the local FBI office” to uncover the recording room . Garrison said he wanted to raid the FBI office in order to uncover "the secret
 Garrison threw the money at the driver as he ran into the bushes near his house . Garrison crouched in bushes for several minutes and surveied the area before running up to his front door . Garrison threw money at driver, crouching in bushes and surveying the area .
 Garrison hoped he could find witnesses who would tie the defendant to either Oswald or Ferrie . Shaw's trial was delayed for more than a year . Garrison hopes to find witnesses to tie Shaw to either Ferrie or Oswald .
 On January 21, 1969, Shaw's trial finally began, nearly two years after he was arrested . Shaw was convicted of murder in 1969, but never convicted of any crime .
 Garrison presented the same basic prosecution he had in the 1967 preliminary hearing . Garrison was charged with attempted murder, attempted murder and attempted murder in the 1970s . Garrison had promised spectacular disclosures .
 Garrison introduced the Clinton, Louisiana, witnesses, who said they saw Shaw driving with Oswald and Ferrie . Garrison tried to prevent his case from falling apart . Witnesses said they had seen Shaw with Oswald, Ferrie sometime in the summer or fall of 1963 .
 He testified he had attended a party several months before the one Russo described . Ferrie, Oswald, and Shaw had been there and had openly discussed their plans to kill Kennedy in front of him .
 He claimed that strangers had hypnotized him some fifty or sixty times “against my will” He said he had fingerprinted his daughter when she returned from school to ensure it was she .
 Garrison had been aware of Spiesel’s past but put him on the stand over his staffs objection . Garrison was aware of his staff's objection but put Spiesel on stand .
 Garrison increasingly concentrated on what appeared to be a second prosecution, one against the Warren Report and its conclusion of a lone assassin . Yet as the case against Shaw collapsed, Garrison appeared to focus on the Warren report . Garrison: "The Warren Report concluded that Shaw was an assassin"
 He called Marina Oswald, pathologist Pierre Finck, and witnesses from Dealey Plaza . They were not relevant in determining Shaw’s guilt or innocence .
 He successfully subpoenaed the Zapruder film and showed it ten times to the Shaw jury . The film was shown to the jury ten times during the trial .
 It returned forty-five minutes later with an acquittal on its first ballot . The jury was returned to the scene of the incident .
 Garrison arrested Shaw for perjury after he said he did not know Ferrie or Oswald . Two days later, Garrison arrested him for perjury . Garrison claimed Shaw had lied about Ferrie and Oswald .
 It took another two years of legal fighting before a federal court issued a permanent injunction against Garrison from prosecuting Shaw . The injunction was issued on June 7, 1971, on the grounds that charges had been brought in bad faith .
 Garrison offered Perry Russo as a witness at the federal court, but he refused to repeat the story . Garrison tried to get Russo to testify about the Ferrie party, but Russo refused to do so .
 Garrison told Playboy he thought the CIA might have paid Shaw’s legal bills, but Shaw actually spent over $200,000, his life savings, on the four years of legal battles . Garrison said he thought Garrison might pay Shaw's legal bills . Garrison: Shaw spent $200
 For the suit to survive the death of the plaintiff, he had to have surviving children or parents . For the lawsuit to survive, the suit had to be able to get a surviving child .
 Shaw had no children, and his mother died shortly before he did, so his case was dismissed . Shaw's mother died before he died, so the case was also dismissed .
 Louisiana later changed its law to allow the estate of the deceased person to continue the suit . Louisiana changed law so estate of deceased person could continue suit . The suit was eventually settled in 2007 .
 The abuse of power from a megalomaniac prosecutor destroyed Shaw’s life, he says . Shaw's life was destroyed by the abuse of his position as a prosecutor, Shaw says .
 Until his death in 1992, he continued beating the media drum that he was right all along . Only the efforts of the military-industrial complex prevented him from succeeding, he said .
 In 1988, he published On the Trail of the Assassins, in which he regurgitated all of his theories developed in 1966 and 1967, though they were clearly outdated . He then published On The Trail of The Assassins .
 He spoke about Shaw as though the jury’s acquittal was a mere oversight in an otherwise iron-clad case . The jury acquitted Shaw of murder, he said, in a case that should have been more thorough .
 Despite his efforts, and his election as an appellate judge, he could not redeem his reputation . Despite efforts, he was not able to redeem himself .
 The evidence of his abusive prosecution had hurt the conspiracy movement and ruined him as a credible voice, he said . The evidence had hurt his supporters and ruined his credibility, he added .
 Oliver Stone used more than $50 million of Warner Bros.’ money to rehabilitate his theory and again tarnish the name of an innocent man, Clay Shaw .
 Garrison moved into a lavish home built by Frank Occhipinti, a Marcello business partner . Garrison moved in after his second term as district attorney . Garrison's lavish home was built by OcChipinti's business partner, Frank Ocodinti .
 Garrison was indicted on federal charges of accepting $50,000 in bribes to protect the mob’s gambling interests in 1971 . Garrison was convicted of accepting bribes for protecting the mob's gambling interests . Garrison is a former New York mayor of New York City .
 Six co-defendants testified against him, and government surveillance tapes exposed him accepting bribes . Government surveillance tapes expose him accepting four bribes .
 He represented himself in the trial, claiming it was a plot to punish him for his JFK investigation . He won an acquittal in the case .
 Andrews: "Today their name is Candy; tomorrow it is Butsie; next day it is Mary" Andrews says he has no record of any associates of Oswald .
 The impropriety of private funding of a public prosecutor is a violation of the American Bar Association’s ethical rules . Private funding of the public prosecutor, with the inherent possibility for improper influence or conflicts of interest, violates the rules of the bar association .
 Most were convinced Garrison was on the right track at the beginning of his career . However, most were convinced he was going to be successful .
 Novel filed an unsuccessful $10 million libel suit against Garrison and Playboy for libel . Novel filed a successful $10m libel suit .
 Garrison was the subject of numerous stories in New Orleans about his sexual preference . Garrison was married and Garrison was subject to numerous stories about his sexuality . Garrison himself was subject of several stories about him being gay .
 A prominent New Orleans attorney told the author how Garrison tried to sexually molest his brother, then 13, in 1968 at the New Orleans Athletic Club . Garrison was then 13 when he molested his brother at the club .
 Nationally syndicated columnist Jack Anderson wrote about Garrison’s assault of the youngster in a February 1970 column . Anderson: Garrison's assault was an assault on the youngster .
 Bradley had lived and worked in North Hollywood, California, since 1962 . He had never lived in New Orleans . Bradley was a New Orleans native .
 Garrison learned he had been in El Paso, Texas, on the day of the assassination, he issued an arrest warrant . Garrison issued the arrest warrant when he learned he'd been in the city .
 No evidence or witnesses were ever produced at a subsequent extradition hearing . California governor Ronald Reagan refused to send Bradley to New Orleans .
 Nagell also believes that Oswald was placed into a hypnotic trance by David Ferrie and turned into a ‘Manchurian Candidate’ who then carried out the assassination . The author believes that Ferrie hypnotized Oswald into a trance and turned him into the Manch
 Cheramie had warned the hospital staff that JFK would be killed in Dallas, Texas . Garrison developed the story as Garrison worked on JFK's assassination . Garrison says the story was true .
 The House Select Committee discovered that she had been in heroin withdrawal and physical shock when she was checked into the hospital . The medical records show that she was in physical shock and heroin withdrawal at the time .
 The only person who claimed Cheramie had mentioned the assassination before November 22 was the state trooper, Francis L Fruge, who brought her to the hospital on November 20 .
 Cheramie Fruge said she brought in Ruby and Oswald in November . When he spoke to her on November 25, she said that she brought them in . Cheramies said that when she spoke to him, he said he brought in Oswald .
 Fruge later worked with Garrison’s probe and his story of what Cheramie said before the assassination expanded dramatically . Cheramies' story expanded dramatically in Garrison's probe .
 Cheramie told Fruge that she had been a stripper for Jack Ruby . She said she knew that Oswald and Ruby were homosexual lovers . She was thrown out of the car by Ruby, who she was working with on a narcotics deal, she said .
 She died on September 4, 1965, when she was again lying on the roadway and was struck by a car . She died in 1965 .
 The subsequent investigation revealed it was an accident, although buffs list it as a mystery death . The investigation was later revealed to be an accident .
 Shaw was questioned about his foreign travels by the CIA’s Domestic Contact Division, the same as thousands of other Americans during that period . Shaw had no other relationship to the Agency, but he had no relationship with the CIA .
 At one point in the investigation, he had a warrant drafted for the arrest of Robert Perrin, who supposedly could testify about Ruby's gun-smuggling activities to Cuba .
 The night before he made the arrest notice public, Weisberg proved to him that Perrin had died in 1962 . Perrin's arrest notice was made public the night before his arrest .
 The Clark Panel confirmed the medical conclusions of the Warren Commission . The panel's findings were largely lost in the coverage of the events in New Orleans .
 Russo admitted in an interview that he believes Shaw was innocent . However, Russo admitted that Shaw was not guilty .
 As the extent of Garrison’s folly in New Orleans became known, the conspiracy press began to falter . The conspiracy press, which had gained tremendous public acceptance during 1966 and 1967, faltered .
 Garrison's excesses reflected poorly on other theorists, especially since the leading critics were an integral part of his early efforts . Garrison’s excesses reflect poorly on others, especially in his early work . Garrison's overindecision reflected poorly .
 Garrison's 'cockeyed caper' in 1967 was more than an abuse of the justice system, investigators say . Anthony Summers later wrote, “What angers investigators about … Jim Garrison is that his cockeyed . caper in 1967 is more than a crime, Summers
 The most popular works on the assassination were now those that exposed the New Orleans fiasco, most notably James Kirkwood’s American Grotesque5 and Counterplot .
 Harold Weisberg sued to obtain transcript of January 27, 1964, executive session of the Warren Commission . The Warren Commission discussed a newspaper article that asserted Oswald had been an FBI informer .
 The Washington Post ran a big story, on page three, and that was picked up by Senator Pell . Senator Pell says the Washington Post picked up the story .
 Both demanded new government investigations . They received considerable attention, were moderate in tone . Instead of jumping to conclusions, they both demanded new investigations .
 In March 1975, Geraldo Rivera aired, for the first time, the Zapruder film on ABC’s Goodnight America . Rivera aired the film on GoodNight America, which aired on ABC .
 Millions were shocked by its graphic detail, and especially the image of Kennedy’s head snapping back and to the left after the final shot . Millions have been shocked by the graphic detail .
 The President reacted to a bullet fired from the front, rather than the rear as the Commission had concluded . Without an understanding of the medical evidence or the physics involved, it appeared as though the President reacted from the rear .
 The CIA, with the assistance of the mafia, had repeatedly tried to assassinate Cuba’s Fidel Castro during the early 1960s . It had discovered that the CIA, . with the help of the Mafia, had . repeatedly tried . to assassinate Castro .
 The CIA had not kept President Kennedy fully informed about the assassination plots . Most of the Warren Commission members had never heard anything about them . Allen Dulles had been director of the CIA when many of the attempts were made .
 That the CIA hid its operations to murder the Cuban leader from the Warren Commission, as well as the details from its own President, raised questions about what it might have withheld on Lee Oswald .
 In April 1975, Virginia congressman Thomas Downing introduced a resolution calling on Congress to reinvestigate the assassination of John Kennedy . Downing, a committed believer in a conspiracy, introduced the resolution in 1975 .
 In the same Congress, Texas representative Henry Gonzales had introduced a resolution calling for a new investigation of JFK and the shootings of Robert Kennedy and the Reverend Martin Luther King, Jr. and the attempted assassination of Governor George Wallace .
 FBI agent James Hosty had received a note from Oswald shortly before the assassination and had destroyed it . Hosty says he destroyed the note, but it was destroyed .
 Despite the growing demand for a new investigation, it failed to get out of the committee, killed by a tie vote . The committee was deadlocked by the vote .
 Coretta Scott King, widow of Martin Luther King, Jr., met with Congressional Black Caucus to inform them of new evidence . The next year, 1976, when it appeared the momentum for a new investigation was faltering, Coretta met with the congressional Black Caucus .
 The committee was established, with Congressman Downing as its first chairman . Downing was the first chairman of the committee .
 The Black Caucus suggested Mark Lane as general counsel, but eventually Richard Sprague was selected . Sprague, a prominent Philadelphia prosecutor, was selected for the job .
 He had never read the Warren Report or any of the critics’ books, and appeared to approach the case without prejudgment .
 He angered and offended Congress by submitting a 1977 budget of $6. million, considered excessive . He also announced he would make extensive use of polygraphs and stress analyzers on potential witnesses .
 Henry Gonzales, who had replaced Downing at the start of 1977 as the chairman, tried to dismiss Sprague . But Sprague insisted the entire committee vote him out of the House of Representatives .
 By February 1977, it appeared there would be no new investigation of the JFK assassination . The JFK assassination was still unsolved .
 In March, Speaker Tip O’Neill named a new chairman, Louis Stokes, Democrat of Ohio . Stokes is the current chairman .
 Stokes persuaded Sprague to resign, and Congress extended the committee's life through the end of the year . The committee has a budget of $2.2 million .
 Most of the committee's work was conducted in private, as are most congressional inquiries . Except for a few weeks of public hearings, with carefully chosen witnesses, most of the work was done in private .
 In December 1978, the Select Committee reviewed a draft of a lengthy final report on both JFK and King assassinations . The Select Committee spent nearly $5.5 million on the JFK assassination .
 It concluded the Warren Commission was basically correct and that Oswald alone had killed Kennedy and Tippit . While it found that there was likely a conspiracy in the King case, it concluded there was no conspiracy in King case .
 Acoustics experts claim to be 95 percent certain that a fourth shot was fired from the grassy knoll . They say it was from a police motorcycle motorcycle . The recording was recorded from the police motorcycle .
 McLain mistakenly thought his cycle had the open microphone, testified in a public hearing . McLain thought the microphone was the microphone, but he mistakenly thought it was .
 The acoustics blunder opened the door to much greater speculation about a plot . Instead of quietly resolving the conspiracy questions left over from the Warren Commission, the blunder opens the door for speculation . The Warren Commission was left open to questions about the CIA .
 The committee had decided there was a conspiracy, it felt obliged to assess the probable identity of the conspirators . The report was published in July 1979 .
 The committee’s conclusion infused new life into the arguments for a conspiracy . It now has the imprimatur of a government investigation that had not only concluded there was a conspiracy, but highlighted the suspects .
 Garrison's investigation was now only a distant, bad memory . Garrison’s investigation is now only an investigation . Garrison's probe was now a distant memory .
 For many, the CIA remained a leading suspect,† but now the mafia moved to the forefront as the most credible plot-master . The mafia has been the main suspect in the CIA's most recent CIA plot .
 The same year that the Select Committee completed its work, Seth Kantor’s book, Who Was Jack Ruby? concluded Ruby was a mafia hit man . The book was published in 2012 .
 Hoffa rejected a concrete plan to murder RFK in early 1967, when presented with a concrete murder plan . Hoffa refused the opportunity .
 Teamster official Frank Chavez told Hoffa about the details of a plot to eliminate Robert Kennedy . Hoffa strongly rebuked him, saying that such an action was dangerous and should never be contemplated .
 Aleman said it was only “his impression” that Trafficante meant the President was going to be hit . Aleman recanted in his public testimony before the Committee of Congress .
 Becker says he tried to interest Marcello in distributing an oil additive he had invented . Becker: "I'm trying to interest him in distributing my invention" Becker: Marcella had invented an additive he'd invented .
 Becker lost his temper when he mentioned Bobby Kennedy . Becker was the godfather at the center of the conversation .
 The House Select Committee concluded it was extremely unlikely that Marcello would discuss a plot to kill the President with anyone but his closest lieutenants . The committee concluded it would be extremely unlikely he knew he was under a criminal investigation .
 He's not even from Sicily, for God's sake, he’s from North Africa, Tripoli, Tripoli. He's from Tripoli, not Sicily, Sicily, or Sicily, he's from Libya, he says .
 "If he was going to talk about Kennedy, there is no way on this earth he would talk to a geologist about that," he said . "No way on the earth" would have him talking about Kennedy's assassination, he added .
 Carlos Carlos rarely talks, but would have been an oration . Carlos would have made a speech for the first time in his career .
 Marcello was found guilty of racketeering and conspiracy in 1981 trial . Most of his crimes were played in the 1981 trial in which he was convicted of conspiracy and racketeering .
 Critics say tapes contain conversations between Marcello and undercover agents about the Kennedy family or the JFK assassination . Critics long contended they have been withheld because Marcelo incriminates himself in those conversations .
 Since the Select Committee had disbanded by the time the tapes were made, Professor Blakey did not hear them . Since the tapes had been made, the tapes are not available to the public .
 Marcello and Trafficante were apparently not opposed to the idea . But at the very least, if true, it shows Hoffa wanted JFK dead in early 1963 .
 On April 11, 1967, two FBI agents interviewed Ragano at their Tampa office, regarding the Bureau’s continuing criminal investigation of his client Trafficante .
 Trafficante told agents about a trip he had made to New Orleans earlier that year, during the Garrison probe . Trafficante dismissed the allegations about Trafficante’s possible involvement in the assassination as “ridiculous” and, to prove his point, told the agents about
 He recounted that when he was in a car with Trafficante and Marcello, a radio broadcast commented on the Garrison investigation . Trafficante recounted that he and Trafficante were discussing Garrison investigation when he heard the news .
 He made his disclosure less than three weeks after the movie JFK had created a national fervor on the subject . At a time he was coincidentally trying to sell a book manuscript, his autobiography .
 Ragano recalled a different reaction from Marcello and Trafficante when he relayed another murder request from Hoffa . This one, this one was to “hit” Teamster boss Frank Fitsim-mons .
 The same mafia leaders who shied away from a contract on the teamster’s leader supposedly were interested in the most powerful target of all, the President .
 Those who have investigated and studied the mafia do not believe there is any credible evidence that the mob was involved in the JFK assassination . There is no credible evidence of mob involvement in the assassination .
 We also put a microphone into the special headquarters of Sam Giancana . We also have a microphone in the special HQ of the Sam Giancaana team .
 All the top leaders of the Chicago mob talked to other mobsters, including Giancana . "Giancana" was one of the top Chicago mob leaders . "We listened to them"
 There was never any sign that the Marcello clan or anyone they knew was connected in any way . And then when the assassination of the President happened, they discussed it relentlessly, but there was no sign they had anything to do .
 Giancana and the people around him were complete virgins when it came to electronic surveillance . Giancna and his friends were "completely virgins" when they came under electronic surveillance, he says .
 Hoover had brought us into the fight against organized crime in 1957 . Hoover ordered us to try and get microphones in, and the first we ever got in was in July 1959 . I was the police agent on that. I was a police agent .
 "That night we went up and took it out and then let it smolder for a couple of weeks, and then put it back in," she said . "We're going to do a lot of things to keep it smoldin'
 "They never, in those days, thought we could put a microphone in their headquarters. They never thought we would put it there," he says .
 "We got them in there for six years, talking about every crime you could imagine," says CNN.com's Rob Greene . "They were talking about everything you can imagine," he says . "But we got them talking about ... everything we can imagine"
 "It would be the end of the mafia if they went after the attorney general or the president and anything went wrong," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The mafia theorists no longer argue the evidence presented in the Warren Commission or the activities of Lee Harvey Oswald . Instead they argue that Oswald was involved in the assassination of President Kennedy .
 The attempt on General Edwin Walker’s life is given only passing mention, since there was no motivation for the mob to want Oswald to kill the general . The general's life was not the target of the mob .
 Oswald’s uncle, Dutz Murret, was a local gambler . Oswald's uncle was a gambler in New Orleans . Ferrie and Banister did investigative work for the New Orleans godfather .
 Oswald seldom saw Murret in New Orleans, but some writers suggest that Marina may have confided to him that Oswald had tried to kill General Walker . Some writers, including Blakey, suggest that Oswald may have told Murret that he tried to murder Walker .
 Becker: Murret turned nephew over to Marcello, who has been looking for "a nut" since 1962 . Becker says he was looking for “a nut” since then . Becker: The search for the missing man began in 1962 .
 Marina denies ever telling Murret or anyone, including Ruth Paine, about the Walker assassination attempt before JFK was killed . She says she never told Murret about the attempt .
 Oswald’s involvement with the mafia is the absence of any evidence of conspiratorial contact between them . Oswald and the mafia were not involved in any conspiracy theories . Oswald was the only person to have been involved in the mafia .
 Aleman, Becker, Ragano claim the mafia leadership in New Orleans developed a plan to kill Kennedy . Oswald was living in Dallas in 1962 and early 1963 when the alleged plot was hatched .
 Oswald went to New Orleans during the summer of 1963, he left there before Kennedy’s trip to Texas was even announced . Oswald left New Orleans before Kennedy was announced to be in Texas .
 Oswald was granted a visa to travel to Cuba in September 1963 . If the Cuban embassy in Mexico City had granted Oswald a visa, he would have been in Havana when JFK visited Dallas .
 Oswald stayed at home every night, never received any calls from his wife, landlady and roommates say . Oswald only made one call a night to his wife to her during the two months before the assassination .
 The motorcade was officially announced only days before the visit, there was no flurry of telephone calls . After the motorcade, there were no calls from phone calls from people concerned .
 Mobsters may have discussed killing JFK, but their plans did not involve Lee Oswald . Mobsters planned to kill JFK but Oswald was not involved in their plans .
 Critics have flooded the field with new and ever-changing theories . The mob thesis is the current favorite, but critics have flooded it with new theories .
 Some are based on elaborate personal stories told by people who have implicated themselves in a purported assassination plot . Some are even based on personal stories from people who've implicated themselves .
 Garrison’s weakening of the research standards had actually begun with Garrison's weakening of research standards . That trend, which gained momentum after the Select Committee's Report, gained momentum .
 The New Orleans district attorney believed almost anyone who had a story to tell about the assassination . The more elaborate the better the better, the better .
 Garrison’s results were condemned, but his methods were perpetuated by others in the field . Garrison's methods were condemned by many of his methods . Garrison was a pioneer of the field in the 1960s and '60s .
 Dallas researcher David Perry compiled the names of twenty-eight men identified by buffs as having been a second assassin or as having “confessed” to being a second .
 There are also some forged documents being produced and this could do real damage to the historical record . The forged documents are also being produced by some of the world's leading historians .
 "A lot of the research that is getting printed in books is secondary work, just one author citing another. And unfortunately, a lot of it is secondary research," she says . "It's hard to tell you what you need to do to get your hands on a book," she
 The stories that are wrong are getting repeated over and over, and in many cases they are getting embellished in each retelling . That means that stories that aren't right are being re-told over and again, and that they're getting repeated .
 Eventually, people believe these stories just because they see them in print so often, they believe them, says CNN.com.com .
 Richard Russell, in The Man Who Knew Too Much, does the same with Richard Nagell, who spent time in and out of a mental ward . Richard Russell was so unreliable that not even Garrison used him. Richard Russell did the same .
 Mark Lane relies in part on the word of Marita Lorenz, who claims to be a former mistress of Fidel Castro . Lorenz claims to have been a mistress of Castro . Lane's latest book, Plausible Denial, relies on Lorenz's word .
 She spins an incredible tale of CIA complicity . She recounts cross-country car trips with conspirators as well as meetings with Ruby and the CIA’s E Howard Hunt .
 The problem is, as Edwin Lopez, a former researcher for the House Select Committee, says, “Mark Lane was taken in by Marita Lorenz.” He says the problem is that Lane is being taken into custody by Lorenz .
 Between her and Frank Sturgis,* we must have spent over one hundred hours . Between Frank and Frank, we spent over a hundred hours talking to her about her .
 Chauncey Holt says he knew Oswald, Ruby, and mobster Meyer Lansky . He says he delivered phony IDs to Dealey Plaza while also disguised as a tramp .
 Holt, represented by a Texas attorney, tried to sell a book about it all . Holt is represented by Texas attorney . Holt was represented by an attorney .
 Ricky White said his father, Roscoe, a Dallas policeman, was the grassy-knoll shooter . Ricky White claimed the evidence was in his father’s diary .
 Documents that "prove" White was an assassin have been unmasked as forgeries . Other documents that “prove’t’ve” White were found to be forged are forgeries, others have been forgeries.
 A group of Texas investors formed a corporation, MATSU, and has repeatedly tried to market the Roscoe White story as a book or film . MATSU is trying to sell the story to a film or a book .
 Oliver Stone reportedly considered paying $750,000 for the White White story . Stone eventually bought the rights to Garrison’s 1988 book On the Trail of the Assassins for $250,000 .
 David's story became the basis for a television documentary, The Men Who Killed Kennedy . It was later discovered that the accused men were either in the French navy or in prison on the day David claimed they were in Dallas, Texas .
 Oliver Stone’s film JFK, released late in 1991, was the culmination of more than a decade of work by the conspiracy press . The conspiracy press has been involved in the JFK assassination .
 JFK is a blatant mix of fact and fiction and is a microcosm of what has happened throughout the assassination-research community . JFK is the perfect combination of facts and fiction, says author .
 Sifting out the truth is increasingly difficult for those not well versed in the facts, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 These theorists take us away, fly us away to this unknown land of Oz, wherever they take us . Theories take us into this unknown place, wherever it takes us, are theorists .
 There are a bunch of books that are just old-fashioned nut books, like the umbrella man. Now, as you know, there are a lot of ... nut books . The umbrella man is an umbrella man .
 Dealey Plaza witnesses such as Jean Hill and Ed Hoffman are treated as celebrities . The event includes autograph sessions with celebrities such as Hill .
 A Dallas "JFK Assassination Information Center" has opened in a shopping mall . Everything from bumper stickers to T-shirts are sold at the mall .
 Some have profited from selling bootleg copies of the Zapruder film and autopsy photographs .
 The gun Jack Ruby used to kill Oswald sold at auction for $200,000 . The new owner is offering a "limited edition" of 5,000 bullets shot from Ruby’s pistol for $500 each .
 Coroner's tag that had been placed on Oswald’s big toe after his death sold for $6,000 . Coroner had placed the tag on Oswald's big toe on his big toe when he died .
 People are making lucrative livings off of selling conspiracy theories to the public . People make lucrative living off of peddling conspiracy theories, experts say .
 The ready acceptance of conspiracy by most Americans does not surprise those who study the phenomenon . Few people have bothered to read the Warren Report, but few have even bothered to do .
 Historian Henry Steele Commager: "I do think there has come up in recent years ... something that might be called conspiracy psychology" Historian: "There might be a conspiracy psychology. It might be that conspiracy psychology."
 There is an esthetic principle here. To employ what may seem an odd metaphor, there is a key to this story .
 President's death would invest the President’s death with meaning, endowing him with martyrdom . It would invest him with meaning and endow him martyrdom, he says . The President's life would be invested with meaning .
 After the remaining federal files are released, a slew of books will probably follow, each focusing upon “new” evidence, further removing the facts .
 Oswald likely to become a footnote to the ever-widening theories fueled by fresh documents . Oswald is likely to be a footnote in the history of the JFK assassination .
 "The search for a darker truth seems unquenchable," says CNN.com's John Sutter . The search for the truth remains unquenable .
 They can be tested against credible testimony, documents, and the latest scientific advances . They can't be tested by credible testimony or documents, they say .
 "Chasing shadows on the grassy knoll will never substitute for real history," says CNN.com's John Sutter . Chasing shadows of the knoll won't substitute real history, he says .
 Lee Harvey Oswald, driven by his own twisted and impenetrable furies, was the only assassin at Dealey Plaza on November 22, 1963 . Oswald was the lone assassin at the scene of the 1963 shooting .
 "To say otherwise, in light of the overwhelming evidence, is to absolve a man with blood on his hands, and to mock the President he killed," says President Obama .
 See page 348, about how the report was a hoax concocted by reporter Lonnie Hudkins et. al. See page 349, about the report .
 Robert Maheau and Johnny Roselli acted as conduits between the government and the mob . They were an ex-FBI agent who became a private investigator with underworld connections .
 Following the release of Oliver Stone’s 1991 film JFK, Congress passed historic legislation establishing a process that will lead to release of most of those documents . The small percentage of remaining Warren Commission papers, and whatever files other federal agencies still maintained about the case .
 The purpose of the legislation was to dispel the notion fostered in Stone’s movie that the government was party to a cover-up . The legislation was intended to dispel that notion .
 By January 1994, more than 500,000 pages of documents had been released pursuant to the legislation . No information that contradicted or undermined the conclusions that Oswald and Ruby acted alone surfaced in the new files .
 In November 1993, the author testified before the Legislation and National Security Subcommittee of the House of Representatives . He provided a summary of the contents of some of the newly released documents .
 In First-Hand Knowledge, ex-CIA contract agent Robert Morrow weaves an intricate intelligence plot, of which he claims to have been a part . Morrow says he was a contract agent for the CIA . Morrow claims he was part of the plot, which he says he helped develop .
 Oliver Stone, in his film JFK, regurgitated almost all of Garrison’s original contentions against the intelligence community . Garrison: “The intelligence community is a powerful tool that can be used to shape the world's intelligence agencies .”
 CIA theories necessarily involve the greatest number of conspirators, sometimes numbering in the hundreds . Yet the underlying facts to such accusations have been disproved, and the CIA theories involve a number of people .
 An acquaintance asked Marcello how he intended to deal with the Select Committee’s suspicions about him in its final report . The bug was picked up by a ceiling bug in his Town & Country office .
 Marcello told the man to be quiet, and according to the FBI description, the tape records the sounds of a chair being pushed away from a desk . The two men walked out of the room and the two men left the room .
 Blakey found it suspicious that Marcello wanted to go outside to answer the question about the Select Committee conclusions . Blakey said he found the move suspicious because he wanted to be outside the room .
 Dragging Trafficante's name into the assassination may be Ragano’s revenge for a time when Trafficante refused to help him, Ragano says . Ragano may be trying to get Trafficante back on his feet, but Trafficante has refused .
 Ragano was disbarred in 1976 after he was convicted of tax evasion and was soon destitute . Ragano is a former lawyer who served as a judge in New York .
 When he approached his old friend and client Trafficante for a loan, he was flatly turned down . Trafficante was turned down by Trafficante's old friend Trafficante, a former client .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots at CNN iReport . Send your photos of your favorite travel destinations to iReport.com/Travel .
 He was mistakenly identified by many buffs as one of the three tramps detained at Dealey Plaza . Many buffs mistakenly identified him as the tramp who was detained at the site .
 In 1973, Mark Lane co-wrote Executive Action, a semidocumentary in which a wealthy right-winger is the chief conspirator . Lane: "Executive Action" is a documentary in which the conspirator is wealthy . Lane says the film is about a rich right-
 The Parallax View shows how an innocent man could be framed as a lone gunman . It is a look at how innocent men can be framed for being a gunman in the U.S.
 Winter Kills is based around a Kennedyesque family . In Winter Kills, the slain President’s father was responsible for the assassination .
 Mr X was loosely based on an adviser to the film, Fletcher Prouty, an ex-Army colonel who was the chief Pentagon liaison officer to the CIA at the time of the assassination . Mr X is based on a retired Army colonel who worked for the CIA .
 The implication is that some intelligence agency, probably the CIA, released early, prepackaged details about the assassin to the media . The CIA is said to have been involved in the assassination .
 There is nothing mysterious about the ‘extra’ edition of the Christchurch Star . But there is nothing sinister about the 'extra' edition of this edition .
 It was 7:30 A.M. on November 23 in New Zealand when JFK was assassinated . Because of the nineteen-hour time difference, it was 7.30 a.m. on Nov. 23 .
 Oswald arrested when it was shortly after 9:00 A.M. in Christchurch . Oswald was arrested when he was arrested at the scene of the incident . Oswald is believed to have been involved in the shooting .
 A Note About the Past Decade Since Case Closed was published in 1993, there have been several developments regarding the assassination . A note about the past Decade since Case Closed has been published .
 Long-sealed government records have been made public and more books charging a conspiracy have been published . Long-sclosed government records were made public .
 The most significant addition to understanding what happened on November 22, 1963, is the release of new records . New records will help explain what happened in 1963 .
 It is charged with re-examining for release all assassination-related records that federal agencies had regarded as too sensitive for the public . It was charged with releasing assassination records that had been considered too sensitive .
 In 1993, Case Closed was issued, some historians and journalists told me they thought it was a brave book . The conclusion that Oswald had acted alone in killing JFK was still to be tested by the imminent release of these documents, he says .
 I was a strong advocate for releasing all files that were remotely relevant, especially since the government’s longstanding, and usually indefensible, refusal to release such documents had exacerbated lingering doubts many people had had about the assassination .
 I was confident that the release of the files would bolster my conclusion of Oswald’s sole guilt, I said . Oswald was the only person to admit that he was responsible for the assassination of President Kennedy .
 The simple answer is they did not provide the information long hoped for by conspiracy theorists . CNN's John Sutter says they are disappointed with the outcome of the election .
 The files were conveniently ignored by many who had vocally demanded their release in the first place . Without adding substantive evidence to any conspiracy theory, the files have been ignored .
 A cult of secrecy had become an ingrained part of government bureaucracy, leading many to be suspicious about the government’s motives . The files themselves often illustrate how secrecy had been ingrained in government bureaucracy .
 Agencies steadfastly held onto documents even when they had absolutely no relevance . Agencies held on documents even though they had no relevance. Agencies kept documents even after they were absolutely irrelevant .
 In August 1993, the CIA released a batch of long-classified documents . Some of the documents were photocopies of published newspaper and magazine articles about the assassination .
 It is hard to overcome the barriers of a bureaucracy that deems its own photocopy of a public article to be classified .
 The inherent tendency of government agencies to withhold documents has worked to the detriment of establishing an early and conclusive truth in the question of who killed the president, says the president .
 Besides the release of the files, there have been several other developments in the case during the past decade .
 In late 1993, PBS’s Frontline aired a three-hour special investigation of Lee Harvey Oswald and JFK .
 Frontline gave amateur film taken by a bystander at Dealey Plaza on November 22, 1963, to a scientific firm that specialized in digitizing and improving the grainy image . Frontline also gave an amateur film of the 1963 events to a firm that specializes in digitization and improving
 The film was shot from the corner of Main and Houston streets by the late Robert Hughes . It shows the president’s motorcade entering Dealey Plaza, and also some of the assassination's aftermath .
 The Hughes film was of such poor quality, it was not possible to determine whether the “movement” was merely an artifact on the film or a shadow of a real person .
 Lee Harvey Oswald was last left alone by his co-workers just a half hour before the assassination . Oswald had last been left alone in the same location where he was last seen alone by colleagues .
 Oswald's rifle was ditched just across the sixth floor as he escaped . It is also the same location in which three spent bullet cartridges were found . Oswald’s rifle was also found in the same spot .
 The frames from the Hughes film show a person in the sniper’s nest only seconds before the first shot, provide a visual confirmation of both the physical evidence left behind by the killer, as well as contemporaneous accounts .
 Several private investigations of the case have either begun, or in some cases, finished . During the last ten years, several comprehensive private investigations have begun or finished .
 Max Holland, a fellow at the John Nicholas Brown Center for the Study of American Civilization, has been working on an extensive history of the Warren Commission . Holland: The inner dynamics and politics of the panel reached its conclusions .
 Chief Justice Earl Warren, who headed it, refused to answer any questions about it . Chief Justice Warren refused to say whether the case was settled .
 Warren did not appreciate that when a conclusion on something as momentous as the assassination of a young and popular president was handed down, it was not enough to expect the public to accept it on face value . Warren didn't appreciate that . He did not expect that when .
 The failure of the Commission to establish any mechanism for responding to the rumors and false information that quickly became widespread was a fundamental error, the Commission says . The failure to establish a mechanism for dealing with the rumors was a 'fundamental error'
 Holland’s groundbreaking study, due to be published as a book, explains how elementary errors were reached, and how they helped fuel a conspiracy industry . Holland's groundbreaking study will be published in a book .
 Another long-time JFK researcher, Gus Russo, published the results of his work in 1998 . Gus Russo's work was published in 1998.
 Russo’s book, Live by the Sword, is the only one I know of that makes use of all the files released since 1993 . Russo's book is only one he knows of that uses all the data released since then .
 Russo concludes that Lee Harvey Oswald was the lone assassin at Dealey Plaza on November 22, 1963 . Russo: Oswald was a lone assassin . Russo's comprehensive study concludes that Oswald killed the lone man .
 JFK's brain has been missing since the mid-1960s . He also credibly solves the long-standing mystery of what happened to JFK’s brain, missing since then .
 Robert Kennedy buried the brain with JFK when the body was reinterred at Arlington Cemetery on March 14, 1967 . Russo shows how Robert Kennedy avoided any gruesome public display about his brother’s death .
 Russo believes Oswald likely killed JFK on behalf of Castro and the Cuban government . Russo: Oswald's activities during a preassassination trip to Mexico City can no longer be answered .
 Russo does an excellent job of skewering the CIA for giving a higher priority to protecting its assets in Mexico, as well as keeping secret its own plots with the mafia to kill Fidel Castro, than it did to assisting the Warren Commission .
 The CIA was the only U.S. agency with jurisdiction to probe what Oswald had done abroad . Oswald had been killed in November 1963 .
 The documents released by the Assassinations Review Board further embarrass the CIA for its lackluster investigation . The documents further embarrasses the CIA .
 Russo's work persuaded me that I was too mild in castigating the CIA in Case Closed for its virtually nonexistent investigation . Russo’s work has persuaded me to castigate the CIA, but I was wrong .
 The CIA deliberately withheld evidence, not because it feared disclosing a conspiracy against JFK, but rather because it put is own interests first, and the public’s right to know, second . The CIA not only lied to the Warren Commission, but intentionally withheld evidence .
 CIA officials performed a disservice both to the country and to history, historian says . By so doing, CIA officials have performed a service to the nation and history .
 Several other books during the past decade have had had added to smaller aspects of the case .
 The Real Story of Jim Garrison’s Investigation is a meticulous deconstruction of District Attorney Jim Garrison's conspiracy theories . Oliver Stone's Film JFK, is a detailed deconstruction .
 Garrison's new book, based on new interviews and fresh information, exposes Garrison as a complete fraud . Garrison's book even includes the first-ever interviews with the children he had molested . Garrison was convicted of molesting more than 100,000 children .
 Thomas was published in the peer-reviewed Science and Justice, a quarterly publication of Britain’s Forensic Science Society .
 Thomas argued that the House Select Committee had been correct after all when it concluded in 1979 that there was acoustical evidence of a fourth shot at Dealey Plaza . Thomas argued in the 1980s that the committee had been right .
 Thomas’s methodology was found to be based on multiple errors when he tried matching photographs of the motorcade to available police audio tape . Other acoustic and photographic experts also found errors in his analysis of the events .
 Another woman in New Orleans claimed to have secret letters from Oswald as well as evidence of his undercover role in a massive plot . Another woman was exposed as a fake even by conspiracy theorists .
 Purported first-time pictures of the assassination at Dealey Plaza were offered for sale by a respected southern auction house in 2000 . They were pulled when the auctioneers realized they were merely photos someone had taken while on the set of the Oliver Stone film .
 Fake audio tapes, doctored pictures, bogus interpretations of existing records, and false confessions continue to plague the JFK case . The JFK case is still a mystery .
 Many long-time conspiracy theorists modified their arguments during the past decade, and especially in the past two years . Yet, as a result of Case Closed, many long-term conspiracy theorists have changed their arguments .
 New conspiracy theories, complete with “witness accounts, contradict most earlier conspiracy plots . New theories try to take into account what was accomplished in Case Closed .
 The only shots that hit Kennedy came from behind, most of the buffs dismissed it . The Zapruder film, taken that day by Dallas dressmaker, proved that the only shots hit Kennedy were from behind .
 Conspiracy theorists try to explain away that evidence by contending that the Zapruder film must have been somehow doctored . As a result, a growing number of conspiracy theorists have tried to explain that evidence away .
 It is the essentially the same argument used over JFK’s autopsy X rays and photographs . JFK's autopsy X-rays and photographs were used in his death .
 Conspiracy theorists often charge that the only bullets that struck the president were fired from behind . Conspiracy theorists say they must be fake, since they also say they were fired behind him .
 The original proponent of such arguments, Robert Groden, also got involved in a new case during the past decade . Groden has been involved in the case for more than a decade .
 Simpson said a photograph of him wearing Bruno Magli shoes at a football game was doctored . The photo was taken during the trial of Simpson in New York City . Simpson's defense said the photograph was faked .
 By the time the prosecution finished introducing a series of such pictures, Groden’s self-proclaimed photographic expertise was exposed as woefully insufficient . Groden was nationally exposed as a photographer .
 Conspiracy theorists now acknowledge that Oswald was indeed in the sniper’s nest, with his rifle . Other conspiracy theorists have gone so far as to conjecture that he shot only blanks .
 Some buffs have figured out how to answer the void left in their field by Case Closed . Although there is no evidence to support the new theories, it is the only way some buffs have solved the mystery .
 Case Closed: There has simply been no information or developments during the past decade that have changed the conclusions reached in Case Closed . Case closed: No developments or developments changed the conclusion of the book .
 Millions of pages of assassination related documents have bolstered the history originally set forth in the book . The release of millions of pages has bolstered the story set forth by the book, author says .
 "Case Still Closed" is still popular with the title of Case Closed . "Case still closed" might be called Case Still Closed for the fortieth anniversary of the assassination .
 The following year, his mother, unable to cope with him, committed him to an orphanage . He joined his two older brothers in the orphanage, where he joined his older brothers .
 Lee followed his brother Robert into the Marine Corps, where he was court-martialed twice . Lee's brother Robert served in the Marines . Lee was court martialed twice for his part in the Navy .
 Oswald’s passport was issued on September 10, 1959, one day before his release from the Marines . Oswald was released from the Marine Corps one day after being released from prison . Oswald's passport shows him with a passport issued in 1959 .
 Devoted to Marxism from the age of 15, he planned for nearly two years to defect to the Soviet Union . Devoted to Marxism from age of fifteen, he was devoted to Marxism .
 Oswald’s failed suicide attempt in Moscow prompted the Soviets to allow him to stay in Russia . Oswald in Russia was allowed to stay by the Soviets .
 In Minsk, he posed with Pavel Golovachev, Roza Kuznetsova and Ella Germann, Oswald’s first love, who devastated him by rejecting his marriage proposal . He posed with a friend and KGB informant on Oswald .
 Oswald kept a ‘Historical Diary’ of his activities while in Russia . It showed not only his fickle nature but his deepening hatred of both the Soviet and American political systems . Oswald kept the diary of his travels to Russia .
 Oswald and some of his co-workers at the Minsk radio and television plant . Oswald was killed in the Soviet Union invasion of Russia in March 1968 .
 Oswald met Marina in March 1961, and they married a month later . Marina and Lee were married in April 1961 . Oswald and Marina met in 1961 .
 With them are Marin’s aunt and uncle, Valentina Guryevna Prusakova and Ilya Vasilyevich Prusakov . The couple have been married for more than 20 years .
 Ilya was the equivalent of a local U.S. policeman . Some mistakenly conclude that Ilya worked for the KGB, when he was actually a local police officer .
 Lee spent more than a year trying to obtain permission to return home to the U.S. Lee tried at first to renounce his United States citizenship . He tried to return to his native country, but was denied permission by the government .
 The Walker Shooting Back in America, the Oswalds’ home life turned violent. The Walker shooting back in America. Back in the U.S. Oswalds had a violent home life. Oswald’s home life .
 Lee created a second identity, complete with false identifications that he made . Lee also created a fake identity, including false identities that he had made .
 Alek was derived from his Russian nickname “Alik” and Hidell was a variation on the name of a Marine he had known . Hidell is derived from a variation of his Marine nickname . Alek is the son of a Navy SEAL SEAL Team Six member .
 Oswald stalked the Dallas home of right-wing general Edwin Walker in early 1963 . Oswald took surveillance photos of Walker's home in Dallas .
 Oswald’s assassination attempt went awry . The window of the Walker home shows why Oswald's assassination attempt failed . Oswald's attempt to kill himself was a mistake .
 His shot nicked the bottom of the wooden frame, deflecting the cullet's path and saving Walker’s life . Walker's life was saved by a single shot fired by a man who fired a gun .
 Oswald's wife, Marina, took several photos of Oswald in the backyard of his Dallas apartment . Oswald was one of several taken by Marina Oswald . Oswald had a pistol and rifle in his backyard, holding leftist newspapers .
 The Mannlicher-Carcano rifle in Oswald’s hand is the same one used to kill President Kennedy . Oswald was killed with the rifle used in the assassination of JFK .
 Marina's insistence that she took the photo, conspiracy critics have vigorously contested their authenticity . Despite Marina’s insistence she took it, conspiracy theorists vigorously contested her authenticity .
 The House Select Committee on Assassinations found no evidence of fakery . Twenty-two photo experts submitted the photograph to a series of tests and concluded there was no evidence .
 Under a microscope, composite pictures are easily identified by variations in the grain pattern . composite pictures can be easily identified under a microscope . composite images can be found by looking at grain patterns .
 Oswald was taken moments after his court hearing in New Orleans for having disturbed the peace in an altercation with anti-Castro Cubans . Oswald had a court hearing for disturbing the peace . Oswald was captured moments after the hearing .
 Oswald passed out pro-Castro leaflets for the New Orleans branch of the Communist Fair Play for Cuba Organization . Oswald was a member of the group . Oswald died in August 1963 at age 50 .
 He was that chapter’s only member, though he hired two men from the unemployment line to distribute the pamphlets . He was the only member of that chapter .
 Oswald’s application for a travel visa to Cuba was filled out at the Cuban embassy in Mexico City on September 27, 1963 . Oswald's application was completed at the end of the month of the day .
 Oswald's photo was given personally by the Cuba embassy clerk, belying conspiracy stories that an imposter visited instead . The photo stapled at the upper left-hand corner was given by Oswald personally to the Cuba Embassy clerk .
 The 1964 reconstructions were done by the FBI for the Warren Commission . They approximate the shooter’s view through his 4X telescopic sight .
 These images are keyed by the Commission to frame numbers from the Zapruder film of the assassination . The images appear much smaller than what the assassin would have seen with the sight filling his entire line of vision .
 The car is a different model from the presidential limousine, and therefore the two agents are not in the actual positions of President and Governor Connally at the time of the assassination .
 JFK’s right arm has started moving up towards his chin, part of a neurological response to the throat wound . JFK's right arm is now moving up to his chin as a result of the neurological response .
 It belonged to a heckler who was later identified, it gave rise to much early and incorrect conspiracy speculation . The heckler's name was the name of the heckler .
 The shot that killed JFK came from behind the motorcade, not from the Grassy Knoll . It is the visual confirmation that the shot came from a motorcade . The shot was fired from behind JFK's motorcade in 1963, but not from behind .
 The metal-jacketed 6.5mm slug struck JFK in the high, right rear of his skull . Brain tissue exits directly above and to the right of the President’s head .
 Bonnie Ray Williams and Harold Norman were startled when they heard the rifle fire directly above them . The men on the lower floor were startled by the gunfire .
 Norman heard Oswald operate the gun’s bolt action, and the three cartridge cases hitting the floor . Norman even heard Oswald operating the gun's bolt action . Oswald even heard the three cartridges hit the floor of the gun .
 Howard Brennan was only ninety-three feet from the sniper’s nest . Brennan was a construction worker who saw Oswald shooting during the assassination . Brennan says he was in the middle of the shooting .
 Tippit’s patrol car was found in the exact location where he stopped Oswald just forty-five minutes after Kennedy was killed . Oswald was killed in the assassination .
 Oswald pulled his revolver and fired, killing Tippit instantly . Oswald pulled the gun from the car as he walked around the front of the car . Oswald then pulled it from the back and fired .
 Oswald, who was followed by a shoestore clerk, ducked inside the movie house without paying for a ticket . Oswald was followed into the theater by a local shoestores clerk, who followed him .
 Oswald was dragged out of the theater by a Dallas policeman and a detective . Oswald unsuccessfully tried to shoot another policeman after a scuffle inside the theater . He was dragged from the movie house by a police officer and detective .
 Oswald's press conference was held at the jail at midnight on the day of the assassination . Jack Ruby was held in the jail where he was held by Ruby .
 Jack Ruby entered the room by pretending to be a journalist . Jack Ruby was a local Dallas nightclub owner . Ruby was killed in a Dallas nightclub shooting .
 Ruby was obsessed with the weekend activities surrounding the assassination . Ruby, a publicity hungry and attracted to high-profile events, was obsessed by the events .
 Oswald’s murder of Oswald sparked considerable speculation about whether he was a Mafia hit man . Oswald was a nightclub owner with a tough guy image . Oswald's murder sparked speculation that he may have been a hitman .
 Ruby thought he would be treated as a hero for having meted out street justice to the President’s assassin . Ruby had not planned to shoot Oswald .
 Conspiracy theories say JFK's coffin was empty when it arrived at Andrews Air Force Base . JFK's Casket is believed to have arrived in Washington, D.C.
 Supposedly the President’s body had been stolen for surgical alterations while still in Dallas . The body of the President was found in Dallas, Texas .
 The casket was never unattended, however, and it was hermetically sealed by an air-lock mechanism in Dallas . It was sealed by a mechanism that seals the casket's doors .
 In 1978, six members of the House Select Committee on Assassinations traveled to Havana and met with Fidel Castro for four hours . It was the first time the Cuban president had answered questions about the assassination .
 Oswald, a committed leftist who wanted desperately to move to Cuba, might well have been inspired by Castro . Oswald wanted to leave the country to join the Castro regime in Cuba . Oswald was a committed left-wing activist who wanted to join Cuba .
 The single bullet that wounded Kennedy through his neck as well as inflicting all of Governor Connally’s injuries was tested . Warren Commission Exhibit 399 is Exhibit 399, Exhibit 399 .
 The bullet from a 1992 reconstruction was done by Failure Analysis Associates . The bullet was found in a bullet hole in the bullet hole .
 The single bullet was found in even better condition than 399 . It provided the final physical evidence necessary to prove the single bullet theory .
 One man, acting alone, killed the President . The Ballistics of Assassination Graphic Analysis . One man acting alone killed the president .
 Ever since, the technical plausibility of such marksmanship has been under attack . Ever since the tech plausibility has been questioned .
 Today, ballistics can be subjected to advances in computer analysis . The ballistics of the ballistics are now subject to computer analysis.
 By tracking the trajectories of the shots in reverse from the wounds, the source of the shot can be determined with precision . The trajectory of the bullets can be traced to the source .
 The following graphics are based on forensic evidence analyzed by these new techniques, using timing from the frames of the now-famous 8mm film of the assassination taken by Abraham Zapruder . The new techniques were developed in the 1980s and 1990s .
 Penn Jones, former editor of the Texas weekly Midlothian Mirror, originated the popular theory that witnesses to the Kennedy assassination who knew too much were being silenced by an unidentified murder squad . This is the single bullet that wounded both JFK and Connally .
 Jones, who believes there were nine assassins at Dealey Plaza, is the author of four self-published books on the case . Jones believes nine assassins were responsible for the shooting .
 By 1967, he had compiled a list of 18 people connected to the assassination who had suffered unnatural deaths . The list included 18 people who had died from unnatural deaths from the assassination .
 The odds against them being dead through foul play within three years of the assassination was one hundred thousand trillion to one . Initially, The London Sunday Times used Jones’s list of eighteen to conclude that the odds against their deaths were one hundred, thousand trillion times to one.
 No major writer or investigator on the case—even those trying to expose dangerous conspiracies—has died an unusual death . No major writers or investigators have died in connection with the case .
 All of the earliest critics, like Mark Lane, Edward Epstein, Harold Weisberg, David Lifton, Josiah Thompson, and Mary Ferrell, are alive and well . All of these critics are well-known today .
 Penn Jones, who first published information about the deaths, was never bothered and is now seventy-eight years old . Even Penn Jones never bothered to get the information back .
 No one tried to eliminate Jim Garrison or any of his staff during their judicial probe, nor was Oliver Stone bothered when he “exposed” the government and sanctified Garrison . Oliver Stone was not bothered by his sanctification of Garrison .
 Key witnesses who claimed to have seen a second gunman at Dealey Plaza are still alive . Jean Hill, Malcolm Summers, Gordon Arnold, and Ed Hoffman are all alive .
 Fundamental conspiracy witnesses like Beverly Oliver, who linked Ruby and Oswald, are still living . Delphine Roberts, who tied Oswald to Guy Banister and David Ferrie, is still living. Beverly Oliver is still alive .
 Almost thirty men named as the “second shooter” by conspiracy buffs are alive . Almost thirty people named as “Second shooter’s” are still alive, according to the FBI .
 Frank Ragano, sixty-nine years old, has reportedly sold his manuscript that says he passed the “hit” from Hoffa to Marcello and Trafficante . Ragano is believed to have passed the "hit" to Trafficante. Ragano's manuscript says he
 Carlos Marcello, the New Orleans crime boss who some say carried out an assassination contract for the CIA, enjoyed his retirement until his natural death in 1993 at the age of eighty-three .
 It would seem necessary that key ‘witnesses’ to conspiracy be eliminated as soon as possible after the assassination . Yet the list covers more than two decades, covering more than 20 years .
 Roy Kellerman, the Secret Service agent in charge of JFK's limousine, died in 1963 . The last death is that of Kellerman; the last death was that of a Secret Service officer .
 In many instances, the persons listed were strong believers in Oswald’s guilt, which should have assured their survival . Many of the people listed were strongly believers in the guilt of Oswald . They should have been killed by conspirators .
 Life magazine executive who bought Zapruder film is only connection to the case . Jackson's only connection was that he was the executive who decided to purchase the film .
 Dallas gun store owner says he didn't sell the gun Oswald used to kill Tippit . He supplied a half-page affidavit, as did every other Dallas gun-store owner .
 She was the cleaning woman at 1026 North Beckley and saw Oswald near 1:00 P.M. on the day of the assassination . She was a cleaning woman who saw Oswald in the area .
 The only thing he knew about the Ruby investigation was what he read in the newspapers . He said he knew nothing about the case from the media .
 Ruby was deranged at the end of his life and believed not only that he was being killed by injections, but also that 25 million Jews were being slaughtered on the jail floor below him . Ruby believed that 25 millions of Jews were also being slaughtered in the jail . Ruby died at the
 He was a friend of Roger Craig, the deputy sheriff who told the elaborate tale about a phantom getaway car at Dealey Plaza . He is only listed because he was friends with Craig .
 Nicholas Chetta was the New Orleans coroner who performed the autopsy on David Ferrie . Ferrie's autopsy was performed by Chetta in New Orleans, New Orleans . Chetta performed his autopsy on Ferrie, who died in 2009 .
 His finding of a berry aneurysm has been confirmed by forensic pathologists . His finding was confirmed by subsequent pathologists who examined the patient .
 Her testimony helped prove he was in flight after the shooting . She testified that he was not someone the conspirators would apparently kill at the age of 72 .
 He sold the film to Life magazine and was uninvolved in the investigation . The film was sold to Life and Life magazine .
 They called him Red because he drank too much and his face looked like a baboon’s ass . Red was called Red because of his drinking too much, and he looked like Red .
 Marrs lists the death only as “possible cancer,” despite the unambiguous death certificate and statements from his treating physicians . Marrs: Marrs' death only listed as possible cancer, despite his treating physician's statements .
 Charles Gregory was one of the surgeons who operated on Governor John Connally . Charles Gregory operated on Connally's widow .
 Gregory’s medical testimony was some of the most important supporting the Warren Commission and the single bullet . Gregory's medical testimony supported the single-bullet .
 After his Warren Commission testimony, he had no connection with the case . After his testimony, the case was dropped .
 The only reason he seems to be on the mysterydeaths list is that he was a business acquaintance of George de Mohrenschildt, Oswald’s Dallas friend . He was an acquaintance of de Mohranschildt .
 Dallas deputy sheriffs worked on the case . Lewis was one of the dozens of officers who worked on it . The suspect was found dead in Dallas .
 A psychiatrist testified that Ruby was not insane at the moment he shot Oswald . John Holbrook was a prosecution witness at the Ruby trial . Holbrook testified in the trial .
 Immediately after her son’s arrest she hired Mark Lane to represent her, and over the years she gave and sold dozens of press interviews about many aspects of the case .
 He testified before the Warren Commission but had no involvement with the investigation after his testimony . He testified in testimony but was not involved in investigation after testimony .
 Pathologist James Weston examined JFK autopsy X rays and photos for the House Select Committee . Weston was pathologist who examined the JFK autopsy photos and X rays .
 Cyril Wecht has led a vocal oneman campaign to prove medically that the assassination is a conspiracy . All of the other doctors are still alive at this writing—and perhaps the surprise survivor is Cyril . Wecht is a vocal advocate of the assassination .
 Wecht is alive and well and is the medical examiner for Allegheny County, Pennsylvania . He is a medical examiner in the state of Pennsylvania .
 He was retired and living in Florida when, Marrs says, he died of ‘unknown causes . Marrs: He died of "unknown causes" in Florida .
 While the fifty-three listed above died of natural causes, the following forty-eight died unnatural deaths . The Unnatural Deaths are the names of those who died of unnatural causes .
 According to Penn Jones, unidentified sources reported that she screamed into the telephone, before the assassination, that the President was going to be killed . Penn Jones: Unnamed sources said that she told them she was killed .
 There is no corroboration for the report, yet Marrs still begins his list with her death . Marrs says she was killed by a car crash in 2010 .
 Jones asserts Zangetty told friends about three assassins scheduled to kill JFK, that Ruby would kill Oswald, and that the Sinatra family was involved . Jones asserts that Zagetty . told friends that three assassins . were scheduled for kill JFK . Jones says that Ruby killed Oswald
 There is no support for Jones’s claim, and the author could find no record of such a death . The author could not find any record of the death .
 He probably qualifies for the list since he was acquainted with Guy Banister . He was a good friend with the former England star .
 Oswald reportedly knew a fellow roomer at Oswald’s Beckley Street boardinghouse . Oswald also reportedly knew fellow roomers at the boardinghouse, according to reports .
 Mary Sherman had no connection to the case, though she was acquainted with David Ferrie . Mary Sherman did not have any connection with the case .
 Medical records show she was killed in an accidental fire . There was no gunshot wound on her body . According to the medical records, she died in an accident .
 Both were reporters who had stopped by Ruby’s apartment on November 24, 1963, after the shooting of Oswald . Ruby was shot by Oswald in Dallas, Texas .
 Ruby’s roommate, George Senator, and a friend of his, Jim Martin, spoke to CNN iReport.com . Ruby's attorney, Tom Howard, and George Senator are also on the show .
 Hunter was killed in California when someone dropped a pistol and it accidentally discharged . Hunter was a Marine Corps veteran who served in the Marine Corps .
 Dallas police believed Koethe’s murder was the result of a fight with a gay lover . Koethe's murder was believed to have been result of fight with gay lover, police said .
 The evidence that Underhill was an agent is from an undisclosed source known only to Jones . Jones has no corroboration that he ever said that there was CIA complicity in the assassination .
 She was not associated with any aspect of the case . Except for her reported liaison with the President, she was not .
 Marrs claims she “had private interview with Ruby” and was going to break open the case . Marrs also claims she had a ‘private interview’ with Ruby and was about to break the case up .
 Her “private” interview with Ruby was when she spoke to him for a few minutes during a recess in the courtroom during his trial . Ruby was surrounded by other reporters .
 There was no scoop pending by the time Kilgallen drank herself to death . She drank herself in a pool of blood .
 Whaley had a head-on collision in which his taxi passenger was critically injured . The eighty-three-year-old driver of the other auto had a fatal heart attack and lost control of his car .
 Bowers told his story not only to the Warren Commission but also to Mark Lane for his book and film documentary . Bowers tells his story to Lane and Lane .
 He was fired shortly after he told the story and had no other relationship to the case . He was not involved in the case, but had no relationship to it .
 His testimony supports the Warren Commission conclusion about the location of the assassin . The Warren Commission concluded that the assassin's location was likely to be located .
 The story was exploited by Robert Groden and Harrison livingstone in High Treason . Marrs picked it up for his mysterydeaths list for his Mystery Deaths list .
 He was warned shortly before his death that a murder contract was put on his head by Castro agents . Castro agents put a contract on him before he died, he says .
 Garrison wanted to question him as part of his anti-Castro investigation . Garrison wanted him to be part of an investigation into Castro Castro's crimes .
 The coroner's report and death certificate show it was an aneurysm, with no foul play involved . Coroner's report: The death was caused by a ruptured aneurism, not foul play .
 He was a cameraman, not a reporter, and never claimed to have any special information . He was not a journalist, but he was cameraman and cameraman .
 Johnson claimed he could put Shaw and Oswald together, but was so unreliable that not even Garrison used him . Not even Garrison was able to use him .
 The Shaw trial finished on March 1, and Johnson was not killed until July . Shaw was not convicted of murder, but Johnson was killed in July .
 He was shot and killed when he and his partner, Al Maddox, tried to arrest a fugitive, James Walter Cherry . He was killed in a shootout with Cherry's accomplice .
 Since he was supposedly a member of the ‘Warren Commission cover-up, any team of assassins eliminating dangerous witnesses would be expected to let him live . Boggs was supposedly part of the 'Warren Commission Cover-up'
 Ruby had only sporadic contact with him over 15 years, and none during 1963 . Ruby had no contact during that period .
 For a time, critics claimed Milteer was identified in one of the photographs taken at Dealey Plaza . But photo analysts for the Select Committee proved it was not him .
 There is no link between Milteer and the events in Dallas, Texas, police say . Beyond his boastful claim in November, there are no links to the events .
 The thousands of hours of surveillance tapes on Giancana, starting in the late 1950s, show that he knew nothing about the assassination or about any alleged mob plot . The tapes also show that the Italian government did not know about any mob plot or any alleged plot .
 He strongly opposed Castro, and solicited American support for the anti-Castro Cubans . He solicited U.S. support for Cuba .
 Cadigan was a document expert whose involvement with the case ended with his 1964 Warren Commission testimony . Sullivan was an official later in charge of counterespionage . Cadigan and Sullivan were involved in the case .
 Oswald had been assigned to a U-2 base and was in Russia when Powers was downed . He was assigned to the base and had been stationed in Russia . Powers was killed in the crash .
 Marrs lists Teresa Norton as a Ruby employee, and says she was “fatally shot” in August 1964 . Marrs says Norton was shot in the head by a member of the mob .
 He also lists Karen "Little Lynn" Carlin, another Ruby employee, as being a “gunshot victim” in 1966 .
 Teresa Norton was another name used by Karen Carlin . She is the same person as Carlin, who used the name Teresa Norton .
 Carlin died in August 1964 in a Houston hotel fire . Sylvia Meagher, Robert Sam Anson, and David Scheim all reported Carlin to have died .
 Carlin testified a second time to the Warren Commission on August 24, 1964, after the date she was supposed to have died . The Warren Commission found that Carlin had lied about her death .
 Marrs provides no citation for the 1966 date, and does not list a location, month, or day . Marrs says the date is 1966, and no citation is given .
 The author asked him to comment on the Ruby-related deaths, and he is quoted whenever they appear . The author asks him to respond to the deaths .
 Researcher David Perry conclusively proved that Lee Bowers’s death was accidental . Bowers was found to have died accidentally .
 The goal of this book was to reexamine all the evidence on the JFK assassination . The book was reexamining the evidence from the assassination .
 Any of a dozen issues could have been the subject of a separate book, including Oswald's time in Russia, Jack Ruby’s story, or the actual assassination . The book, "The Oswald and Ruby," was published in October 2013 .
 Random House agreed to be the publisher of the book . The last two years were particularly hectic, with Random House agreeing to be publisher .
 Time was spent obtaining information about files still classified by the U.S., Russian, and Cuban governments .
 In obtaining documents, I was aided by an excellent staff at the National Archives, particularly Michael McReynolds, director of Textual Reference, and Sue McDonough, archivist; Master Sgt. Sgt. John Sutter .
 A special thank you to Cynthia Wegmann, Esq., Esq. New Orleans, who allowed me to review her father’s voluminous papers on the Garrison case, and to Peter Earnest, chief of the CIA's Office of Public and Agency Information .
 For help in obtaining information in other countries, I am indebted to Rene Mujica of the Cuban mission to the U.S. For help, I'm also indebted to Yuriy Kobaladze, press bureau chief of the KGB .
 While I am grateful to all of them for the time they took to speak with me, a few made an extra effort . While I'm grateful to them for their time, I'm also grateful for their efforts to speak to me .
 Dr. Carlos Bringuier clarified the anti-Castro issues as well as the problems in New Orleans in 1963 . Dr. Alberto Moreno: "It was a very difficult year for the Cuban people to come out of Cuba"
 Michael Baden resolved many persistent medical discrepancies; and Earl Ruby provided valuable insights into his brother Jack . Earl Ruby also discussed his brother's life with Michael and Earl Baden .
 Yuriy Nosenko, the 1964 KGB defector, is familiar with the KGB’s handling of Oswald in Russia . He says the KGB handled Oswald's case in the 1960s and '60s . The KGB was criticized for its handling of the Oswald case in Russia
 He is still at risk because of a standing KGB death warrant . He is living under an assumed name in the U.S. since his life is at risk .
 Only twice before had he agreed to private interviews, and they had not been about Oswald . Only twice other interviews had been held before, and not about Oswald.
 A journalist from one of the earlier meetings had later disclosed the U.S. state in which Nosenko was living, forcing him to move . The journalist from that meeting later disclosed that he was living in that country .
 Despite the risks in granting another interview, he agreed with the argument of my first letter to him, emphasizing his duty to the historical record . He agreed to the argument that he agreed to grant another interview .
 "The extended time he spent with me, combined with his recall for details, was more than I originally expected," he said . The extended time was more impressive than I expected, he added .
 Bill Alexander, Esq., was the assistant district attorney in Dallas at the time of the assassination . Bill Alexander was an assistant DA in Dallas when the assassination occurred .
 He was an integral part of the investigation after Oswald’s arrest . He later prosecuted Jack Ruby for Oswald's murder . Jack Ruby was later convicted of Ruby's murder of Oswald .
 He is a significant source of untapped information about the case but has seldom given interviews . He is also a significant . source of . untapped . information .
 I am grateful for the several days he gave me in Dallas, Dallas, in addition to the many retired Dallas police sources he led me to . I'm grateful for his time in Dallas .
 His recollections of the assassination weekend helped me better understand many of those about whom I had to write . He says his recollections helped him better understand some of the people he was writing about .
 Dallas sheriff Jim Bowles made himself available for days at a time . Bowles and his staff, including Jim Ewell and Wilma Snelen, were available at the sheriff's request .
 Sheriff Bowles's crusade to uncover the truth in the assassination’s acoustics issues is some of the case's best private research . The sheriff's crusade for the truth is some .
 "He shared his work selflessly with me, and I am indebted for his considerable assistance," he said .
 I am especially thankful to Mary Latham of Itek Optical Systems and Janet Steele of Bell & Howell for their help .
 Michael West have done some of the most sophisticated computer-enhancement work on the Zapruder film . Michael West has worked on the film for more than 30 years .
 Sportsmail has been given access to the enhancements and underlying tests by the team behind the development of the new technology .
 Rev. Steve Goldberg, Esq., Esq. was always available with astute legal advice . Rev. Goldberg is always available for advice on matters of personal residence .
 David Whipple, president of the association of retired intelligence agents, holds the same position for retired Secret Service agents . Les Stanford, for Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms, also hold the same positions for retired agents .
 I owe a special thanks to David Perry, an insurance investigator who has studied the assassination for nearly two decades . Perry says he has studied JFK's assassination for 20 years . He says the assassination is a mystery .
 John Sutter's new book will be published in the summer of 2015 . He says he hopes the book will help purveve many falsehoods that clutter the field . Sutter says the book is a way of purging the field of falsehoods .
 He was unstinting in his assistance, often spending hours on the most arcane requests, ranging from the height of the fence on the grassy knoll to 1963 Dallas street maps .
 Using the Freedom of Information Act in many lawsuits, he has obtained thousands of government documents on the case . He has used the act to obtain thousands of documents from the government .
 I disagree with him about almost every aspect of the case, but I thank him for his generosity in the use of his papers and his time . His attitude toward the sharing of information is refreshing, and although I disagree, I think he's generous .
 The same applies to Mary Ferrell, a retired legal secretary in Dallas, who has one of the largest private archives on the assassination . Ferrell: "I have a lot of time to think about what happened in Dallas"
 She also allowed me to review some of her extensive collection when I visited Dallas .
 Paul Hoch, in Berkeley, California, is the unofficial archivist for the conspiracy press . Hoch: "The conspiracy press is the only way to get around the world"
 An academic, with a thorough understanding of the documents in the case, Hoch provided insights that helped me avoid pitfalls in the research .
 Gus Russo, in Baltimore, Maryland, is a private researcher who was kind to provide many telephone numbers and addresses from his extensive database . Gus Russo provided many phone numbers from his database .
 Assassination Archives and Research Center in Washington, D.C., has all the documentation available at the National Archives . Instead of microfilm, everything at the AARC is in an easier format for research—paper copies .
 With annual dues of $25 and a high-speed photocopy machine on the premises, there is no better place for anyone interested in researching .
 Charles Schwartz saved me after several computer crashes, as I made the mistake of trying to learn new software while I wrote the first draft of the manuscript . Schwartz: "Charles saved me as I tried to write a novel in a book"
 His patience in taking panicked telephone calls at all hours of the night is greatly appreciated . His patience is also appreciated .
 John and Catherine Martin were kind enough to allow John and his wife to be their houseguests on their research trips to Washington . The Martin family was kind of a houseguest at the Martin family home .
 "They always found room for us, and their home was an oasis of peace and quiet," says mother-in-law . "They were always finding room for them, and they were always there," she says .
 Pam Bernstein, my agent and friend, has left William Morris to establish her own agency . Pam Bernstein is leaving William Morris for a new agency . She has been with William Morris since 1996 .
 She helped place this project and negotiate a contract that allowed me to undertake the extensive research . She helped with the project and negotiated a deal that allowed her to undertake extensive research.
 "I have been fortunate to be represented by one of the best agents in the business, Owen Laster. Since her departure, I have been able to have the best representation in the world," she says .
 At Random House, Beth Pearson oversaw the editorial production of the book .
 Her great enthusiasm for the subject, combined with her keen eye for detail, greatly helped maintain the accuracy of the text . Her keen eye-to-the-critic image helped maintain her accuracy, she said .
 "He recognized this was a good story and gave me free rein to do the research and come up with the answers," he says . "I'm glad to be able to do this," he adds .
 It is rare that a publisher will commit to a project without specific guarantees from the author about the book’s conclusions and the ability of the writer to gather the data . The book will be published in September 2015 .
 "Reexamine the evidence and find the truth," author says of JFK's assassination . "They did not care if I came back with a book that concluded the Kennedy assassination was a conspiracy or the result of a lone assassin"
 Editor Robert Loomis' effort on this one was beyond the ordinary assistance that can be expected from someone who must attend to a dozen manuscripts at a time . The editor has forever spoiled me for any future book because of his effort .
 "He believed in this book from the beginning and championed it at Random House," says Random House editor John Sutter .
 Our extensive discussions fundamentally affected its organization and tone several times, each for the better, each time, each of the better .
 His imprint is evident throughout throughout, and the book’s quality is due largely to his commitment and support . The book's quality is largely due to the support of the author's family and friends .
 She is my inspiration at every stage of my work, even enduring my frequent self-doubt when I constantly tormented her with my worries about organizing the masses of information into a solid manuscript .
 She endures the daily invasion of figures and trappings from another period . Depending on the subject, she endures a daily invasion .
 "I know she will be happy to no longer live with the shadow of Lee Oswald," she says . "She was happy to live with Lee Oswald. I know she'll be happy," she adds .
 FBI report of addresses of Lee Harvey Oswald from time of his birth, CE 1963, is published in WC Vol. 1 . FBI report: Oswald's addresses of addresses from time to time of birth .
 Oswald's possible attendance at a day nursery in Dallas, Texas, during the school year 1944–45 , CE 1874, WC Vol. 1874 . FBI report, April 3, 1964, of investigation concerning Lee Harvey Oswald’s possible attendance . Oswald attended a Dallas day nursery
 Letter from Louisiana Department of Public Safety to Commission to Commission, February 4, 1964, transmitting information concerning Lee Oswald’s education and background in Louisiana . Lee Oswald was a member of the Committee of Investigation into the assassination .
 FBI report, November 26, 1963, reflecting affidavit of Palmer McBride, CE 1386, WC Vol. 1386 .
 Notes of interview of Lee Oswald conducted by Aline Mosby in Moscow, November 1959, CE 1385, WC Vol. 1385 . Lee Oswald's interview was conducted in Moscow in November 1959 .
 Lee Oswald’s classification card, dated August 30, 1956, Fort Worth public schools, high school department, and Oswald's permanent high school record . Lee Oswald attended Arlington Heights High School, CE 1873 J, K, WC Vol. 1 .
 FBI report, June 26, 1964, of interview with Allen R Felde, CE 1962, was published in WC Vol. 1962 . Felde died in 1964 .
 Letter from Lee Oswald to Robert Oswald, November 26, 1959, CE 295, WC Vol. 295, was written by Lee Oswald . Lee Oswald was assassinated in November Oswald's assassination .
 Application form filled out by Lee Harvey Oswald on March 4, 1959, for entry to the Albert Schweitzer College, CE 228, WC Vol. 228, was filled out in 1959 . Oswald filled out the application form for entry into the college . Oswald's application form is dated March 4
 U.S. passport application of Lee Oswald, dated September 4, 1959, CE 1114, WC Vol. Vol. 1 . Lee Oswald applied for a passport in 1959 . Oswald's passport application was published in September 1959, 1959 .
 FBI reports, December 4, 1963, concerning passenger records of steam ship on which Oswald sailed from New Orleans to Le Havre, France , CE 2665, WC Vol. 2665 . Oswald's ship was the steam ship that he was on .
 Lee Oswald to Marguerite Oswald, with envelope postmarked September 19, 1959, CE 200, WC Vol. 2, 1959 . Lee Oswald's letter is dated from 1959 to 1959 . Oswald's wife, then-wife, was assassinated in 1961 .
 Oswald’s Historic Diary, CE 24, entry for November 17-December 30, 1959 . Oswald's historic diary was published November 17, 1959. Oswald's Historic Diary is CE 24 .
 Oswald’s Historic Diary, CE 24, entry for January 4, 1960; CE 985, WC Vol. Vol. 985 . Oswald's Historic Diary is published by Oswald Oswald .
 Oswald’s Historic Diary, CE 24, entries for January 11 and 13, 1960; interview with Priscilla Johnson McMillan, September 29, 1992; . Oswald's Historic Diary .
 Lee Oswald’s handwritten account of amorous affairs in the USSR, found among Oswald's personal effects . Oswald's handwritten account was found among his personal effects, CE 2759, WC Vol. of the World War II .
 Lee Oswald's notes were written on Holland America Line stationery, CE 25, WC Vol. 25 . Lee Oswald was assassinated in November 1963 . Oswald was killed by the assassination of President Kennedy Kennedy in August 1963 .
 Declaration of Lee Oswald requesting that his United States citizenship be revoked, CE 931, WC Vol. 931 . Lee Oswald requested that his U.S. citizenship was revoked . Oswald's request for the revocation of his citizenship was denied .
 Letter to Lee Oswald from the American embassy in Moscow, February 28, 1961, CE 933, WC Vol. 933 . Lee Oswald's letter was sent to the U.S. Embassy in Moscow from the embassy .
 Foreign Service dispatch from the Department of State to the American embassy in Moscow, March 24, 1961, CE 940, WC Vol. 940 .
 State Department memorandum from John T White to Edward J Hickey, March 31, 1961, CE 970, WC Vol. 970, was signed by John T. White and Edward J. Hickey .
 Department of State In . struction to the American embassy in Moscow, April 13, 1961, CE 971, CE . 971 . In . 1961, the State Department sent a letter to the embassy in . Moscow .
 Oswald's interview with Aline Mosby in Moscow, CE 1385, was conducted by Mosby . Mosby interviewed Lee Oswald in Moscow . Oswald was a member of the Oswald family . Oswald died in August 1944 .
 Oswald’s Historic Diary, CE 24, entry for November 17 to December 30, 1959 . Oswald's historic diary was published in 1959 . It was published on November 17, 1959, when Oswald was assassinated .
 Letter from Lee Harvey Oswald to the American embassy in Moscow, dated May 1961, CE 252, WC Vol. 252, was written by Oswald . Letter from Oswald to American Embassy in Moscow is dated May 31, 1961 .
 FBI reports, December 1–7, 1963, of interviews with and data concerning Marina Oswald , CE 1401, WC Vol. 1, 1963 . Marina Oswald was a member of the Oswald family . Oswald's wife, Lee Oswald, was killed in September 1963 .
 Operations memorandum from State Department to the American embassy in Moscow, dated August 18, 1961, CE 979, WC Vol. 979. Operations memorandum .
 Letter from Lee Oswald to Robert Oswald, dated July 14, 1961, CE 301, WC Vol. 301, was written by Lee Oswald . Lee Oswald was assassinated in July 1961 .
 Oswald letters dated from July 15, 1961 to October 4, 1961, from Lee Oswald to the American embassy in Moscow, as preserved in State Department files . Oswald's letters were sent to the U.S. Embassy in Moscow in 1961 .
 Internal memorandum of the Commission dated June 8, 1964, and attached documents, re “Senator John G Tower’s contacts with Lee Harvey Oswald” , CE 1058, WC Vol. 1 .
 Operations memorandum from the American embassy in Moscow to the Department of State, August 28, 1961, CE 944, WC Vol. 944 . Operation memorandum: Operations memorandum .
 Marina Oswald, CE 1777, was born in August 1961 . Oswald was the first woman to be granted a permanent residence in the U.S. State Department . Oswald died of a gunshot wound to the head .
 Foreign Service dispatch from the U.S. embassy in Moscow to the State Department dated July 11, 1961, CE 935, WC Vol. 935 . The dispatch was from the American embassy .
 FBI report by Special Agent Fain, May 12, 1960, CE 823, WC Vol. 823 . Copy of the FBI report was published in 1960 .
 FBI report, December 5, 1963, of interview with Gladys Yoakum, CE 2699, WC Vol. 2699 . FBI report: "Gladys" Gladys, Gladys and Gladys were interviewed in December 1963 .
 FBI report, December 6, 1963, of interview with Troy Bond, principal, evening school at Crozier Tech High School, Dallas, Texas .
 Letter from Marina Oswald to Russian embassy, February 17, 1963, CE 986, WC Vol. 986 . Marina Oswald's letter was sent to the Russian embassy in Moscow .
 Interview with Art Pence, February 21, 1992; testimony of Ronald Simmons, Ronald Simmons and Art Pence . Art Pence: "Art Pence is a man of honor" Art Pence was the president of the U.S. House of Representatives .
 Notes by Oswald titled “A System opposed to the Communists,” CE 98, CE 98 and WC Vol. Vol. 98 . Oswald's notes were published in the late 1940s and 1950s .
 FBI report by agent John Fain, Sept. 10, 1963, CE 829, WC Vol. IV, 444; copy of a copy of the FBI report on Sept. 9, 1963 .
 Marina Oswald was interviewed by the FBI on February 18, 1964 . FBI report: Marina Oswald's interview with Marina Oswald, CE 1156, WC Vol. 1156. Marina Oswald . Marina Oswald is a former CIA operative .
 Report of investigation into possible target practice by Lee Oswald in Dallas, Texas, area , CE 2694, WC Vol. 2694 . Lee Oswald may have used target practice in Dallas area .
 Oswald’s undated application for employment at Goldrings, New Orleans, CE 1945; application dated August 6, 1963, for . employment at Cosmos shipping, CE 1946; application for. employment at unknown place, CE 1947; Lykes Brothers Steamship Co. Co.
 Oswald’s application for employment with William B Reily, May 9, 1963, CE 1398, WC Vol. 1398 . Oswald applied to William Reily for employment in 1963 .
 Marina Oswald's letter to the Russian embassy was published in CE 12, WC Vol. 12, CE 12 . Oswald wrote to the embassy in Moscow, Russia, on behalf of Marina Oswald . Oswald was assassinated in 1961 . Oswald died of a heart attack at the hands of Russian President Vladimir
 Letter from Lee Oswald to Russian embassy, July 1, 1963, CE 13, WC Vol. 13, was sent to the embassy in Moscow, Russia . Lee Oswald's letter to the Russian embassy was sent in July 1963 . Oswald was assassinated in September 1963 .
 Letter from Ruth Paine to Marina Oswald, July 11, 1963, CE 411, WC Vol. 411, was written by Marina Oswald . Paine's letter was published in 1963, and was signed by Paine and Oswald .
 Oswald’s employment in New Orleans was one of many investigations into his New Orleans job . Oswald was a prominent New Orleans resident . Oswald died in August 1944 .
 Letter draft from Ruth Paine to Marina Oswald, July 21, 1963, CE 416, WC Vol. 416 . Paine wrote to Oswald, Marina Oswald . Oswald was assassinated in July 1963 . Oswald's assassination was the first assassination of American President Richard Nixon .
 Letters dated August 22 and July 6, 1963, from Eugene Murret to Lee Oswald, CE 2648, WC Vol. 1, 1963 . Murret and Oswald were married at the time of Oswald's assassination . Oswald was assassinated in August 1963 .
 Secret Service report, December 9, 1963, reflecting investigation of allegation that Oswald rented an office in New Orleans for conduct of Fair Play for Cuba Committee activities . Secret Service: Oswald rented office to conduct Fair Play For Cuba Committee .
 Letter from Major James T McCarley, CAP Deputy for Personnel, to Deputy Commander, CAP, Louisiana Wing, November 3, 1959 .
 Affidavit of John Manchester, as prepared by Andrew Sciambra, undated, 1967, 1. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 5 . 5. 5th. 4th. 6th. 7th. 8th. 9th
 Letter from Arnold Johnson to Lee Oswald, July 31, 1963, CE 1145, WC Vol. 1145 . Lee Oswald was Lee Oswald's target of assassination .
 Interview with Warren de Brueys, March 16, 1992; testimony of Warren de Brueys . Warren's testimony is included in WC Vol. 1 . Interview with De Bruey on March 16: 1992 .
 FBI report by Special Agent Kaack, October 31, 1963, CE 826, WC Vol. 826 . Copy of the FBI report was published in 1963 .
 Lee Oswald’s application for tourist card to visit Mexico, CE 2481, WC Vol. 2481 . Lee Oswald's application was made for a tourist card in Mexico . Oswald applied for the tourist card at the time of his death .
 FBI report, December 11, 1963, of interview with Earl Spencer Anderson, CE 2126, WCVol. 2126: "Earl Spencer Anderson"
 Secret Service report, August 28, 1964, of schedule of buses traveling from Dallas and Houston to Laredo, Texas, was published in WC Vol. CE 2534 .
 Letter of June 23, 1964, from State Department to Commission, transmitting note and enclosures received from Mexican government, with translation . CE 2123, WC Vol.2123, CE 2122 .
 Oswald’s trip to Mexico, with a translation of a report prepared by a Mexican immigration inspector and an interview of the inspector . FBI report of March 16, 1964, of investigation into Oswald's trip . Oswald's visit to Mexico was part of an investigation into the assassination of President
 Lee Harvey Oswald, Internal Security—R—Cuba, Miami, Florida, dated September 12, 1964, 9. 9. Oswald was killed in Cuba in September 1964 . Oswald was a Cuban exile in Cuba .
 Dr. Burt Griffin memo to W David Slawson, May 16, 1964, House Select Committee on Assassinations ; deposition of Dr. Dr. Griffin . Griffin memo: "Dr. Griffin"
 Burton C Einspruch, July 11, 1978, House Select Committee on Assassinations , 17 . Burton C. Einsrruch was a member of the House of Representatives . He was killed in September 1968 .
 FBI report of investigation of December 16, 1963, of schedule of . Continental Trailways buses from New Orleans to Houston . Secret Service report dated August 28, 1964, of . schedule of schedule . from Dallas and Houston to Laredo, Texas .
 The Never-Before-Told Story of Lee Harvey Oswald by the KGB Colonel Who Knew Him 66. The KGB Colonel who Knew him 66. Oswald . Oswald's story was told by a KGB Colonel .
 Interview with Gerald Nadler, April 3, 1992; Jean Davison, Oswald’s Game, 209 . Interview with Nadler: "Oswaldo's Game"
 Gerald Nadler, “The KGB Spies Who Came in for the Gold,” The Washington Times, March 27, 1992, A9; interview with Nadler . Nadler: “KGB Spies Came in For the Gold’s Gold”
 Gerald Nadler, “The KGB Spies Who Came in for the Gold,” The Washington Times, March 27, 1992, 1, 1; interviews with Nadler were published April 3 and 5, 1992 . Nadler: The KGB spies "came in for
 Marina Oswald gave testimony of Marina Oswald, FBI report, April 22, 1964, giving approximation of expenditures that Lee Oswald made during his travel and stay in Mexico . FBI report: Oswald made expenditures in Mexico during his travels and stay there .
 Pemex Travel Club, Mexico, CE 2489, WC Vol. XXII; photo of pamphlet titled “Fiesta Brava’s” published by PemEx Travel Club .
 Summers donated them to the center after finishing the work on his book . Summers donated the book to the charity . Summers' book was published in 2010 .
 Comer Clark, “Fidel Castro Says He Knew of Oswald Threat to Kill JFK,” National Enquirer, October 15, 1967 . Clark: Fidel Castro says he knew of Oswald threat to kill JFK .
 FBI report of interviews of manager and other personnel of Hotel del Comercio at Mexico City, CE 2540, WC Vol. 2540 . FBI report: Hotel staff were interviewed in Mexico City .
 Letter, dated June 29, 1964, from the FBI to the Commission, with attached report of reinterviews of Mr and Mrs. Mrs. Richard Nixon . Letter from FBI to Commission: "Reinterviews were conducted in June 1964"
 FBI report: Eulalio Rodriguez-Chavez . FBI report, June 11, 1964, of interview of Rodriguez-chavez . CE 2456, WC Vol. XXV, 6 .
 Interview with Michael Paine, April 18, 1992; testimony of Paine from 1992 . Interview with Paine in WC Vol. 1 .
 Lee Oswald to the Russian embassy, CE 103, WC Vol. 103, is a draft of letter from Lee Oswald . Lee Oswald's letter was sent to the embassy in Moscow, Russia .
 Letter from Lee Oswald to the Russian embassy, November 9, 1963, CE 15, WC Vol. 15, was written by Lee Oswald . Lee Oswald wrote to the embassy in Moscow, Russia, on November 9 1963 .
 Wire-service story, “Back Pay Can’t Erase Censured Agent’s Years of Pain,” by Earl Golz, December 8, 1980 .
 Secret Service memo to Commission of July 10, 1964, concerning Trade Mart decision . CE 1360, WC Vol. Vol. 1, 1964 .
 Statement of Special Agent Winston Lawson concerning his official duties from November 4 to November 22, 1963, in preparation for President Kennedy’s trip to Dallas, CE 769 .
 Letter from Secret Service to the Commission, March 26, 1964, CE 1022, WC Vol. 1022 . Secret Service: The letter was sent to the commission from the Secret Service .
 “Increased Seating Readied for Kennedy Luncheon,” Dallas Times Herald, November 16, 1963, CE 1361, WC Vol. XVIII, 2; “Kennedy Luncheon’s Luncheon.” “The Luncheon of November 16
 Marina Oswald testified in 1992; testimony of Marina Oswald is published in WC Vol. 2 . Oswald's testimony is part of a series of interviews with her family members .
 Interview with Ruth Paine, April 18, 1992; testimony of Paine in WC Vol. 1 . Paine's testimony is published in WC vol. 1, 1992 .
 “Yarborough Invited to travel with JFK,” Dallas Morning News, November 20, 1963, CE 1364, WC Vol. XXII, 615 . “I’m not sure why I was invited to JFK’s trip.”
 Danny Arce was shot in the head by Bonnie Ray Williams in 1992 . Arce is credited with saving the lives of Danny Ray Williams . Williams was killed in 1992 in a car crash in California .
 Statement of Dallas police officer Joe Murphy, December 9, 1963, CD 205. Statement of a Dallas officer on the night of the shooting . Statement of the officer's statement of the night . Officer Joe Murphy was shot by Dallas police officers in Dallas, Texas .
 Earl Golz interview with John Powell for the Dallas Morning News, December 19, 1978 . John Powell was the president of Dallas County, Texas, in 1978 . Powell was a national hero .
 FBI memo, ibid.; interview with Dallas sheriff Robert Knowles, March 3, 1992 . FBI memo: Interview with Knowles was conducted in 1992 .
 Author’s review of Warren Commission volumes and statements from Dealey Plaza witnesses by FBI, sheriffs office, and Dallas police . Author's review of statements by FBI and police .
 Report of the Committee on Ballistics Acoustics, Commission on Physical Sciences, Mathematics, and Resources; National Research Council; National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 1982, 1982, 7.5. Report: Report of Committee on . Ballistics acoustics .
 Interview with Harold Norman; testimony of Bonnie Ray Williams, WC Vol. 10, is published in WC Magazine . Interview with Norman was published in "WC Vol. 11"
 The Kennedy Assassination: As Seen by Howard Brennan 7; testimony of Howard Brennan, WC Vol. 7 . Howard Brennan: JFK assassination was JFK's first assassination .
 Jean Hill gave statement to sheriff’s department, WC Vol. 5323, statement of Jean Hill to sheriff's department . Hill was charged with murder, kidnapping, sexual assault and other crimes . Hill is now in jail .
 Gordon Arnold interviewed by Earl Golz, August 27, 1978, for the Dallas Morning News . Arnold was a member of the Dallas Cowboys . Arnold's career spanned four decades .
 Duke Lane, “The Black Car Chase and the Cowtown Connection,” unpublished, 1993. Duke Lane: “Cowtown Connection’s” is the result of the chase . Lane: "Cowtown is a great place to go"
 Entre Nous newsletter, Vol 14, #2, “Will the Real Umbrella Man Please Stand Up?” 15. “I’m not sure what’s going to happen,” says the author .
 Interviews with Weaver, Crawson and Schram, March 8, 1992, and March 6, 1992 . Interviews were conducted by John Crawson, Bernie Schram and Tom Weaver . Interview with Weaver and Crawson was published in 1992 .
 London Weekend Television, “Trial of Lee Harvey Oswald,” testimony of Jack Tatum . London Weekend TV, ‘Trial’s ‘Lee Harvey Oswald’ testimony,’ witness testimony .
 Testimony of Helen Markham, William Scoggins, and Virginia Davis, WC Vol. Vol. Testimony: "The Trial of Virginia Davis," "Virginia Davis" Vol. 2, is published by WC WC .
 Virginia Davis, William Smith, and Sam Guinyard testify in WC Vol. VI, 453; testimony of Virginia Davis and William Smith . Davis, Smith, Smith: "I am a man of God, I am a woman of God"
 Radio log of Channel One of the Dallas Police Department for November 22, 1963, CE 705, WC Vol. 705 . Radio log: Dallas police Department .
 John F Kennedy Autopsy Radiographs and Photographs . HSCA Vol. 1: The Autopsy of John F. Kennedy was published in 1963 . Autopsy photos of Kennedy's autopsy were taken in 1963 at the age of 60 .
 Peters also drew a diagram that showed the doctors’ positions around the table and provided it to the author . Peters drew the diagram and provided the author with a copy .
 Author’s review of witness statements published in the twenty-six volumes of the Warren Commission and available in the National Archives .
 Letter from the Secret Service to the Commission, dated June 11, 1964, with attached statements of Secret Service personnel concerning the events surrounding the assassination, CE 1024, WC Vol. 1 .
 David Lui, “The Little Girl Must Have Heard,” The Dallas Times Herald, June 3, 1979, H-3 . Lui: "The little girl Must have Heard"
 Warren Commission memorandum, Arlen Specter to Lee Rankin, June 11, 1964; WC Vol. Vol. 1: "Warren Commission memorandum" Specter: Warren Commission memo to Rankin: "It's a good idea that the government is trying to get things done with the
 Governor Connally's coat worn at time of assassination, CE 683; front view of shirt worn by governor . Connally died at age of 60 .
 Robert Piziali, American Bar Association, mock trial of Lee Harvey Oswald, August 10, 1992 . Lee Harvey Lee Oswald mock trial was held in a mock trial in the U.S. in New York City, New York .
 Piziali, American Bar Association, mock trial of Lee Harvey Oswald, August 10, 1992 . Lee Harvey Lee Oswald mock trial was held in a mock trial in the U.S. in New York City .
 Martin Fackler, American Bar Association, mock trial of Lee Harvey Oswald, August 10, 1992 . Lee Harvey Harvey Oswald mock trial was held in the U.S. at Fort Lee, Texas, in a mock trial .
 A Report to the House of Representatives, Select Committee on Assassinations, on the subject of “1977 Activation Analysis Measurements on Bullet-Lead Specimens . Involved in the 1963 Assassination of President John F Kennedy,” by Dr. Robert Kennedy . Dr. Kennedy
 “1977 Activation Analysis Measurements on Bullet-Lead Specimens Involved in the 1963 Assassination of President John F Kennedy,” JFK-Exhibit F-331, 533. I, 504; . “ 1977 “activation Analysis Measurement Measurements�
 Interview with William Alexander, March 12, 1992; testimony of Jack Ruby, testimony of Ruby, WC Vol. 1 . Interview with Alexander on Jack Ruby: "I'm not afraid to be afraid to die" Interview with Jack Ruby was conducted in 1992 .
 FBI report of investigation conducted on November 24, 1963, of Dallas area police record concerning Jack Ruby and others . FBI report, June 9, 1964, concerning records pertaining to Jack Ruby provided by Chicago Board of Education . Jacob Rubenstein provided by Illinois Institute for Juvenile Research . Rubenstein
 Interview with Earl Ruby, November 17, 1992; statement of Marian Carroll and Ann Volpert, CE 1185, WC Vol. 1185 . Interview with Ruby was published in 1992 .
 Interview with Earl Ruby, November 17, 1992; testimony of Earl Ruby from WC Vol. 1 . Interview with Ruby, Nov. 17, in 1992; . testimony of Ruby, testimony from Ruby, Vol. 2, 1992 .
 Fannie Rubenstein died in Elgin State Hospital in 1964 . Rubenstein was hospitalized at the time of her death . FBI sent FBI letter to Commission, dated February 18, 1964, transmitting records of Rubenstein to Elgin state hospital .
 Interview with Earl Ruby, November 17, 1992; testimony of Hyman Rubenstein, WC Vol. 2, 1992 . Interview with Ruby was recorded in 1992 . Ruby was the subject of an interview with CNN's John Sutter .
 FBI report, November 27, 1963, of interview with Sam Gordon and Sollie Ziv, CE 1197 . FBI report: Interview with Martin Brauner, CE 1282, WC Vol. XV, 10; Sam Ruby Exhibit 1, 185; C Ray Hall Exhibit 1 .
 FBI report, December 9, 1963, of information on Jack Ruby and his family supplied by Michael F Heneghan, chief probation officer, Chief Probation Officer, Family Court of Cook County, Chicago, Ill., CE 1255, 364 .
 FBI report, November 26, 1963, of interview of Ben Epstein , CE 1193; FBI report of interview with Ira Colitz, CE 1289, 3; WC Vol. 3; . FBI report: Interview of Ralph Kaplan, CE 1194; CE 1195; CE
 FBI report, November 29, 1963, of interview with Erwin Horwitz, CE 1191; CE 1194 . FBI report: Interview with Horwitz in 1963; WC Vol. XV, 28 .
 FBI report, December 4, 1963, of interview of Bennie Barrish . FBI report of interview with Bennie . Barrish, CE 1239, WC Vol. XIV, 44; C Ray Hall Exhibits 1 and 13 .
 CE 1200; FBI report, November 29, 1963, of interview with Mike Nemzin . CE 1203; CE 1207; FBI interview with Ben Kay, November 26, 1963 . Interviews with Art Petacque, Barney Ross and Arthur Douglas Cohen . CE 1200 .
 FBI report, November 26, 1963, of interview with Theodore Shulman, CE 1206, WC Vol. XIV, 445 . FBI report: Interview with Abe CoHn .
 FBI interview with Saul Molodofsky is published in WC Vol. XXII; FBI report, April 2, 1964, of interview . FBI report: "Saul Moudofsky was a genius in the field"
 FBI report, November 27, 1963, of interview with Joe Kellman . CE 1193; FBI report: Interview with Israel Horowitz . CE 1258; CE 1299, WC Vol. of Interviews, CE 1216; FBI .
 FBI report, June 22, 1964, of interview with Stephen Andrew Belancik, CE 1294, WC Vol. 1, 1964 .
 FBI report, June 24, 1964, of interview with Irving Zakarin, CE 1295, was published in WC Vol. 1295 . Zakarin was assassinated in September 1964 .
 FBI reports, August 10, 13, and 19, 1964, concerning the examination of phonograph records and papers pertaining to the Dallas crime investigation of 1946–48 , CE 2416, WC Vol. 2, and 3, 1964 .
 FBI report of interview with Herman Ross on November 25, 1963 , CE 1516; FBI report, December 13, 1963, of . interview with John N Crawford, CE 1619, WC Vol. 1 .
 Interview with Earl Ruby, November 17, 1992; FBI report, November 27, 1963, of interview with Michael Shore . FBI report: "Michael Shore, Michael Shore, and Earl Ruby"
 FBI report, November 25, 1963, of interview with Leon Worth , CE 1531; FBI report of interview conducted on December 9, 1963 . Joseph Leipsic, CE 1552; Norman Smith, CE 1742, WC Vol. XXII . FBI report: Interview with Norman
 FBI report: FBI interview with Mrs. Newberry on December 19, 1963, of interview .
 Ayo, , CE 1689; FBI report, April 1, 1964, of interview of Prentis I Vaughn, CE 1694, WC Vol. Vol. 1 .
 FBI report, November 24, 1963, of interview with Benny H Bickers , CE 1517; FBI report December 6, 1963 . Interview with Philip Lance, Philip Lance and Mrs. Bickers .
 FBI report, December 5, 1963, of interview with Janet Adams Conforto and Winnie Fay Floyd . Report, January 20, 1964, of . interview with Mrs. Philip Lance , CE 1533 .
 FBI report, January 3, 1964, of interview with Charles Edward Morgan , CE 1548 . FBI report: Interview with Willis D Dickerson , CE 1676, WC Vol. Vol. 1 .
 FBI report, November 26, 1963, of interview with Frank Ferraro , CE 1514; January 6, 1964, of . interview with Willis Dickerson , CE 1676; FBI . report, January 21, 1964: of interview . with Gordon Sims , CE . 1683,
 FBI report, December 3, 1963, of interview with Robert McEwan, CE 1740, was published by the FBI in 1963 .
 FBI report, December 5, 1963, of interview with Robert Lee Shorman, CE 1250; FBI report undated . FBI report: Interview with Mrs. Shorman .
 FBI report, December 24, 1963, of interview with Barry Herbert James Deavenport, CE 1498 . FBI report: Mrs. Fannie Birch interviewed .
 FBI report: Interview with Alexander Gruber, CE 2243, CE 2414; WC Vol. XXIII; FBI report, November 30, 1963, of interview with Billy Joe Willis . FBI report on Gruber: "Alexander Gruber is not a good liar"
 CIA files have no information on Ruby or his associates, CIA memo says . Ruby was a prominent figure in the organization's history . Ruby died in 1964 .
 FBI report, December 12, 1963, of interview with William Earl O’Donnell, CE 1624, 2, 2 . FBI report: “William Earl O'Donnell’s life was at stake in World War II .”
 FBI report, December 3, 1963, of interview with John C Jackson, CE 1478, was published in WC Vol. 1478 . FBI report: "John C Jackson" was interviewed by FBI in 1963 .
 FBI report, November 28, 1963, of interview with Elaine Rogers, CE 1459; FBI report . FBI report: "Marilyn Miranda Moone," CE 1460 .
 FBI report, December 4, 1963, of interview with Wynn Warner, CE 1484, WC Vol. 1484 . FBI report: "Wynn Warner"
 FBI report, December 6, 1963, of interview with Johnnie Hayden, CE 1449, 170, 170 . FBI report: "Johnnie Hayden" was interviewed by FBI in December 1963 .
 Testimony of William Serur, State of Texas Jack Rubenstein, CE 2411, 626, WC Vol. 626 . Rubenstein was a member of the U.S. House of Representatives from Texas. Rubenstein served in Texas.
 FBI report, December 17, 1963, of interview with Theodore Louis Fleming , CE 1632 . FBI report: "Mrs. Fleming"
 FBI report, November 24, 1963, of information provided by George Snyder, records bureau, Dallas Police Department, relating to arrest record of Ruby . Ruby was arrested in Dallas, Texas, in 1963 .
 FBI report, November 25, 1963, of interview with John McKee, president, Dallas Crime Commission, CE 1233 . FBI report: "Dallas Crime Commission," CE 1510, WC Vol. 1, 1963 .
 Adelson, The Ruby-Oswald Affair, 59; interview with Tony Zoppi, No vember 19, 1992 . Adelson: "I'm not sure what happened to me. I'm sure I'm not going to be surprised"
 FBI report, November 25, 1963, of interview with Wally Weston , CE1530; FBI report December 13, 1963 . FBI report: Interview with John Joseph McNaughton, CE 1563 .
 FBI report, November 29, 1963, of interview with Irvin Charles Mazzei, CE 1543, was published in WC Vol. 1543 .
 FBI internal memorandum, Special Agent Ralph J Miles, August, 11, 1953 . FBI internal memo: "Ralph J Miles was a Special Agent for the FBI"
 FBI report of March 17, 1964, of examination of telephone records for the Carousel Club for September 26-November 22, 1963 , CE 2303, WC Vol. 3 .
 FBI report, December 5, 1963, of interview with Max Rudberg, CE 2265, was published in WC Vol. 2265 . FBI report: "Max Rudberg is a man of honor in the world"
 FBI report, December 20, 1963, of interview with Connie Trammel, CE 2270, WC Vol. 2270 . FBI report: "Connie, Connie, Connie ... Connie" Trammell .
 FBI report, December 18, 1963, of investigation into records at Merchants State Bank, CE 1669, WC Vol. 1669 . FBI report: "Investigation into records into records"
 FBI report, November 26, 1963, of telephone interview with assistant district attorney Bill Alexander, CE 2245, WC Vol. 2245 . FBI report: "Bill Alexander was interviewed by the FBI in 1963"
 FBI report, November 30, 1963, of interview with Graham Koch, CE 2251, WC Vol. 2251 . FBI report: "Graham Koch" was interviewed by the FBI in 1963 . Koch was the subject of an interview with the FBI .
 FBI report, December 20, 1963, of interview with C William Selah , CE 2269; FBI report on December 16, 1963 . FBI report: Interview with Ralph Gismont .
 FBI report, December 21, 1963, of interview with Robert G Landers , CE 2434, CE 2435, WC Vol. Vol. 2 . FBI report: Interview with Robert Landers .
 FBI report, November 28, 1963, of interview with Gladys Craddock, CE 1479, WC Vol. XX; FBI report . FBI report: "Gladys" Craddock . Craddock was murdered in 1963 in a car crash .
 FBI report, July 31, 1964, of interview with Gladys Craddock, CE 2321, WC Vol. XII; FBI report . FBI report: "Gladys was a victim of sexual abuse" Craddock . Craddock was convicted of sexual assault in 1964 .
 Interview with Tony Zoppi, November 23, 1992; Hall Exhibit 3, 4, WC Vol. 4, was published in 1992 . Interview was conducted in 1992; Tony was a member of the World Series team .
 Tear sheet from Dallas Morning News of November 22, 1963, entitled “Welcome Mr Kennedy,” CE 1031, WC Vol. 1031 . Tear sheets were printed in Dallas, Texas, in 1963 .
 FBI report dated March 17, 1964, of examination of telephone company records for Carousel Club from September 26-November 22, 1963 . FBI report: "Carousel Club" was at the center of the investigation into the alleged murder of the club .
 FBI report, June 11, 1964, of interview with Alexander Philip Gruber, CE 2284, WC Vol. 2284 . FBI report: Interview with Gruber in 1964 .
 Testimony of John Rutledge, State of Texas Jack Rubenstein, CE 2405, 105, 105 . Rubenstein was a member of the Texas Republican Party. Rubenstein died at the age of 98 .
 FBI report, November 25, 1963, of interview with Marguerite Vea Riegler , CE 2247; FBI report April 3, 1964, of . interview with Rita Leslie Siberman . Interview with Robert Louis Sindelar and Dennis Patrick Martin April 17, 1964 .
 Arnold Clyde Gadash, State of Texas Jack Rubenstein, CE 2816, WC Vol. XXV, testified . Rubenstein was a member of the U.S. House of Representatives from Texas. Rubenstein is a former member of Congress.
 FBI report of November 29, 1963, of interview with Thomas Raymond Brown, CE 2341, WC Vol. 2341 . FBI report: "Thomas Raymond Brown was interviewed by the FBI in 1963"
 Testimony of Wesley Wise, State of Texas Jack Rubenstein, CE 2413, 500, Vol. 500, is recorded in Texas . Rubenstein's testimony was recorded in a book called Rubenstein’s autobiography, Rubenstein .
 FBI report, November 28, 1963, of interview with James M Chaney, CE 2324, was published in WC Vol. 2324 . FBI report: Chaney was a member of the Chaney family; Chaney died in 1963 .
 FBI report of information received February 17, 1964, concerning interview of Phillipe Labro in Paris , CE 2276, Vol. 2276 .
 FBI report, December 3, 1963, of interview with Frank Bernard Johnston, CE 2326, 428, 428 . FBI report: "Frank Bernard Johnston"
 FBI report on July 23, 1964, of interview with Laura Bryum and report, July 29, 1964 . FBI report . of interview of Virginia Thompson Humphries, CE 2337, WC Vol. 2337 .
 “In Their Own Words,” Dallas Morning News, November 20, 1988, 30, 30. “Their Own Words’s own Words” was written in 1988, 1988 .
 Harry Holmes interview with postal inspector David McDermott, June 29, 1989, 2. XIII, 63; interview of Harry Holmes by postal inspector . Harry Holmes was a member of the Royal Family of Scotland Yard, Scotland Yard .
 Hugh Aynesworth, “The Garrison Goosechase,” Dallas Times Herald, December 21, 1982 . Hugh Aynworth, "The Garrison goosechase," was a Dallas resident .
 David Chandler, “The ‘Little Big Man’ Is Bigger Than Ever,” Life, April 10, 1970, 33. David Chandler: ‘The Little Big Man is Bigger than Ever.”
 Richard N Billings, “Garrison and the JFK Plot,” Long Island Press, May 15, 1968. “The JFK Plot’s JFK plot was a plot to assassinate the president of the U.S.
 Gurvich conference with Edward Wegmann, August 29, 1967, Tape 2, unpublished transcript, 10.05 . Gurvich. Gurvich Conference with Edward. Wegman . Tape 2 is unpublished transcript .
 Statement of David Lewis, district attorney’s files, month undated, 1966 . District attorney's files show he was arrested in 1966 .
 Interview with Gordon Novel by Salvatore Panzeca and Robert Wilson, April 16 and April 17, 1967 . Gordon Novel became a cult sensation .
 House Select Committee interview with Walter Sheridan, July 10, 1978; HSCA Rpt. Rpt., 178. Sheridan was interviewed by Sheridan in 1978 . Sheridan was a member of the U.S. Senate Select Committee .
 Interviews with James Leavelle, David Perry, March 2, 1992, and March 11, 1992 . Interviews were conducted in 1992 .
 Interview with David Perry, March 2, 1992, referring to conversation with Hugh Aynesworth . Interview with Perry was conducted in 1992 . Perry: "I'm not afraid to be afraid to die"
 The Assassination of President John F Kennedy and the New Evidence of Conspiracy . The Assassinations of President Kennedy and The New evidence of Conspiracy. The New Evidence for Conspiracy.
 Government Reports “Alleged Assassination Plots Involving Foreign Leaders,” Interim Report of the Select Committee to Study Governmental Operations, with Respect to Intelligence Activities, United States Senate .
 Hearings Before the Sub-Committee on Civil and Constitutional Rights of the Committee on the Judiciary, House of Representatives, on FBI Oversight, 1976. Hearings . Hearings before the sub-committee on civil and constitutional rights of the . Judiciary, on the FBI .
 Report of the President’s Commission on the Assassination of President John F Kennedy, and 26 accompanying volumes of Hearings and Exhibits, 1964; Report, without supporting volumes, also published by Doubleday, 1964 . Report, which was published in 1964, was published
 Report of the Select Committee on Assassinations, United States House of Representatives, 1979; Report, without supporting volumes, also published by Bantam, 1979 . Report, with 12 accompanying volumes of Hearings and Appendices on Kennedy investigation, 1979. Report also published in Bantam .
 Report to the House of Representatives, Select Committee on Assassinations, on the subject of 1977 Neutron Activation Analysis Measurements on Bullet-Lead Specimens Involved in the 1963 Assassination of President John F Kennedy .
 Report to the President by the Commission on CIA Activities Within the United States, June 1975 . Report: CIA Activities within the U.S. within U.K. Report to President by . Commission .
 Texas Supplemental Report on the Assassination of President John F Kennedy and the Serious Wounding of Governor John B Connally, November 22, 1963, by Texas Attorney General Waggoner Carr .
 He confirmed the sequence of shots I originally set forth in Case Closed . "Case Closed" is the latest in a series of films based on the book . The film is set to be released in September .
 In 2007, former Charles Manson prosecutor Vince Bugliosi published Reclaiming History, a 1650-page book that ultimately concluded I got it right in 1993 . The book was published by Buglioi in 2007 .
 When Case Closed was first published, I went on Bill O’Reilly’s FOX program to discuss the book . Case Closed is available on Amazon.com .
 O’Reilly told me he had not yet read the book, but that he was personally convinced the mob had killed Kennedy . O'Reilly: "I'm personally convinced that the mob killed Kennedy"
 The author wrapped the Case Closed conclusion of a lone assassin into a short populist book . The book sold a million copies . It was published in 1968 .
 Three major Hollywood movies about the assassination will be released later this year . The assassination is the subject of three major Hollywood films about it .
 AP-GfK poll: 60 percent of those surveyed believed that “multiple people were involved in a conspiracy to assassinate JFK’s . 25 percent thought Oswald alone had killed Kennedy .
 Ten years earlier, on the fortieth anniversary, 75 percent thought it was a conspiracy . Ten years ago, 75 per cent thought it would be a conspiracy, ten years earlier .
 Near the time of Stone’s JFK, a remarkable 90 percent or more embraced a conspiracy . The film was released in 1989 .
 The millions of pages of government documents released about the assassination have not provided any solace to conspiracy industry . Millions of pages have been released of the assassination since Case Closed was published .
 JFK was killed as payback for his own attempts to kill Cuban president Fidel Castro . The theory most in vogue during the past decade is that JFK's assassination was payback . JFK was assassinated in 1963 .
 Fifty years after the assassination, the biggest casualty has been the truth . The biggest casualty of the assassination was the truth, says President Kennedy .
 It has been mangled and often lost under an avalanche of false information, distorted memories, and unrestrained speculation . It has often been lost under avalanche of fake information and distorted memories .
 Conspiracy theories might sometimes be entertaining, but nothing is more compelling than the real story of what happened on November 22, 1963 . The real story is the story of the 1963 shooting .
 All rights are reserved in the right to use this ebook or any portion thereof in any form or by any means, whether electronic or mechanical, now known or invented, to reproduce the ebook . The author of this article does not share any of its content with the publisher .
 Open Road Integrated Media is a digital publisher and multimedia content company . Ebooks by GERALD POSNER are available in ebooks .
 Open Road creates connections between authors and their audiences by marketing its ebooks through a new proprietary online platform . The Open Road platform uses premium video content and social media to connect authors with audiences .