 The United States and Cuba sure know how to hold a grudge . The U.S. and Cuba have been at odds for decades .
 When Fidel Castro came to power in 1959, relations between the two countries quickly devolved into bitter arguments, political grandstanding and the occasional international crisis . Relations between Cuba and the U.S. have been tense since Castro's rise in power .
 On April 13 President Obama announced that he would lift some longstanding restrictions on Cuba . The 47-year-old economic embargo on the island nation was lifted on April 13 .
 For the next half-century the two countries more or less cooperated, with the U.S. helping to squash rebellions and heavily investing in the economy of its tiny neighbor .
 Ernest Hemingway lived there for 22 years; he wrote The Old Man and the Sea at his villa just outside of the capital . Hemingways lived in the same villa for more than 22 years .
 Fidel Castro and his band of guerillas overthrew the government of President General Fulgencio Batista . It took multiple years and a few attempts to overthrow the Batista government .
 Castro visited the U.S. just three months after coming to power . He toured Washington monuments and met with Vice President Richard Nixon . Castro was wearing his trademark olive green fatigues .
 It was a rare moment of alliance between the two countries, and one that would not be repeated . It was the rare moment that would never be repeated.
 By 1960, Castro's government had seized private land, nationalized hundreds of private companies and taxed American products so heavily that U.S. exports were halved in just two years . The United States exports of American products were also halved .
 Eisenhower Administration imposed trade restrictions on everything except food and medical supplies . Eisenhower Administration responded by imposing trade restrictions . Eisenhower administration imposed restrictions on food, medical supplies and other supplies .
 Castro expanded trade with the Soviet Union instead . Decrying ""Yankee imperialism,"" Castro expanded his trade with Russia instead .
 The United States responded by cutting all diplomatic ties with the United States . The two countries have been talking through Switzerland ever since . The U.S. and Switzerland have been able to talk through Switzerland .
 President Kennedy issued the permanent embargo on Cuba in 1962 after ordering a shipment of 1,200 cigars for himself . Within a few years the country, whose economy relied on the use of American-made products, became a shell of its former self .
 With no way to import American cars, Cubans watched their pre-embargo sedans rust into jalopies . Cubans had no way of importing American cars . Cuba has been hit hard by the embargo .
 The early 1960s were marked by a number of subversive, top-secret U.S. attempts to topple the Cuban government . The Cuban government was overthrown .
 Between 1961 and 1963 there were at least five plots to kill, maim or humiliate the Cuban leader using everything from exploding seashells to shoes dusted with chemicals to make his beard fall out .
 Castro's Cuba soldiered on, angry as ever at the U.S. The Get Smart-like plans never worked, and Castro's Cuban government never backed down . Cuba's economy has been hit hard by the United States' economic policies .
 The darkest moment in the countries' relationship came on October 15, 1962 . The U.S. spy planes discovered evidence that the Soviet Union was building missile bases in Cuba .
 The Soviet missiles were gone within six months, but it would take a long time for America to forgive the nation that allowed them to be placed so close to the U.S. mainland .
 In April 1980, thousands of Cubans sought political asylum in foreign countries . In 1980, a downtown in the economy caused Cubans to seek political asylum .
 Anyone who wants to leave, Castro announced, could do so through its northwestern port, Mariel Harbor . Castro: Anyone who wanted to leave could go through the port's northwestern port . Anyone who want to leave will be able to do so, Castro said .
 125,000 Cubans clambered onto boats and made their way to the United States in a mass flotilla . Over the next six months 125,00 Cubans made it to the U.S. over the next 6 months .
 Castro also released criminals and mental-hospital patients, of whom as many as 22,000 landed on the shores of Florida . Cuba refused to take them back .
 The United States strengthened its embargo rules in 1992 and again in 1996 with the Helms-Burton Act . The act was issued in retaliation after Cuba shot down two U.S. civilian airplanes .
 The last decade has seen the U.S. tighten and then relax restrictions depending on the political climate . The United States has seen a number of restrictions tightened and relaxed .
 A 2001 agreement to sell food to Cuba in the aftermath of Hurricane Michelle has so far remained in place . The U.S. is now Cuba's main supplier of food, with sales reaching $710 million in 2008 .
 President Obama's announcement this week that he would lift remittance and travel restrictions for those with family still in Cuba marked a small but significant change in the U.S. position toward the island .
 Obama also agreed to let telecommunications companies pursue business in the country . The U.S. still has roughly the same number of phone lines as it did in the 1950s .
 The fate of the embargo rests in the sensitive hands of politicians, and no one is sure what Cuba's reaction will be . Cuba's response to the decision to lift the embargo is still unknown .
 The U.S. has extended a small olive twig to an ailing nation run by the brother of ailing man . What happens next is anyone's guess .
 This is, after all, a man the U.S. once tried to kill with a seashell . This is after all of the United States tried to . kill him with a seahell .