 Name it properly {follow the format} Nómbrelo correctamente {sigue el formato} Last Name, First Initial, First First Initial. Name it correctly {following the format}.
 You have 10 calendar days before your first final exam . Put No School in Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday . You have no school on Monday or Tuesday .
 Attendance Recovery will be offered Monday, Tuesday, Thursday, and Saturday . Attendance recovery is offered at least three days a week .
 Signed Personal Education Plans and Attendance Letters need to be returned . Signed personal education plans and attendance letters are returned .
 2nd Quarter Grade Boost Formal Assignment due tomorrow . El paquete de aumento de grado se publica y enviado por correo electrónico. 2nd quarter Grade Boost formal assignment due tomorrow.
 Asignación formal del segundo trimestre de aumento de grado, vencimiento 1/4/19. Asignation .
 You have only 6 more in class days to make changes to your class . You have 6 more days to change things in class .
 Use your test taking strategies to answer the questions in the attachment . Use the test to test your knowledge of the skills required to pass the test .
 Use sus estrategias para tomar exámenes para responder las preguntas del adjunto . Use sus estrategas tomar ex-expertes preciprasas .
 Test Taking Strategy Analyze it Box/Underline key words or phrases . Observe all answer choices Observe every answer choices . Never answer without reading the question again .
 Trade caravans allowed the Songhai Empire to exchange valuable metals for commodities and luxury items . The Songhai empire traded precious metals for luxury goods .
 Songhai traders prevented from selling their goods to overseas customers . Trade caravans prevented the Songhai trade from going overseas . Songhai had to rely on the help of a trade caravan .
 Songhai traders welcomed travelers to their cities in hopes of selling them fabrics and food items . Songhai travelers were greeted by traders hoping to sell fabrics, food and clothing .
 Songhai traders traveled to Egypt to seek ores and other valuable minerals for building materials . They sought valuable minerals from the country's most important minerals .
 Si te quedas estancado durante dos minutos, responde dos preguntas fáciles . Responde to pregunta fááblees: "Respondas a question: 'What do you think?'
 Communism / Comunismo Cold War using at least four of the vocabulary words . Communism/Comunismo is a form of Communism .
 Truman Doctrine / Doctrina Truman Guerra Fría usando al menos cuatro cuatro de 5. Fría . Truman Doctrine/ Doctrina used to use only 5.5 .
 In 1959, Cuba became a Communist 90 country, led by Fidel Castro . Fidel Castro was the leader of Cuba's Communist Party .
 The Bay of Pigs invasion was a failed mission by the United States to remove communists from power in Cuba in 1961 . The U.S. failed to remove the communist regime from Cuba in Cuba .
 Vamos a leer un pasaje para ayudarnos a responder las siguientes preguntas . "We are going to respond to these pregunta," says CNN.com.com .
 After the Bay of Pigs invasion, the Soviet Union gave Cuba more weapons . Cuba was given more weapons after the invasion of Cuba in 1961 .
 After the Bay of Pigs invasion, the Soviet Union gave Cuba more weapons . President Kennedy learned that Inthe weapons. In October 1962, President .
 1962, President Kennedy learned that the Soviets were secretly building missile bases building on missile the bases on the island . October were secretly October were October 1962, 1962 . October was October . October 1962 .
 If island . bases bases were completed, atomic were . missiles could reach American cities within minutes . completed .
 Kennedy announced that U.S. warships would stop any Soviet ship carrying missiles . Kennedy made the announcement in a letter to the Soviets .
 The world After the Bay of Pigs invasion, the Soviet Union gave Cuba more waited tensely as Soviet weapons . In 1962, In October steamed President toward Cuba .
 Kennedy learned that the Soviets were secretly building secret missile bases . At the last minute, missile bases the Soviet ships on turned the island .
 Ifback. the bases were completed, atomic missiles could reach American cities within minutes . Ifback . the bases are completed, nuclear weapons could reach . U.S. cities could be within minutes of hitting .
 After In the Baythe turn, of Pigs invasion, states United the Sovietpromised Union gave Cuba more weapons . After In The Bay, the Soviet promised the U.S. more weapons to Cuba .
 If the bases had been completed, atomic missiles could reach American cities within minutes . President Kennedy learned that the Soviets were not to invade the island in October 1962 .
 In all the years of the Cold War, the world never came closer to a full-scale nuclear war . The world's greatest fear of nuclear war was the possibility of a nuclear war in North Korea .
 In October 1962, President Kennedy learned that the Soviets were secretly building missile bases on the island . Kennedy learned in October 1962 that the Soviet Union was developing missile bases .
 If the bases are completed, atomic missiles could reach American cities within minutes . The bases could be completed within minutes of American cities .
 Exit Ticket First and Last Name 12.18.18 World History Block # Answer the essential question in Exit Ticket paragraph form . Answer the question in paragraph form.
 If work is emailed, it must arrive the night before the due date . Finish the DBQ Essay by the end of the week .
 If the email comes in at 12:00, it will be assessed a late penalty . Grade Boost Packet will use the email to send a late-notice email to the team .
 If the assignments are handed in after five minutes, it will be assessed a late penalty . The assignments will be handed in at least five minutes . If the assignment is handed in before five minutes they will be penalised .