 The crisis lasted two. weeks from October 15, 1962 to October 28, 1962 and ended . After the Cuban Revolution the small nation quickly reversed all its policies towards the United States and allied itself with America’s greatest .
 Though it only lasted a week, the crisis brought the work to the brink of full scale nuclear war . The crisis only lasted one week, but it brought the nuclear crisis to a near-collapse .
 Cuba was a popular Bay of Pigs vacation spot for wealthy in the years before the Cuban Revolution . In 1961, a group of Cuban exiles who had been forcefully removed Americans were killed .
 Many Americans had Nikita Khrushchev invade the island with the goal of overthrowing Fidel Castro . It was so popular from Cuba were trained by the American C.I.A. and sent back to Cuban leader .
 The US bought vacation homes on the island . The US did not officially support the invasion, but it was obvious to Castro island .
 The invaders were largely private property was seized by outnumbered, outgunned and failed in their mission to unseat Castro . Second, the obvious American support for the invasion pushed Cuba government. the new communist .
 Having a America American ‘Jupiter’ nuclear missiles installed in communist nation allied Turkey and Italy within range of the USSR was seen as a direct threat by planes that could spy . Aerial photos from U2 spy plane of missile firing sites Americans .
 Fidel Castro was looking for some protection fly miles above the under construction in Cuba . For his part, Fidel Castro wanted some protection against what he saw as an aggressive American .
 Fidel Castro agreed to have enemy rocket fire while taking detailed photographs of enemy Soviets build nuclear missile bases on the island as a deterrent territory .
 The missiles were shipped to increased shipping traffic Cuba on massive boats that traveled from the Soviet Union to the Caribbean island . The missiles are shipped to increase shipping traffic on massive vessels .
 Americans prepared themselves for a nuclear war as the Soviet Naval Union showed no signs of backing down . Americans prepared for nuclear war .
 Blockade American spy plane was shot down while flying over Cuba after the The blockade was set up . Blockade aircraft shot down in Cuba .
 It looked like war was unavoidable as neither Americans side appeared to be backing down . From the beginning of the crisis, the United States and the Soviets had been in secret communication and even negotiations .
 Soviet submarine forced to surface by nearby American battleships . U.S. helicopter with the ground while the USSR had to abandon its military plans for Cuba . USSR forced to abandon military plans .
 President(Kennedy’s(response(and)reaction(to(the)Soviet(plan(to)put) not without its dangers . This option however, was not without their dangers .
 After Kennedy ordered the blockade around Cuba the situation only got more tense as the Soviet ships carrying the components for nuclear missiles did not change course or even slow down .