 Eisenhower and Khrushchev met four times between 1959 and 1960 . The USA and USSR met in Geneva and Geneva .
 June 1961 was only agreed as there was a new president but neither side was willing to back down .
 Khrushchev backed down as he knew he couldn't win a nuclear war and so western powers stayed in Berlin . Kennedy began to prepare the USA for nuclear war after the summit .
 Khrushchev avoided war with the United States but still looked strong . As a result, in August 1961 the Berlin wall was built in Berlin .
 USA attempted to bring Cuba back into its sphere of influence, Cuba asked the USSR for help with defence . Cuba asked for help from the USSR in order to defend itself .
 After the revolution, the United States refused to deal with the new government . The U.S. refused to help the revolution's new government.
 CIA convinced Kennedy that a US-backed invasion would solve the problem . The CIA convinced him that a U.S. backed invasion was the solution to the crisis .
 1400 U.S. backed troops met 20,000 of Castro's troops in Cuba . Castro knew of the invasion in advance and 1400 troops met . Castro's control was very weak .
 It ended all chance of a friendly U.S. relationship with Cuba with Cuba . The U.N. has been in the midst of a diplomatic crisis with the island nation .
 Cuba and USSR started building closer ties including military defence for Cuba . Cuba and the USSR built closer ties in the 1960s .
 Warn Castro that his actions put Cuba in danger and hope that Castro would decide to stop the missile site construction .
 U.S. troops would invade and get rid of the Castro government . The Castro government was overthrown by the United States .
 In September 1962, Soviet ships carried nuclear weaponry to Cuba . USSR placed the missiles here as the USA had missiles close to the USSR . Cuba saw Soviet missiles as a great way to prevent the USA from invading Cuba again .
 In October 1962, U.S. spy planes photographed the Cuban missile sites . The secret was out in October 1962 .
 USSR gave a speech, in 1963, about working with the USSR to focus on their 'common interests' Khrushchev forced from power in 1964 in 1964 . USSR was determined to catch up with the United States in the arms race .
 Czechoslovakia challenged Soviet authority . This was because their economy and living standards declined . Any opposition to communism was crushed and hence communism rule became very unpopular .
 USSR sent tanks to Prague and Dubcek was arrested . Tried to persuade Dubcec to stop these reforms but failed to .
 The USSR demanded withdrawal as they could not continue to allow Germans to leave East Germany through Berlin . The USSR refused to continue to let Germans leave the East Germany .
 The USA objected; if they left it would be humiliating . So in November 1958 they announced Berlin was East German and demanded western powers leave the city within six months . In November 1958 the U.S. demanded that the city be renamed Berlin .
 The USA and USSR met four times between 1959 and 1959 . The two summits went fairly well, though nothing was agreed .
 Eisenhower and Khrushchev meet again in Paris in 1960 . U.S. spy plane had been shot down over the USSR and Eisenhower refused to apologise and the summit collapsed .